Boys in Trouble 
=================

:Type: Book Reviews & Abstracts
:Author: Wormwood Scrubs
A study of Adolescent
Crime and Its Treatment. L. Le Mesurier.
With an Introduction by Alexander Pater-
son, H.M. Commissioner of Prisons. John
Murray. 284 p. 6/-. 1931.

This book has been written by the Leader
of the Women Workers at the Boys' Prison,
Wormwood Scrubs, who for eight years
have helped to secure better classificataion of
b?ys awaiting trial, by interviewing the lads,
visiting their homes and parents and provid-
lng the Medical Officer with full reports on the
social environment which has played its part
Producing the anti-social acts. Thus Mrs.
e Mesurier's opinions have the weight of ex-
perience and first-hand personal knowledge of
some thousands of " boys in trouble," and in
the words of Mr. Alexander Paterson, she has
earned the right to write." She has also
Cai'ned the right to be read, and those who are
concerned to improve our methods of dealing
^lth juvenile and adolescent crime, would do
^'ell not on]y tQ rea(| ]ier book themselves,
?>ut to do their utmost to persuade others, mag-
istrates, M.P.'s, and the ordinary undis-
lnguished public which in the long run is
^sponsible for our prisons and penal system,
J^ead it too.

Pii exPei"t maY find nothing new in these
cSes. ^ As the author points out, they were
written for him. They were written to
rn^SUa^e man *n ^ie s^reet that the treat-
th f b?y ?ffenc^er is his responsibility,
out Sannot fulfil that responsibility with-
of Pr?viding for investigation into the cause
inr:fa^ boy's crime and the best way of help-
cuts to\ to make good. There are no short
re *? good citizenship and no one specific
H y for delinquency. The unhurrying
tion t scientist, patient study, devo-
aPt)V ^ and respect for facts, must be
consr? thousands of cases which
distr 1 Prob^em- The man in the street
the 1 h tl?e. man of science, especially when
in c]-a ter joiiis forces with the humanitarian
the nScrec^ting the old superstitious belief in
The ?^er punishment to make folk good.
sU?arSClej?^c P^l must be coated with the?
Mesnrj " common sense," and Mrs. Le
first b Cri c^one the great service of shewing
y her works, and then by her words,
that the new way with crime, that of individ-
ual study and individual training", is also the
way of common-sense..

Her gospel is contained in this book, where
she gives briefly but incisively a review of
some of the causes of delinquency, with illus-
trations from cases she has known. She surveys
the various methods of dealing with the boy
offender, and suggests alternatives and re-
forms. Prison is wholly bad and must go;,
whipping stands condemned, not on senti-
mental grounds, but because experience shews
it does more harm than good; fines are rarely
suitable, either the\r are too light to be effec-
tive or too heavy to be paid; probation, one of
the best methods, needs a better staff chosen
without regard to the religious creed of the
candidate; Borstal needs more accommodation
and more variety of training.

Despite her semi-official position, Mrs. Le
Mesurier speaks with a candour for which
reformers owe a debt of gratitude, not only to
her, but to the Prison Commission who have
given her this freedom. When public opinion
in England comes abreast of official opinion,
imprisonment for boys and girls under 21, and
many other evils, will disappear from our
penal system, and the examination and classi-
fication of young offenders will be carried out
far away from the vitiated atmosphere of a
prison.

Mrs. Le Mesurier's book should do much
to hasten that day, and to persuade the public
to carry on with better equipment and on a
larger scale the work in which she and her
colleagues have been the pioneers.

The book is well constructed, vigorously
written and adequately indexed. There is a
Bibliography too short to be of great value,
and it includes a mythical work " Probation,"
by Mr. Clarke Hall?presumably a mistake for
his " Children's Courts." This must be cor-
rected in the second edition, which ought to
be called for very soon.

C.M.C.
CrENETic Studies oe Genius. Edited by Lewis
M. Terman, Vol. Ill, The Promise of
Youth. Follow up studies of a thousand
gifted children. Harrap, 1930. pp. X, TV,
and 508. 21/- net.

Ten years ago Professor Terman and a group
of co-workers set on foot an investigation on
a large scale. Interesting and valuable enough
as it was to begin with, it bids fair to become
more and more interesting and valuable as
time goes on. For it is designed to trace the
development of genius and is intended to cover
a whole generation.

It began in 1921-22, when a selection was
made of 1,400 " gifted " children in the State
of California. They were selected on the basis
of their achievement in the Stanford Revision
of the Binet Tests. All those whose intelli-
gence quotient (I.Q.) reached 140 or over?all
those, that is, who at the age of 10 were at
least four years in advance of the normal?
were included in the experimental group.

The results of this original survey were pub-
lished in Vol. I of Genetic Studies of Genius
in 1926. Side by side with this was issued
Vol. II of the same series, which dealt with
the same problem from a different angle. In-
stead of starting with the gifted child and see-
ing what would become of him when he grew
up (the object of the main investigation) the
author started with the adult who was recog-
nised by the world as a genius, and studied
his childhood. And by applying modern
methods of estimating the I.Q. to the early
records of his life, the author was able to com-
pare the beginning of his career with the end,
and to relate his early promise to the early
promise of the thousand odd new cases under
scrutiny. The conclusion was that " the
extraordinary genius who achieves the highest
eminence is also the gifted individual whom
intelligence tests may discover in childhood.
The converse of this proposition is yet to be
proved."

It is the converse of this proposition that is
now on trial. As many as possible of the
1,400 gifted children were re-examined in
1927-28 with a view to finding answers to these
among other questions; (1) How does the
mental ability of these children hold up on the
average? (2) How many of the children later
show radical changes in intelligence rating,
either positive or negative? (3) How do the
sexes differ with respect to (1) and (2) ?
The most important single outcome of the
follow-up investigation is the abundant and
conclusive evidence that for the group as a
whole the picture did not greatly change in
the period that elapsed between the two en-
quiries. Generally speaking, the children
retained not only their supernorinality but the
same degree of supernorinality?generally
speaking; for there were exceptions. Some
went up and some went down; but more went
down than went up. It cannot be said with
positive certainty that the I.Q. of any given
child will remain constant. The next thing
that can be said is that it tends to remain con-
stant. This inquiry indeed definitely estab-
lishes the fact that there sometimes occur gen-
uine changes in the rate of intellectual growth
which cannot be accounted for on the basis of
general health, educational opportunity, or
other environmental influence. When we con-
sider the evidence from all sources, not only
from intelligence tests but also from achieve-
ment tests, school marks and so forth, we
find that the level of the boys tends to be main-
tained, while the level of the girls tends to go
down. In other words, the boys fulfil their
early promise more steadily than the girls.
It must be borne in mind that the aver-
age age of the experimental group was, at the
time of the second enquiry, only sixteen. Yet
ever so many of them have already attained
distinction. One has taken rank as one of the
outstanding musical composers and musical
theorists of America. At least half-a-dozen
have produced literary juvenilea comparable
to the best produced by eminent authors at a
corresponding age. Three or four have shown
unusual promise in art; and a surprisingly
large number have evidenced exceptional
ability in science.

Highly interesting results were obtained
from a separate inquiry into special abilities.
Great pains were taken in 1921-22 to track
down all children who showed evidence of
outstanding talent in drawing, painting and
music. Those who obtained an I.Q. of 140 or
above were admitted to the Regular group!
those of lower I.Q. were classed in the Special
Ability group. The special ability children h1
the Regular group retained their specif
ability. The other special ability children did
not?not at any rate to anything like the same
degree. It seems to point out that a narrow
vein of genius in the young, unless backed by
a good fund of general intelligence, is liable to
peter out." It is cases of this kind that giye
colour to the popular opinion that genius h]
the young is nothing but a " flash in the pan."
Many other popular conceptions have been
shattered by this series of studies. It is clearly
shown that the notion of the child of genius
as weakly, neurotic, and unstable is wholly un'
founded. He is generally a happy, healthy
and jolly little fellow. Taken as a group, the
gifted children are distinctly better than the
generality of children in health and physique,
and tend to remain so.

Among the characteristics of gifted children
^'hich are delineated in these volumes and
v*'hich may be regarded as definitely proved,
the following are the most noteworthy. They
conie from good family stocks, stocks, how-
cyer, which have greatly decreased in fecun-
'ty during the last two generations and have
now reached a point where they are not main-
aining themselves. Gifted children have, as
a rule, gifted brothers and sisters. They are
rarely difficult children; they do not stand
i0?f from their school companions; they show
n? lack of social adaptability. In fact in gen-
ial character and amiability they stand above
? . average of the school population. They
J0ln heartily in the school sports. Gifted boys
s?nietimes show traces of feminity, but not;
niore so than unselected boys of the same age.
le girls, on the other hand, deviate signifi-
cantly from the norm of their sex in the
lrection of greater masculinity; there is an
. ysual proportion of tom-boys among gifted
eh u ? school progress the typically gifted
^ ^ accelerated by 14% of his age, but in
. e actual mastery of the school subjects (as
bv?-n by achievement tests), he is accelerated
hi S?re ^lan ^0% of his age. Subject failures
en high school are practically never! in-
rred by children of this grade of intelligence.
anrl"e ^lan ^0% ?f the gifted boys in America,
coll !!10re than $0% the gifted girls, go to
"ge, most of them remaining to graduate.
P.B.B.
