National Council of Women Conference
=====================================

The Annual Conference of the National Council of Women of Great
Britain was held in Aberdeen from June 5th to 20th. The Causation and
Prevention of Mental Deficiency was a subject of discussion at one of the
sessions of the Conference and Miss Evelyn Fox moved the following resolu-
tion : ?

" That the Government be asked to appoint a Royal Commission to
make full enquiries into the causation and prevention of Mental Defic-
iency, into its relationship to other abnormal conditions and social prob-
lems, and into any measures, including both segregation and sterilization,
by which it might be prevented."

An amendment was moved that after the words " by which it might
be prevented," the following words be added: ?
" and meanwhile to make such changes in the law as may be necessary
to legalise voluntary sterilization in the case of persons liable to transmit
serious mental or physical defects."
After considerable discussion the Amendment was lost and the Resolu-
tion was carried.

Sterilization Bill
On 21 st July next, Major A. G. Church, M.P. (Central Wandsworth,
Lab.), will ask leave under the 10 minutes' rule to introduce a Bill
" to enable mental defectives to undergo a sterilization operation or
sterilizing treatment upon their own application or that of their spouses
or parents or guardians."

South Western Group of Mental Health Workers
---------------------------------------------

A preliminary meeting of this group of the Association of Mental Health
workers was held in Bristol on the 6th June, 1931, when it was decided to form
a South Western Group and Mr. C. E. Newman of the Somerset Association
was elected Chairman and Miss M. O. Charlton, Southampton, was appointed
temporarily as the General Secretary. It was decided to hold the next meet-
ing in Exeter on Friday, 25th September, and to visit the Western Counties
Institution at Starcross if possible.

Coldeast Colony, Hampshire
--------------------------

A new villa has been opened in connection with the Coldeast Colony
for the accommodation of 50 mentally defective boys. The Colony, which is
being built on the Villa system, when completed is intended for the reception
of between 1,000 and 1,200 patients. At present there are about 60 girls in
one mansion and the erection of additional villas is to be shortly begun.

Sandhill Park, Somerset
------------------------
On the 26th June last a new Hostel was opened at Sandhill Park, Bishop's
Lydeard. Accommodation is provided in the two storey building for 60
young men who will receive training in carpentry, gardening and house-
painting. The Hostel has been named " Fry House " in commemoration of
the pioneer work done in Somerset for the mentally defective by the Right
Hon. Sir Edward Fry.

Stoke Park Colony
-------------------
The Clinic at Stoke Park Colony is now in full working order and the
University of London at their Meeting last May passed the following resolution
" That Stoke Park Colony, Stapleton, Bristol, be added to the list of
Institutions recognised for practice under Regulation 3 for the Diploma
in Psychological Medicine for candidates offering Mental Deficiency as
their special branch under Regulation 4."

September Courses
------------------

Courses
(a) for persons engaged in the training of Mental Defectives in Occupation
Centres, Institutions and Mental Hospitals,
(b) for Officers of Local Authorities and Local Mental Welfare Associations,
will be held this year by the C.A.M.W., from August 29th to September 19th,
at Notcutt House, 35, Dorset Square, London, N.W.i. Lectures will be
given on the medical, psychological and social aspects of mental deficiency,
on methods of training. Manual and rhythmic classes will be given and the
practical work will include visits to Special Schools, Certified Institutions,
Occupation Centres, etc.

The Fee for each course is ^14 (including Registration fee of 5/-). This
includes Board and Residence at Notcutt House. The fee for Non-Residents
ls ?6 ios. Application forms can be obtained from the C.A.M.W. Office and
should be sent in as soon as possible.

Organised Holidays
-------------------

(a) For Cases under Guardianship
This year the experiment has been tried of taking away for a holiday a
party of girls placed under the C.A.M.W. Guardianship Scheme, and thirty-
seven, in the charge of three members of staff, went for a fortnight from
June 13th to Seaford, where they occupied a Y.W.C.A. Hostel. These girls'
mentality covered a considerable range, but the majority were high-grade
feeble-minded with some borderland cases of temperamental difficulties. They
were nearly all in domestic work, some earning a living wage, others being
paid for by their Local Authorities.

The cost of the holiday was ^112 7s. 5d., varying from ?2 19s. to ?3 is.
per head, including board, travelling and incidental expenses. This was borne
by the Local Authorities concerned but in almost every case the girls them-
selves contributed 2/6 from their savings.

The weather was fine and most of the day was spent in the open, walking,
paddling and shopping. Several of the girls had never seen the sea before and
were greatly excited over it. Whole day excursions were arranged and these
involved quite long walks over the Downs. Indoors in the evenings, the
amusements were playing games, community singing and Eurythmics. On
two evenings groups of girls gave entertainments to the others and the pro-
grammes included chorus and solo singing, recitations and drill and dancing.
The fortnight passed most successfully without trouble of any kind and
the girls returned looking bronzed and well and most enthusiastic about the
happy time they had had. Since their return several have written letters of
thanks.

With these girls of poor mentality, lacking in resources of their own and
dependent on externals for their recreation, change is essential. A holiday
gives them change of thought and besides providing the requisite care and
supervision, enables the Leaders to organise the girls' amusements and recrea-
tion. The girls also have an opportunity of forming sane and happy friend-
ships which, in living rather isolated lives, is not always possible to them.
It is also a great help to the members of the staff who are responsible for
their supervision afterwards. Living with a girl for a fortnight enables one
to get a far more intimate knowledge of her character, temperament and
capabilities than much visiting. It was also very helpful to hear the girls dis-
cussing their personal problems amongst themselves and often threw a new
light on their particular difficulties.

In view of the fact that suggestions are being made for the Association
to organise a permanent Holiday Home we feel that the experience was
especially valuable.

(b) For children in Occupation Centres
----------------------------------------

Forty children from the Middlesex Occupation Centres are at present
enjoying a fortnight's holiday at Flint House, Seaford. The expenses of this
holiday are being met by proceeds from the sales of work and by voluntary
subscriptions.
