Practical Child Psychotherapy
==============================

84 MENTAL WELFARE
:Author: Curt Boenheim. With a Foreword by Prof.
Dr H. Kinkelstein. John Bale Medical
Publications Ltd., 85 Great Titchfield
Street, London, W.l. 1938. Price 10/6.

I am glad to review a book by an
experienced German author, who, coming
by way of somatic medicine, thence progressed to child education and psychotherapy. This is a way now chosen by many
pediatricians (including the present
reviewer) and therefore I may at once say
that the perusal of the book has revealed
on most points a wide agreement of
experiences and conclusions drawn from
them.

At the beginning the author states that
psychology is often a playground for
psychologists without adequate medical
knowledge and later on he calls special
attention to the fact that experienced
physicians are all too familiar with the harm
done by lay psychologists lacking the
necessary knowledge of clinical teaching and
practice.

The classification followed in this book
is based only upon purely practical considerations. The " minor psychotherapy "
?a term used by the author as analogous to
"minor surgery"?is its chief concern
" because it is the main activity of the
general practitioner in so far as he practises
psychotherapy
In the " General Considerations " one finds
a short exposition on the " Present Position
of Psychotherapyoutlining the development of this new branch from Freud via
Adler and Jung to Stekel. Here the author
states that one of the most important results
of analysis is the insight into the development of instincts, into the dynamics of the
conscious mind, of repression, and of
dreams. The conflict of opinions of the
modern schools direct him to the conclusion
that Freud's concept of "infantile sexuality"
has by no means secured universal acceptance.

The accurate study of the child at play
(Charlotte Buehler, Hildeg. Hetzer,
Margaret Lowenfeld) is described as a very
happy inspiration. Reviewing Adler's
individual psychology (characterizing him as
a social psychologist) and quoting Jung's
attempts to examine drawings ("modes of
expression other than the spoken word")
the author agrees with Hartmann that
Psycho-analysis can only partially contribute
to characterology and that it has to be
supplemented by type-psychology and
descriptive psychology.

He then deals with experimental psychology, the very important problems of constitution and environment and the difficulties
relating to the question of what is
"normal"? Pointing to the case of the
only child, to the " age of rebellion", to
" failure of adaptationetc., the author
considers that the general vagueness about
so many of such conceptions is one of the
main obstacles which debar us from an
insight into the genesis of neurosis. He
describes types of neuroses and their
symptoms, refers to Pavlov's theories of
conditioned and unconditioned reflexes, to
the inferiority feeling and Adler's organ
inferiority, and his summary about all these
problems shows a very great reserve.
Certainly he is fully right. He states that
the events in the period of early childhood
are of fundamental importance, since a
disposition to disturbances is marked owing
to the sharp conflict of the pleasureprinciple with the reality-principle. The
disturbances take place in many cases in the
somatic field, because in childhood,
especially in the first period of development,
the control of somatic functions assumes an
important place. Discussing the general
indications for, and methods of childpsychotherapy, he enumerates the indications, speaks about suggestion and training,
development and environment, and the comparative value of symptoms, and ends by
criticizing the methods, which must vary
according to the age of the child. Here he
calls special attention to the observation of
younger children at play and also to play
as a therapeutic agent; hypnosis, he
considers, should not be looked upon as the
most obvious therapeutic measure, but
rather as ancillary to other therapy. Later
on in the second part of the book (page 128)
he states that he only uses deep hypnosis in
complicated cases . . . always under the
guiding principle of relaxation and calming,
" never of forbidding or commanding
therapy(In the reviewer's opinion one
should generally avoid hypnosis with
children under the age of adolescence
because one can achieve relaxation and
calming by methods involving less direct
interference through a combination of
physical, medical and psychological treatment. I have given my opinion in this
connection in my book on Enuresis.) Important as therapeutic methods are, rest and
relaxation, exercises, encouragement,
activation and change of surroundings are
equally important. In all cases an accurate
individual treatment affords protection
against mistakes, "which ought to be avoided
at all costs, since every tactical error
seriously undermines the physician's
influence."

The second part of the book is concerned
with special considerations. It is impossible
?owing to want of space?to give any
detailed review of this part. I will therefore
only note that it refers to alimentary and
urinary disorders, disorders of sexual
development, nervous habits, motor disorders and other syndromes influenced by
psychotherapy. It relates 38 characteristic
case histories as examples of particular
disorders and a very wide experience is laid
down in these pages.

(The reviewer points to the importance
of the role of music in treatment by
psychotherapy. One is able to arouse many
reluctant children with music, singing or
whistling, and many exercises are made less
difficult by the help of simple music.
Undesirable results of thumb-sucking are
very often seen in a striking change of the
position of teeth (prognathy, etc.). The
psychotherapy of chorea plays a leading
part, not?here I agree with the author?in
the treatment of chorea as an infectious
disease but in the cases of so-called relapse
of this disease which can be cured only by
psychotherapy. Migraine, also in children, is
in many cases caused by allergy, and the
patient should therefore?before the
beginning of psychotherapy?be tested for
this possibility.)

At the end of the book the author gives a
very well-elaborated questionnaire. I believe
that the excellent book will be very helpful
for the understanding of psychotherapy,
not only for physicians, but also for everyone interested in educational work for
problem children if they are convinced that
a knowledge of such work will no't enable
them?here I quote the author?" to set out
on a dangerous voyage on the rough seas of
psychotherapy."

Albert Uffenheimer.
