Moral Problems of Mental Defect
=================================

:Author: J. S. Cammack, S.J. Burns, Oates & Washbourne. 7/6.

Father Cammack, S.J., might easily have
found a more popular title for his book
which deals from an unfamiliar angle with
some very familiar problems of mental
deficiency. It is an analysis, by a skilled
moral theologian, of the nature of " moral
deficiencya concept which is even more
puzzling to the expert than to the amateur
in the psychology of crime, who may see
nothing particularly odd in the notion of a
person being without moral sense. To have
moral responsibility carefully examined and
clearly defined is a useful preliminary to
wise action, for loose thinking on this
fundamental point has led to much futile
discussion and inaccurate certification.

Father Cammack deals further with the
various factors which modify responsibility,
including heredity. This section covers
well-trodden ground, but the public still
needs much education on recent researches
which are here summarised.

A great part of the book is devoted to
an examination of the question " what
precisely is a moral defective?", and here
again we are on very familiar paths, many
of which seem to lead round in a circle.
The author finds much to criticise in Dr.
Tredgold's work but concurs generally in
the use of the term " Moral Sense" to
mean a feeling or sentiment about moral
notions, an emotional tone superadded to the
intellectual perceptions of the rightness or
wrongness of actionsFr. Cammart
himself believes that the essential differences
which produce this low emotional tone, or
defective " emotional resonance" as it has
always been called, are of an organic
character.

Like many modern experimental psychologists, he considers the factor of
" perseveration " to be of great importance
in determining character and considers that
in this line of research lies the greatest hope
of elucidation of the problems of Moral
Defect. Some interesting studies of
individual cases are given in the book and
attention is rightly drawn to the rarity of
true "Moral Defect".
L. F.
