The Social Function of Science
================================

:Author: T. D. Bernal, F.R.S. Routledge, 12/6.

The participation of the scientific worker
in public affairs has usually been disapproved of, by those in positions of
scientific authority. This point of view was
symbolised by A. V. Hill's letter in Nature
(pp. 132,?952) (1933) quoted in The Social
Function of Science. Professor Bernal has
done great service, both in exposing the
falsity of this point of view, and in demonstrating the interaction of scientific and
social phenomena. As he rightly points out,
it has always been disastrous when there is
a division between theory and practice.
While it is difficult to emphasise all the
important criticisms made in the first half
of the book, the following are probably of
most interest to those whose profession is
research on the teaching of science :?

(1) Lack of co-ordination of research in
different universities and institutions.

(2) Unbalanced nature of research; e.g.,
lack of funds to support biological and
sociological research. As money for
research comes often from industry it
naturally goes to the physical sciences
where some return is likely. Research
in social biology tends to demonstrate
the failure of the present system.

(3) Inadequate resources for research,
including the humiliating seeking for
grants which most scientists have to
undergo.

(4) (a) Impossibility of long term research
under the grant system.

(b) Financial insecurity this system imposes on the young research worker.

(5) That owing to understating in the
universities it is nearly impossible to do
sound research and teach efficiently.

(6) Problem of advancement through publication of quantity rather than quality.

(7) Suspicion of scientists interested in
social affairs.

(8) Lack of contact between the different
sciences causing lack of development of
border line subjects.

As these points are ones of which every
scientific worker is aware, it will be redundant to discuss them further in this review.
It is hoped that Professor Bernal's clear
representation of them will lead to discussion in the various scientific societies.
The second half of the book is perhaps
less easy to evaluate. It mainly consists of
suggestions for reducing the inefficiency of
science which, in its turn, reflects the inefficiency of the social system. While it is
known that adequate foodstuff could be
supplied for all, the present system causes
" the cheapest goods at the highest prices
that can be maintained by the restriction of
competition."

The haphazardness of Western European
science is contrasted with the planned and
adequate financial support given to research
which prevails in Soviet Russia.

Besides the need for the complete reorganisation of science which would only be
made possible by a change in the social
system, Professor Bernal makes several
suggestiops for immediate reform. One of
these is the reform of the present method
of publication. Instead of the present bulky
and inconvenient journal, microfilms and a
sorting system that would send papers to
those needing them is suggested.

Another useful change would be some
adequate and flexible method of contact
between the different sciences. Then we
, might plan to do corporatively what men
like Galton did individually.

The writer feels that the book is open to
criticism on one point and that is the lack
of discussion of recent advances in psychology and anthropology. The Psychological
Sciences are not in quite such a muddle as
Professor Bernal suggests, and there are
psychologists and sociologists who are not
afraid to criticize the present social system.
Also in any book on social matters surely
more space ought to be given to discussion
of the findings of the psychoanalysts.

However, if the book had been written by a
social scientist no doubt equal neglect
would be shown to important steps in
physics and chemistry.

Professor Bernal is to be congratulated
on the completion of such an immense and
important task. It is to be hoped that all
directors of laboratories will both read the
book and act on some of its implications.
Madeline Kerr.
