Abnormal Speech
================

:Author: E. J. Boome, M.B.,
Principal Assistant Medical Officer,
London County Council, H. M. S.
Baines and D. G. Harries, Speech
Therapists for Day Centres and
Mental Hospitals, L.C.C. Methuen &
Co. Ltd., 6/-.

This book should be of invaluable assistance to speech therapists, to parents with
children suffering from defective speech, arid
indeed to anyone whose work is connected
with the remedial side of speech training.
The information and exercises are given
clearly and concisely, and as a glossary of
technical terms is included, the lay reader
can derive as much benefit from the book
as the reader who has had a professional
training in Speech Therapy.

The first chapter is devoted to the tracing
of the normal development of speech, from
the first stage of childish babbling to the
stage when normal speech is produced. This
subject is touched upon again in chapter
VIII in which the authors comment on the
difficulties which have to be overcome by
the class teacher of an Infants' Department
in an elementary school, not only in training
children to speak intelligibly but also in the
production of a pleasant tone of voice.
In Chapter I, which deals with functional
and organic disorders of speech, such as
Lalling and Lisping, the statement that a
lisper has 'usually a constitutional dislike
of accuracy in any movement" (page 15)
seems to be somewhat exaggerated, nor can
one agree that Dyslalia is an acute form of
lisping (page 17). The pages dealing with
Aphasia (18 to 21) and the different forms of
deafness (23 and 24) are particularly useful
and should be of value to the class teacher
as these disorders are not recognised as
readily as stammering or lisping, and
children suffering from a mild form of
aphasis or deafness can be severely handicapped, particularly in their school work.
In Chapter III, the authors give a series
of exercises for the treatment of speech disorders. Many excellent suggestions are
made here, and in Chapter V these are
followed up by more detailed exercises,
including those suitable for general speech
training, such as the " tongue twister"
sentence. This chapter deals also with
psychogenic disorders, and some sound
advice is given on the correct treatment of
stammerers, advice which can be followed
by the patient himself if an adult, or by his
parents if a child.

Chapter VI describes the speech of the
mental defective and some of the defects
peculiar to children suffering from mental
deficiency, and also gives suggestions for
remedying them. These suggestions are
amplified in Chapter VII, which contains a
concise account of the traits and characteristics of the " difficult " child.

The Appendix supplies some interesting
notes of practical value, particularly the
pages on " Child Development" and the
" Relation between Defective Speech and
Disability in Spelling," a subject on which
still more research might usefully be carried
out.

This book fulfils a long-felt want and can
be highly recommended as an indispensable
text-book for students, teachers, speech
therapists, and all who are interested in the
study of speech.
K. E. J.
