A Judgment Test for Measuring Intelligence
============================================

:Author: Cyril Burt, M.A., D.Sc.

Psychologists are often asked for a good test of intelligence to be used with
adults. Of those at present available none is wholly satisfactory. The harder
problems in the Terman-Binet scale sound too much like a teacher's crossquestioning in school : " If two pencils cost fivepence, how many pencils can you
buy for fifty pence?"* On the other hand, the booklets of logical problems used
* Test 4 for "Average Adults" in the new Terman Merrill scale.

for ordinary group-testing are to some examinees a painful reminder of the printed
papers set at the end of a summer term and productive of so much dread and
humiliation. Indeed, are not all adults, and particularly those whose education
finished at fourteen in Standard V or VI, likely to feel embarrassed, not to say
resentful, when some critical stranger arrives and proceeds openly to probe the
shortcomings of their intellectual capacities or attainments?

It is partly in the-hope of avoiding these and other difficulties that the following
test has been constructed. The examinee is given a number of short reasoned
statements, each typed out on separate cards, and relating to everyday facts and
problems. He is asked to arrange them, so far as he can, in an order of merit,
indicating which he thinks are the more justifiable and which he thinks the most
stupid. Each statement is, as it were, a potted argument; and the wording is so
chosen that the validity of the conclusion depends not on the truth of the premises
but on the reasoning involved. The examinee's intelligence is then measured by
the correlation between his order and a standard order, which is taken to be the
arrangement which a perfectly intelligent person would make. The dullest do
little more than sort the statements into two main groups?those that they are
willing to accept and those that they feel to be manifestly foolish or absurd. The
abler persons can discriminate much finer shades of validity; and can sort the
cards into five or ten groups, or even rank them in a sequence.

The test has been tried out in two forms. The harder contains thirty
reasoned statements, of which only a few are flagrantly absurd and the majority
involve fallacies that are more subtle or concealed. This was the earliest form
attempted. It was originally devised as a vocational test to measure the intelligence
of abler adults, for whom the Binet scale or the written group tests were far too
childish; and was first tentatively employed at the National Institute of Industrial
Psychology by Miss Gaw and myself. We found that it worked quite smoothly,
and apparently gave reliable results in cases of vocational selection. More recently,
after some revision of the material, it has been applied to forty-five senior students
and members of a College staff, whose relative intelligence could be fairly
accurately assessed; and, on correlating the results with the order of intelligence,
a co-efficient of .67 has been obtained.

This has encouraged us to attempt a more elementary form of the test; and,
in spite of difficulties in choosing a sufficiently simple wording, we find that the
general method is almost as effective with duller adults as with bright. Mr. Russell
has tried out this simplified form with a group of thirty-three adults at a working
men's club, and obtains a correlation of .73.

Both groups were small; but, with adults, it is exceedingly difficult to procure
any reliable estimation for the intelligence of larger groups against which the test
can be checked. The test material itself will no doubt need further amendment
and extension before it can be recommended for general use : Mr. Russell, for
example, has been for some time experimenting with performance material, in
order to avoid the handicap which all verbal tests at times impose. Meanwhile,
we believe the underlying principle may be of interest to those who desire to
construct tests of their own for similar purposes.

The special advantages of the method would seem to be these. It is well
known that tests that depend on logical reasoning, and presuppose no special
knowledge of the subject-matter, yield by far the best measurements of intelligence.
If the questions and their wording are simple enough, such problems can be solved
by children with a mental age of 6 or 7. But tests of reasoning are of two main
kinds, " constructive " and " critical In the former, which make up the bulk
of tests in common use, premises are given, a question raised, and the examinee
has mentally to construct an argument leading to the right solution : the
arithmetical problem quoted above from Terman is of this type. In the other
form, the whole argument is presented to the examinee ready-made, and the
examinee has to judge its logical value : Binet's absurdity-tests are the best
known examples.

Now the orthodox view of the theoretical psychologist maintains that
intelligence essentially consists in explicitly " educing relations and correlates ".
So it does, when the reasoner is an adult theorist. But in a very early paper on
mental testing?the first, I believe, in which the importance of logical relations
was stressed?I pointed out that, among children and practical people, intelligence
was more frequently displayed, not by the explicit, step-by-step inference of the
logician and the scientists, but by a " complex synthetic activity, comparable to
what is popularly described as ' intuition ', whereby we implicitly comprehend the
intelligible character of a whole, without explicitly analysing it into its component
parts or distinctly formulating their relations "f. With children, tests of
" judgment" (as this intuitive process may be called) gave even higher correlations
than tests requiring formal syllogistic inference. Further experience has led me
to the conviction that the more familiar tests of the latter type may at times do
grave injustice to the practical or intuitive intelligence of the " average pdult " as
we find him in daily life.

For this reason absurdity tests prove extremely effective so far as they go.
But with adults, at any rate, a long series of statements containing nothing but
absurdities is more likely to insult their intelligence than to measure it. Hence
the fallacies employed must be for the most part mild rather than obtrusive.
But then how are you to tell whether the examinee has really detected the
fallacy or not? Once again the practical man may be quick to perceive the
flaw, and yet find it very hard to put his criticism into words. In testing aesthetic
* For fuller explanations, with examples, see " The Backward Child," pp. 523 et seq.
f "Experimental Tests of Higher Mental Processes and their Relation to Intelligence,"
J. Exp. Ped., I, 1911, pp. 101 et seq. Cf. Board of Education, " Report on Secondary
Education, 1939," p. 436.
appreciation we should never judge a person by his ability to append detailed
reasons for his intuitive preferences; we should be satisfied if he could grade
the test-specimens?pictures, patterns, musical extracts, or the like?in an order
which agreed with that of accredited experts on art. Similarly, I suggest that
the best way to test appreciation of what is rational or irrational is to be found
in a double comparison : the examinee compares the items and we compare the
results of his comparison with those of the logical expert.

The essential principle is by no means new. It was briefly described in a
review of psychological tests drawn up for the Consultative Committee of the
Board of Education*; but.it has mainly been employed for testing artistic and
moral judgment rather than intellectual. But after all, plenty of intelligence tests
require the examinee to arrange objects in order and then measure his accuracy
by the correlation between his order and the true order : Binet's test of weights,
for example, where five boxes are to be arranged according to their heaviness,
really exploits the same procedure in an elementary guise.

Perhaps the greatest merit of the test lies in the fact that its aim is not too
plainly manifest. When the test was given to a class of students in 1935. not one
suspected that the object was to measure their intelligence, though several of them
volunteered the comment that intelligence was the essential quality required to
carry out the task efficiently. The majority thought that the object of the test
was to measure their suggestibility or credulity; and fortunately no person objects
to demonstrating that he is by no means credulous or suggestible. Finally, though
such proposals are perhaps irrelevant to the main purpose of this article, I may
point out that the same principle may be applied to test the concrete nature of
different persons' judgments on a wide varietv of topics. " Mass observation " is
the fashion at the moment. By getting various individuals to rank beliefs in order
of acceptability, and then applying a factor-analysis to the results, striking sidelights may be thrown on current views in regard to social, industrial, and even
political problems. The method is therefore one of wide possibilities for the
social psychologist.

* Report on Psychological Tests of Edncable Capacity, 1924, p. 58.
