Personality in Formation and Action
=====================================

:Author: William Healy, M.D. London.
Chapman and Hall, Ltd., 1938. 8/6.

There is a quality about lectures in print
that is not to be found in other kinds of
writing. The audience seems to take a share
in the building up of the argument, so that
it becomes at once more vivid and more
convincing. This quality is found in Dr.
Healy's book, which consists of a series of
edited lectures given in memory of Dr.
Salmon to the New York Academy of
Medicine.

Although the lectures were presumably
delivered to a medical audience, they are
easy reading for the layman. Dr Healy was
asked to render an account of what he had
learned about personality in thirty years of
clinical experience. He does this with clarity
and proportion. It must indeed have been a
difficult task to draw from his great storehouse of human lives those facts and inferences which had stood the test of time.
There can be few authorities who are in a
position to look back upon scientific studies
of individuals made at the beginning of the
century, and to ask themselves the question,
" Was I right or wrong? "

Dr Healy divides his subject into four
main parts : The Materials of Personality
Formation; The Developing and Emerging
Personality; Personality in Widening Relationships, and Implications for the Future.
In the first chapter he considers the meaning
of " self ", its basis in constitution and prenatal development, and the relationship
between growth and experience. In the
second he asks which elements in the
structure of personality are fixed and unalterable, and which may prove to be modifiable. Dispatching the controversies over
human instincts with the impatience of an
empiricist, he considers with greater
tolerance the subject of personality types,
and of the innate determination of the
strength of certain impulses and emotions.
The part played by intelligence receives
particularl}- careful consideration. Through
all this chapter run the questions, " What
are the best ways of understanding a given
personality? ", and " How far can our understanding help in the development of desirable
characteristics? "

The social aspects of personality growth
are discussed in the third chapter. Here the
psychiatrist leaves his clinic, and follows in
the trail of the anthropologist, touching
npon the relationship between personality
and culture, between learning and the
development of character, between
individual incentives and social values. The
final chapter on " Implications for the
Future", turns mainly upon this last problem.

The book can only be appreciated as a
whole, and is absorbing enough and not too
long to be read at a sitting. Many profound
problems of philosophy and social science
are only suggested, and here it is Dr.
Healy's experience and wisdom rather than
the thoroughness of his analysis which lends
peculiar interest to his comments. He never
commits the nnforgiveable sin of scientific
complacency. Personality in all its infinite
variations is still a subject for wonder. We
have not begun, for instance, to understand
its physical basis. We have hardly started
to consider the development of personalities
of social value, so absorbed have we been
in explaining the motives of those who
create social problems. We have been far
too naive in our use of quantitative measurement. We know extremely little about an
individual when we have estimated his intelligence. The life histories of delinquents
show that high-grade defectives as a whole
make just as good social adjustments as
those of average intelligence.

Dr Healy concludes with some disparagement of achievements, but with hope for
the future. Men and women of this generation have lost some of the moral virility of
their forefathers. They will not regain it,
as H. G. Wells has suggested, by a better
knowledge of history, science or sociology,
but only by a better understanding of what
the author calls " the momentous theme " of
personality.

S. Clement Brown.
