Psychopathic States
====================

:Author: D. K. Henderson,
M.D., Professor of Psychiatry, University of Edinburgh; Physician-Superintendent, Royal Edinburgh Hospital for
Nervous and Mental Disorders. Chapman & Hall. Pp. 178. 8/6.

Here we have a subject which, under
various labels, has defied adequate definition.
It is easier to say what psychopathic states
are not, rather than what they are, and therefore this classification has been liable to be
used as a dumping ground for conditions
which do not conform to established clinical
entities. The term psychopathic state does
not apply to individuals who are mentally
defective or frankly psychotic, but in Professor Henderson's words those " who
throughout their lives, or from a comparatively early age, have exhibited disorders of conduct of an anti-social or asocial
nature, usually of a recurrent or episodic
type, which, in many instances, have proved
difficult to influence by methods of social,
penal and medical care and treatment. . .
He speaks of " an instability, queerness,
explosiveness, intuitiveness and egocentricitv
which form the picture of the psychopathic
states

This book, which is based on the Thomas
W. Salmon Memorial Lectures given by the
author, is divided into three main parts; the
place of psychopathic states in Psychiatry,
their clinical manifestations, and the needs
for social rehabilitation. It is a strong plea
for the study, understanding and remedial
care of these cases. The author attempts the
difficult task of classifying these states and
suggests that they fall into three groups,
based on personality types, namely, those
who are predominantly aggressive, predominantly inadequate and predominantly
creative. He inevitably raises the question
of the relative importance of and relation
between innate qualities and environmental
influences in the causation of conduct disorders, and while not detailing his argument,
seems to hold the view that constitutional
loading is a more important factor than is
generally recognised.

A particularly interesting feature is the
illustrative clinical material in the form of
numerous pithy case histories, and the book
as a whole, with its practical appeal to all
workers in the mental health field, is constantly stimulating of thought.
F.H.
