By Isabel M. Laird, M.A., B.Ed., M.Coll. S.S.T
===============================================

Psychologist, Royal Scottish National Institution, Larbcrt
At the Chester Conference of the Association of Mental Health Workers,
in February last, the President, Dr Letitia Fairfield, raised with me some points
about the necessity, or even the advisability, of expecting " perfect " work from
imbecile children. We had no time then to develop our argument, and it has
seemed to me, considering the matter at intervals since, worth while to give form
to some ruminatings, and in response to the Editor's request, to address them to
readers of Mental Welfare.

The starting point of my interest in this topic would appear to lie some years
ago, and in the phrase " Well done, considering . . I was hearing the phrase
monotonously often in a large English institution for defectives. It was spoken by
visitors (and staff, myself included) and spoken sincerely : that is, the particular
work or play under review was being well done, when we made allowance for
the fact that the workers and players were mentally defective persons.

A little later, in a large Scottish institution, the phrase was again haunting
my ears. Perhaps, throughout, a personal trait was endowing the words with
their haunting quality, for I dislike giving, or receiving, praise which is first
exaggerated and then vaguely qualified.

Then one day, after several years of work with both imbeciles and higher grade
children, I was curiously struck by the wisely critical remark of a wisely critical
doctor long experienced in the care and training of defectives. It happened at the
conclusion of a long concert given by institution patients, and produced by myself.
" These items," he said, pointing to a certain part of the programme, "were well
done. And these," he continued, pointing to another part, " were well done, considering the children were imbecile in grade."

As I listened to the two remarks, my mind pounced upon the implied
distinction, as a mind pounces upon a truth just discovered after long discomfiture
among probabilities. It was apparent that, to the critic, the first set of items had
been well done, the others not well done. Did " Well done, considering . . then,
usually imply " not well done "? I was forced to the conclusion that it did. And
if this conclusion were true for these children, one duty was evident?the finding
or devising of items which, at the next concert, would secure for the second group
of children too, the sincere and unqualified " Well done

From that conclusion it was only a further step to the decision that not
concert work only but results in all or most lessons and occupations might be
surprisingly affected by the adoption of some practical aim of " perfection " even
among imbecile children. For it was soon clear that adoption of the aim began
at once to affect the manner of teaching, the degree of encouragement given, and,
consequently the effort roused in the children, and the standard of the show
work done.

The plea for " perfection", of course, needs considerable explanation.
Various workers have wanted to know, first, is not " perfection" a relative
quality, or even a mere matter of opinion here? Second, why ever should we aim
at perfection in the working of something as imperfect as imbecile mentality?
Third, even granting the value of the aim of " perfection " in some activities, what
about the valuable stimulus of the goal yet to be reached? Fourth, is it possible
to formulate any guiding principles whereby workers among imbeciles may be
reasonably assured that they are not roaming too far from the comparatively
narrow path?that path between straining after absurd excellence, and leaving
capacities unexplored?

Firstly, then, I agree that the assessment of " perfection " in teaching and
training is practically a matter of opinion; but I would not accept that it is a
matter of my opinion, of your opinion, or of any other individual opinion. It
is a matter of collected, experienced, and tested opinion?a very different thing.
But to indicate one line along which it lies, let me give the example of imbeciles
doing one of the simpler country dances. They keep good rhythm, and as the
dance has four parts, the nurse or student calls out " Partners . . . centre . . .
hands . . or some such word just in time to effect a fairly smooth change
over at each new part of the pattern. Now, if this performance is presented as
a finished piece of work, I have no hesitation in saying it is imperfect, as a dance
done by imbecile children. I contend that if that dance can go one stage further,
allowing the dancers to go through it in rhythm without periodic reminders
extrinsic to the dance, it will cease to be imperfect on that score. But I also
contend that if that dance cannot go the one stage further, it is better replaced
by a simpler one which can be danced as a true whole. I believe it matters to
be able in the end to complete a task oneself, or in team, without assistance.
It matters in individual work in class, but especially it matters in show work.
The effect of continual prompting in any concert spoils the event for both artistes
and audience. Continual prompting in the everyday concert means as a rule
either inadequate preparation, or over-ambitions choice of work. In the institution
or occupation centre concert, it would appear to mean the latter rather than
the former.

To sum up this point, a difficult thing badly done is a blind alley effort,
so long as improvement is unlikely or too far distant to be believed in. A simple
thing well done is a taste of " perfection and may, through the additional sense
of ease, power, and satisfaction released, thereby lead to the well-doing of a
more difficult thing. A further expansion of this point occurs later.

The second is a very different type of argument, but apparently a fairly
common one in practice. Since an imbecile is a very imperfect human being, is
it not more natural for him to " do things by half "? This attitude is perhaps an
outcropping from the habit of counting imbecile capacity as less than half average
capacity for children of the same age. But such a measure is a matter for the
mental tester and the statistician, and in any case can indicate only one aspect
of the imbecile child, and was never intended as an all-round description of an
imbecile child. For workers among the children, the imbecile is a human
personality complete, not a bit of one. The amounts and proportions, however, of
traits, capacities, emotional integrations and so on, within his personality, differ
from those of the average person. They differ much as those of the average
person differ from those of the extremely talented, or the saintly, or those in
any way really great. It would be absurd, in fact cruel also, to argue that average
folk, since they are only partially what the great are, would be best served
by spending an appreciable portion of their lives " half-doing " what the great
do well! It is similarly absurd?not to say similarly cruel?to accept a badly
lived " average " existence, or a badly mastered " average " human training, as
in any way beneficial for ineducable children or adults. So the plea for regular
enjoyment of the real satisfaction of " success " is strengthened.

Again, any attitude of being content with, let alone planning for, " half-done "
normal activities from imbeciles, blinds us to the wide range of individual
differences among them. We know very well what surprising energy may be
released all round, when the special little skill or interest of any pupil (normal,
subnormal or supernormal) is unexpectedly tapped by-some environmental stimulus.
And a very similar release of energy and interest results as the children thoroughly
master each step of any graded scheme of exercises or tasks within their capacity.
Individual differences then have scope to emerge into daylight, and to be
recognised, and used.

A third line of argument is sometimes put forward by still other workers.
This is built upon the text " It is better to travel than to arrive ", and when used
to counter the plea for " perfection " aims in tasks, one line of it tends to confuse
the progress idea and the motion idea in the concept " travel ". The over-repetition
of known work tends to lose even its ritual-pleasure value, if it involves only a
narrow circling on one plane. Now, running on the spot may be exercise or fun,
indulged in occasionally, but it is not " travelling ", and it is entirely divorced
from the needs of everyday life! Further, it does not even involve the main
movements required for running in a game or a race. Yet many of the often
repeated " learned " exercises in sense training can have no other value for the
individual child than " running on the spot

Another line tends to confuse the repetition work in a graded scheme, with
the repetition work in a massed scheme. For example, take tower building with
large blocks. The massed method would aim at the building of a tower of
say ten blocks. The children try for some days, or even weeks, but for most of
them, crashes occur at the seven, eight or nine tower heights. Through all these
efforts, one or two children may achieve the ten tower, and so reach " perfection "
in the set task. But feelings of frustration have been needlessly predominant even
for them, and almost certainly for the others. Now, another group try block
building. They also aim at the ten tower, but they begin by all aiming at the
five tower?or it may be only a three tower, but one which everyone is likely to
achieve?then a higher tower, and a higher tower, until the ten tower is built.
The little expert will win through first in either case, but the graded method
brings " success " to a far greater proportion of the class, just because " Nothing
succeeds like success "?and it isn't " success " even to an imbecile child, to be
told he does well in reaching the yellow mark on the wall, when the (higher) red
mark has been the conscious aim of the class all the time.

Next, " All very well," it may be said, " to advocate ' perfection ' or ' success '
systems of training for imbeciles. But can a set of principles be advocated, which
will help to focus emphasis upon the success or perfection side of the learning
process?" Naturally, there can be little variation from the established rules of
learning and rules for teaching, in any standard text book on the subject. But
some of the wider principles may be outlined here, with imbecile children in
mind as the learners.

(a) The general task will be in the teacher's mind as a whole task, but
will be presented to the patients or pupils as a series of small, graded, connected
steps. And success at each step will be noted and commented upon, both as a
complete success, and as a jumping-off ground for the next step.

(b) Even in the best graded schemes of tasks, there will occur now and
then stubborn failure points, like the plateaux in any long learning-curve. Here
an alternative step may have to be invented, at the same level of work, but just
sufficiently different to call up a slightly more interested effort, perhaps, or a
renewed belief in the possibility of success. For example, in the block building,
a child fails to maintain a steady arm once the tower reaches his own shoulder
level. The introduction of a (broad enough and firm enough) flat box on which
to stand for placing the next blocks, seems to bring back belief in his capacity
to make a higher tower that will stand. Of course, this is not equivalent to
balancing the same number of blocks from floor level, but it is the right kind of
between-task for avoidance of undue failure.

An occasional stubborn case of failure in a series of tasks may not yield
to this. In that instance, the best result is probably gained by giving an entirely
different kind of task for a day or two, instead. Success there may then make
the former task more easily tackled later on.

(c) Adequate revision all along is an essential feature of any good teaching
method, and a " success " method is no exception. We are not able to do a thing
always, because we do it a first time. Think of metal puzzles. We worry away in
a trial and error bewilderment to separate two pieces of hooked metal, and
presently find we have one in each hand. We have succeeded in separating them,
but we do not " see how ". But when we can do this puzzle quickly say three
times in succession, or at any time on demand, then we do " see how and we
have the learning at " perfection " level. With the lower-grade defectives, much
of the success in acquiring skills is of this level, and chance successes are not to
be confused with mastery of a job. The little girl has just skipped one by herself
with a rope. We do not say " Now, skip two ", or " Now see how many you can
skip." We say, " Go and show Billy how you can skip one, and then go and
show Mary how you can skip one Perhaps then we say, " Tomorrow we'll see
if you can skip two If such a child has free play time and a rope during the
evening, she may return on the morrow able to skip not two but half a dozen.
On the other hand, she may have no free practice facilities, and may take another
week to progress from skipping one to skipping two.

(d) Any system of learning, or even lack of system !, demands the adequate
use of progress books or cards. We must know the stages which our children
have reached, and because any individual method of teaching involves wider
variation of progress in a group, more detailed individual ratings must be
recorded more frequently. Happily these need not involve expansive hand-written
reports. One large squared-paper chart with names of pupils one way, and titles
of tasks the other, can be kept rapidly and effectively to date, by means of coloured
pencil marks or gummed paper stars, preferably dated, to mark successes
attained.

These points are still highly debatable, and so are some corollary ones,
such as :?

(1) that not all workers among imbeciles are capable of embracing a " perfection " method of teaching.
(2) that not all occupation centres, resident or day, have enough graded
equipment to allow of such a method being freely adopted.
(3) that such a method, since it could not, strictly speaking, be observed in
animal learning, is therefore not, perhaps, the best spur to learning
at a low human level.

This article is addressed to all fellow workers among ineducable children,
and it is hoped that the discussion may be useful to newer workers, and that it
may be a pointer to stale patches in the teaching of some more experienced
workers, as it has been to me. It may even drive some very much more
experienced folks to say, " This is utter nonsense ", and to write to the Editor
stating an opposite case. If so, let us hope they do so in time for the October
number.
