Report of Backward Child Sub-Committee
=======================================

National Union of Teachers, Walsall
and District Association.

In addition to scientific works and textbooks, recent literature on the Backward
Child and his Education, includes several
reports on the problem as found in particular local areas. The authorship of such
reports varies?a panel of Inspectors in one
area, individual investigators in others?but
from Walsall comes the first pamphlet prepared by a sub-committee of teachers. This
committee was set up by the Walsall and
District Association of the N.U.T., three
years ago and it has fulfilled a very comprehensive programme.

A questionnaire to Head Teachers and
the testing of two age groups of children by
means of a group intelligence test, were
intended to yield data on which conclusions
and recommendations might be based. The
findings were supplemented by direct
questioning of a large number of children
regarding number of schools attended and
size of family. This shows the thoroughness
with which the task was undertaken, and
perhaps the most disappointing part of a
useful document is the unrelatedness of the
conclusions to the information which the
data might be expected to yield?though
admittedly this is difficult to avoid unless
ample time is available for detailed analysis
of the material.

The authors themselves note that their
findings correspond with those of other
investigators, and devote what is the best
section of their report to a suggested scheme
for backward children supplemented by an
individual record card and schemes of work
which cover the essential minima of attainments in the more fundamental subjects.
There is no mention of the precise purpose
of the investigation but presumably the
report will be presented at the local Education Office as an expression of teachers'
opinion. May I express the hope that it will,
in addition, be freely circulated among
teaching staffs who are bound to appreciate
the practical suggestions it contains.
G. R.
