Child Guidance
===============

:Author: Al. D. L. Dickson.
Sands & Co. 1938. Price 5/- net.

It is too seldom that the reviewer has
the pleasure of opening a new book and
feeling that here is just what one has been
waiting for. Mr. Dickson has not written a
text-book on Child Guidance but rather a
broad practical exposition of the working
of a Child Guidance Clinic suited to the
educated reader, and admirably calculated
to break down prejudices. His experience
was gained mainly at the Notre Dame
Clinic at Glasgow and lie pays a welldeserved tribute to the " faith, devotion and
tireless energy " of Sister Marie Hilda, who
was one of the first in these islands to
realise the possibilities of Child Guidance
and quite the first to organise a clinic in
connection with a training college.

The respective parts played by the three
members of the now traditional clinic team,
?the psychiatrist, psychologist and social
worker?are well explained and illustrated
by pointed and interesting case histories.
Though free from " crankiness " and jargon,
there is nothing superficial about Mr.
Dickson's attitude and he constantly stresses
the need for expert training and scientific
knowledge in dealing with apparently simple
problems. The importance of bearing in
mind the effect that physical conditions may
have on character and conduct is well
brought out in the chapter on " neuropathologyThe sections on play-therapy
and speech-therapy will be of particular
interest to teachers and mental health
workers. The Notre Dame Clinic provides
a delightful series of play-norms and is
working out a technique for this most
valuable line of approach to the child mind.
Some child psychologists will feel little confidence in play therapy which stops short
of direct analysis, but there is much to be
said for the more detached attitude.

"If John displays in his play an
unconscious antagonism to one of his
parents, we prefer to discover why this
antagonism has arisen rather than to
explain this to the child. If we can
discover the reason it is often possible
by co-operation between clinic, home and
school to resolve this antagonism."
Play therapy is still too young to be an
occasion for dogmatism and it will be of
great interest to see which school of thought
best justifies itself by results.
The chapter on Speech Therapy is full of
valuable information on a form of treatment which is now advancing on scientific
lines. It is rightly pointed out that the
causes of speech difficulties are of such complexity that the therapist gains immensely by
working as one of a team.

A final chapter deals with common objections to Child Guidance " chiefly from a
Catholic viewpoint" but, in fact, the
criticisms so fairly stated here emanate
from persons professing any religion or
none. All child guidance workers will be
glad to have the case for the defence so
clearly and judicially expressed. For the
sake of this chapter alone, the book should
have a place in every educational library
and should be read by everyone concerned
in the upbringing of children?teachers,
magistrates and Care-Committee workers
alike.

If it is possible to expand the book in
future editions, a fuller explanation of the
value of child guidance clinics in cases of
school retardation might be included. The
history of the movement in the introduction
also calls for revision in certain particulars.
L. F.
