A Demonstration Clinic
======================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1919, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XIII, Nos. 1-3 December 15, 1919
:Author:  the Staff of the Psychological Clinic,

University of Pennsylvania.

In April of each year the educators of Pennsylvania meet at
the University to listen to lectures and addresses on subjects connected with education and to hold conferences and discussions on
methods and plans for carrying on the work. This annual function
is called "Schoolmen's Week." As part of the program this year
a demonstration was given on Saturday morning, April 12th, at the
Psychological Laboratory and Clinic. Similar demonstrations are
given regularly on Saturday mornings and other days through the
academic year as part of the required work in regular courses in psychology. The Psychological Clinic is open daily for examination
when parents and teachers bring their children to obtain advice
which they hope will assist them in solving difficult problems. The
object of the demonstration here reported was to show the schoolmen
of Pennsylvania what some of the methods of the Psychological
Clinic are. The emphasis was laid on the use of psychological diagnosis in the practice of teaching. Professor E. B. Twitmyer, who
is an expert on speech training and who has directed for many years
the speech clinic, showed the principles and methods employed by
him in curing two cases of speech defect. Dr Witmer showed four
children who were not getting on well in school and who had been
helped by means of clinical teaching carried on by volunteer student
assistants attending the School of Education at the University of
Pennsylvania. He also showed two cases, previously examined at
the Psychological Clinic, who had failed to get on in school because
of defects which had not been discovered in time to provide the kind
of instruction fitted to their needs.

Record.
Name  J
Age  Nine years four months.
Referred by  Principal of school.
Because of  Mother's refusal to permit him to remain in special class.
School attended  Public School, until March 1919. Is not now attending any school.
Age entered  Six years.
School history  Kindergarten, 1915.
2-1-17?1A. Not promoted in June.
9-3-17. Dropped and went to  where he stayed
five months, still in 1A.
12-17?1A.
2-1-18?1A.
9-18?1A.
1-19?IB. Principal states that this was an automatic promotion.
2-19. Orthogenic Backward Class.
3-19. Mother removed him from O. B. class and
refused to let him return.
Diagnosis  Deferred for further study.
Recommendation  Clinic teaching to determine diagnosis.
Terman Revision  Basal age, 7 years.
Mental age, 8 years 8 months.
I. Q., .928.
Physical condition  Poor. Decidedly lacking in energy. Trouble with
cervical glands. Frequent colds.
Status at time of examination  Reading?Could read nothing. Knew only A, B, C,
and O. Arithmetic?Approximately second-grade
proficiency.
Number of hours instruction  Five hours thirty-five minutes, distributed over
thirteen periods.
Present status  Can read six pages of Book One of "The Young and
Field Literary Readers." Can spell and write all
the words in those pages.

A DEMONSTRATION CLINIC.
Report.
J  is nine years old, and, already so far as school work is
concerned, he has proved a failure. He spent four terms in 1A,
then a kindly principal promoted him to IB. She did not know
his actual ability and was greatly surprised to learn a month later
that he could not read a word. Furthermore, he was still talking
an almost unintelligible baby-talk, and usually spoke in a low mumble.
His speech defect made his retardation appear even greater than did
his lack of school proficiency. The principal took the proper course
with a case of the kind and transferred him to a special class.
About three weeks later, J , who is an anaemic, nervous,
frail-looking boy, decidedly deficient in energy, went home to mamma
without any hat and also minus some other minor possessions. J 's
mother rushed off to school to find the lost articles, and discovered
in consequence that her boy was in a class with a group of boys,
some of whom were twice his size, most of whom were of a lower
grade than J , and some of whom were obviously feeble-minded.
She felt that these were unfit associates for her child and so, when
the principal refused to return him to the regular class, she removed
him from school. The principal recommended a psychological
examination, and J was brought to the Clinic. An examination
with mechanical tests seemed rather inconclusive, and Doctor
Witmer recommended further study and an attempt to teach. At
the time of his examination J 's only literary equipment was a
knowledge of the letters A, B, C and 0. Of course he could not
read. The next week he began to come to the Clinic for teaching.
Now, at the end of five and a half hours, devoted to the teaching
of reading by the diagnostic method, J  is reading. He has
covered six pages of "The Young and Field Literary Readers,"
Book One, and he knows every word included in those pages so as
to be able to recognize it in an entirely different context. In arithmetic both his ability and his acquirement seem to be normal for
the second grade. His speech is clearing up under instruction. A
Terman test given a week ago gave him an intelligence quotient of
.928, which means an intelligence normal for his age. Even his
physical condition has improved as an accompaniment or result of
the mental spurt. There is nothing to indicate that this could not
have happened long since.

Record.
Name  R .
Age  Seven years seven months.
Referred by  Mother's Assistance Fund.
Because of  Speech defect.
School attended   Public School.
Age entered  Six years.
School history  Entered 9-10-17?1A.
2-1-18?1A
9-18?IB.
2-1-19?2A. General standing 7.
Diagnosis  Infantile stammer, simple and curable.
Recommendation  Attendance at speech class.
Mental status  Normal for age in performance tests. Memory span
4 digits, 4 repetitions for 5 digits.
Physical condition.... Good. Nose and throat negative. Teacher suggests
possible deafness.
Member of teaching
clinic  Taught three hours.
Educational status.... Used anagrams, picking out letters in this fashion?
FRNk called Father. Called H, E and E, F. Knows
no phonics. Could spell cat and rat.
Teaching  Has been taught f, s, e, h, b, m, c, k. Discriminated
between dog, cat and ran as words. Learned to
sound cat, rat, sat, etc.
Dr Witmer states  That is not deaf, but has poor discrimination for
sounds due to faulty articulation. Thi3 leads to
something resembling word deafness.
Speech Work  Can give all sounds by imitation. Drilled on mouth
positions, ordinary words used in casual conversation
and lists of words containing r and t. Has learned
"Barber, Barber" and is given drill on difficult
words found in that classic.

Report.
R is seven and one-half years old, but he has not yet learned
to talk so that anyone can understand him. He entered school
when he was six and was promoted to the second grade in January.
Although he is reported poor in reading, he is expected to reach a
higher class in June.

R  does well in manual tests. His memory is trainable,
although he has a limited memory span. There is nothing to indicate that he has not an adequate mental equipment to do the work
of the second grade, but he does have a very definite speech defect,
so great that it is a most decided handicap in learning to read. The
defect is an infantile stammer, that is, a prolongation of so-called
"baby talk."

R was placed in the speech class conducted by Dr Twitmyer. The teacher to whom he was assigned tried to use his reading
to aid in speech instruction, and discovered that, with the exception
of the words of his name, R did not know a single word. He
was then given special instruction in regular first-grade work in
addition to the speech training. In the few weeks he has been coming
to the Clinic, he has learned to say a great many words correctly,
has become more willing to try to talk and has made a start toward
acquiring reading by learning half a dozen or more words and the
sound names of the letters forming them. There is a chance for
R , but only if given special instruction along the line that he
needs, for he can never profit by school work as long as his speech
defect remains so great.

Record.
Name  S .
Age  Thirteen years seven months.
Referred by  Children's Dispensary, University Hospital.
Because of  Backwardness in school.
School attended   Public School.
Age entered  Not known. School history begins 11-8-15.
School history  11- 8-15 Grade 2A
11-10-15 IB
1-31-16 IB
2-15-16
3- 7-17 1A
9-10-17 IB
2- 1-18 2A
2-28-18 Left school
3-11-18 2 A
Teacher reports that she hopes S 's reading will
improve enough so that he may be promoted at the
end of the term.

Diagnosis  Five years' general retardation.
Recommended  Orthogenic teaching.

Physical condition  Retarded about fi ve years. Nose and throat in need of
care. Head girth 54 cm.

Educational status .... Could not read. Knew words like "is," "be," "the"
and the like. Had no idea of phonics. If he had any
idea of what was on a page he would try to read,
making it up as he went along. The arithmetic was
good second-grade work. Spelling was very bad.
any combination of letters representing a word.
Teaching  Teaching continued for five periods of more than one
hour each. Has been given much drill in phonetics,
and required to be very careful in any reading
attempted. Can now read simple stories in the second
reader. . No instruction given in arithmetic, as that
subject was so far in advance of his reading and
spelling. Is required to do his spelling word from
every angle of imagery, in which he seems deficient,
so that he does not retain correct spellings.
Prognosis  Can be taught to read correctly and well. Number
work probably not past abstractions. Spelling
doubtful at present time.
Note  S likes to come to the Clinic very much. Does
not like to go to school.

Report.

A thirteen-year-old boy bent over a table trying to read a selection
in the first reader. His brows were drawn together and his mouth
puckered as he struggled with the complexities of s-l-o-w and h-a-v-e.
The next time he found these words, he spelled them out again and
so it happened a third time?first-grade reading was no joke to S .
At arithmetic S did much better for he had acquired most of the
combinations during his school career, but spelling?S couldn't
spell. He saw no reason for supposing that one letter was preferable
to another in any given instance. S was not good in school.
S is graded in 2A. He has repeated at different times all
of the classes below that grade and one or two above in an effort to
get a running start. His school life has been strenuous but not
valuable to him, and S is now "going on" fourteen. It is time
he was doing better. S thinks so himself and is eager to quit
school and go to work. He has lost all interest in things academic.
The Psychological Clinic was asked to try S  out. No
reason was found for his inability to read. He plans work well.
He does tests well, and the mental equipment which he uses in his
social life seems to be fully adequate for his environment. In
attempting to teach S  it was found that he lacked the very
foundations of reading. Drill in the use of phonics, insistence upon
accuracy in reading and definite care in the study of his words for
spelling and language have improved S 's work so much that
there seems no doubt that he could have been taught to read and
spell properly years ago. Now that he is almost ready to leave
school, about the best that can be expected is that he may learn to
read well enough to read the daily paper. The years of instruction
S  has received have not given him as yet the most necessary
tools to be used either in the acquirement of knowledge or as means
to the end that he may be self-supporting.

Record.
Name  A
Age  Fifteen years six months.
Referred by  Children's Dispensary, University Hospital.
Because of  Backwardness in school.
School attended   Public School.
Age entered  Not known. School history dates from 11-8-15.
School history  11- 8-15 Grade 4A
11-10-15 3B
1-31-16 3B
2- 1-16
3-29-17 2B
9-10-17 3A
2- 1-18 3B
1 3- 1-18 Left?suspended for truancy.
11- 4-18 3B
2- 1-19 4A. Successful in work of 4A.
Diagnosis  Retardation; on the anatomical scale, four years;
pedagogical scale, five years; mental age score, six
years. Apparently quantitatively feebleminded.
Considering family history and mechanical tests,
will probably be above the line of social competency.
Recommendation  That he be taken from school and put to work.
Terman Revision  Basal age, 7 years.
Mental age, 9 years 2 months.
I. Q., .659.
Physical condition  Retarded four years. Referred to the Nose and Throat
Dispensary. Often at Children's Dispensary for
colds and minor ailments.
Desires  To go to work. Interested in automobile repair shop.

Report.

A  "bags" school. He is fifteen years old and ready to
go to work, but the law requires him to stay in school and study the
reading and arithmetic that goes with the fourth grade. When
A was ten he was in the fourth grade too. He has been in other
grades since then but never one higher than the fourth. Now at
fifteen he is running neck and neck with the attendance officer, in
bad with the school because he will not attend and get his lessons,
in bad at home because he will not go to school and cannot go to
work and thus ease the ever-increasing pressure on the family income;
and, lastly, in bad with the community because he has no lawful
employment and is thus open to mischief with every bad boy of the
neighborhood.

A social worker interested in the family brought A to the
Psychological Clinic because he is doing so poorly in school. He did
not prove to be feebleminded. He uses his hands very well. He
can solve a new problem readily, planning the solution with skill.
He has good ability at following directions and gives evidence of
clear thinking in every test he attacks. On one point alone he is
poor. His ability to use words is limited, his responses to questions
involving their use indicate his lack of acquaintance with his own
tongue. He can read, but he cannot tell about what he has read.
He fails to give definitions and bits of information usually picked up
in school. He has not acquired either arithmetic or reading in a
way to make them adequate tools of use to him in later life.
A is too big a boy to associate with the ten-year-old children
who are in the fourth grade; he is too old a boy to enjoy attempting
the same lessons he did five years ago. The fact that he rebels against
the regimen suggests a not undesirable self-respect.
The Clinic cannot help. There is no way to release A from
his school obligation, so he is completing his education in the accumulation of such material as the street affords and in the acquirement of habits of idleness which will handicap him all his life.

Record.
Name  E
Age  Fifteen years.
Referred  Philadelphia Committee for the Protection of Girls and
Women.
Because of  Bad conduct in school and truancy.
School attended    Public School.
Age entered  Not known.
School history  Not complete. Had reached fifth grade.
Diagnosis  Normal mentality. Retarded and backward.
Recommendation  That she be taught a trade. Recreational opportunities.
Terman Revision  Basal age, 8 years.
Mental age, 10 years 6 months.
I. Q., .674.
Educational status.... Reading, fourth grade. Can reproduce (10-year level).
Arithmetic, third grade.
Physical condition Good.
Desires  To be transferred to another school, but refuses to stay
in school and improve her conduct so that she can be
transferred.
No occupational preferences.

Report.
E , fifteen years old, has entered the dream world where
plumed knights rescue lovely ladies before breakfast and marry
and live happily ever after, in one volume. Each romance, at ten
cents each, has placed E  farther and farther away from the
realm of reality, until now the pages of arithmetic and reading in the
fifth grade automatically become lovely stages upon which dream
people in flowing garments hold impossible conversations and perform marvelous deeds. Lessons were sadly out of place with E ,
and to avoid their continued torture the stage was often set and
peopled in places outside the schoolroom. Since truancy is not to be
desired, and teachers found it impossible to deal with the problem
of E , the knot was cut by issuing to the child a domestic certificate, which permits her to sit in her slovenly home and dream away
the hours undisturbed.

E  is not feebleminded, although very backward. Her
performance tests show good ability with the hands and a fair amount
of planfulness. Her memory span is short and is not compensated
by easy trainability. With the manual dexterity which she shows,
E ought easily to be able to learn some of the simpler operations
involved in mill work. She may be able to keep herself above the
line of social competency if no great stress is placed upon her judgment and ability to plan ahead. The romantic aspect which brought
her into conflict with the schools is probably an adolescent phenomenon, which is not serious in itself, but if not rightly directed may
result in serious non-conformity to the standards demanded by her
own social group.

Record.
Name  S .
Age  Ten years seven months.
Referred by  School nurse of last year.
Because of  Speech defect.
School attended   Public School.
Age entered  Six years.
School history  One term 1A.
One term IB.
Two terms 2A.
One term 2B.
One term 3A.
One term 3B.
Promoted on encouragement to 4A, but will not be
promoted this term to 4B. She is not doing onefifth of the work now. Her written papers average
less than twenty.
Diagnosis  Infantile stammer somewhat complicated by throat
condition.
Recommendation  Nose and throat examination; attendance in speech
class.
Mental status  Infantile; one and one-half years retarded.
Physical condition.. .. Much improved since tonsilectomy. Sore throat
avoided and child has improved in flesh.
Speech status   Can give any sound desired by imitation. When
required, talks very nicely. Apparently no active
co-operation in the home, so that training is progressing very slowly. Child can recite "Owl and
Pussycat" and "My Shadow."

Report.
The youngest of a family of four, S has been petted all her
life. She is now ten years old, a "big girl," but she still retains many
of her baby habits including that of " baby talk." In this she has been
encouraged by her family and the young women of her acquaintance
because it sounded so "cute." With the speech defect, S has
also continued to lean strongly upon the parental oak, and in its
absence upon the teacher or anyone else handy, for S has never
learned to stand alone in the simplest matter.

S  came to the Speech Clinic because a school nurse had
recommended it to the parents. She early showed ability to say
anything that she desired in good English, while at the Clinic, but
apparently it has been hard for the family to remember that S
is almost eleven, and they still permit her to talk in the old way at
home. S goes to school but is not to be promoted to the 4B class
in June, for her work is worth not more than twenty on a scale of
one hundred. Part of this trouble has been S 's amiability which
has made it possible for S to get promoted more on the basis
of her tears than on her ability to read and do her sums.
S must be taught to speak correctly. She will never read
accurately until she speaks well enough for the teacher to understand
her. She must also learn to do things for herself, both at home and
at school. Unless these two points are won, S will never make
a normal, healthy woman.

Record.
Name  P
Age  Twelve years ten months.
Referred by  Juvenile Aid Society.
Because of  Fact that younger sister of seven can neither walk or
talk.
School attended    Public School.
Age entered  Seven years. Two years missed because of illness.
School history Entered in 1911
Three terms 1A
One term IB
One term 2A
6-22-14 entered 2B
One term 2B
Promoted to 3A and then transferred to Orthogenic
Backward Class.
Diagnosis  Normal mentality. Specific defects in vision and audition.
Recommendation  Medical attention, especially eye and ear examinations.
Also dental treatment and subsequent to these
treatments restoration to a regular grade.
Terman Revision  Ten years four months.
I. Q., .81.
Physical condition  Teacher reports boy nearly blind. Does not think
him deaf. Examiner found him lacking in audition
in one ear and dull of hearing in the other. The
sight in one eye is entirely gone and very much
reduced in the other. Body filthy and has "habits
of an animal," so teacher reports.
Educational status .... Teacher reports that he learns absolutely nothing. He
is so often truant that she feels unable to give him a
rating. No co-operation at home.

Report.
Because P 's sister never walked or talked, the family was
referred to a well-known social agency in the city. A social worker
inquired at the school P was supposed to attend, asking for his
school record. His teacher reported him the most disgusting child
in school, of filthy habits, given to answering questions with "queer
expressions." The social worker then brought P  to the Psychological Clinic to find out what was the matter with him.
The examiner was confronted by a 12-year-old boy, tall, pastycomplexioned, not at all prepossessing in appearance, who slid sullenly
into a chair and waited with mouth open for what was to happen.
He co-operated well with the tests, however, and showed at once his
ability with mechanical material. His only defect was a marked
lack of distribution of attention. His memory was good, he had an
adequate memory span and good trainability. His general information, as indicated by the Binet tests, was not that of a boy of his
years, for his school work had not kept pace with his advancing
age, and the abstractions required in the twelve-year tests were
beyond him. The total result showed a retardation on the Binet
scale of two years.

While P was being examined, he constantly questioned the
examiner with "Sir," "H'm?" and "What?" The examiner inquired
whether he heard well, and was met with an indignant denial of
deafness. However, P  finally acknowledged that the drum of
one ear was missing and that he could not hear at all on that side.
Further testing showed that he had reduced hearing on the other
side. There was such a marked lack of distribution of attention in
some of his work that a rough test was made of his vision with the
result that one eye was shown to be completely blind and the other
greatly reduced in acuity.

This normal boy had been shifted from regular class to special
class and back again, partly because he had never been taught
ordinary habits of cleanliness in the home, and partly because of
nonsense replies given in the classroom. His present teacher knows
that he is nearly blind but has not discovered the deafness. With
no help from the parents, the school has not been able to keep P
in regular attendance, and, while he has been in school, he has been
unable to profit by the instruction offered him because of sensory
defects so great as to require special methods of instruction.

Record.
Name  R
Age  Nine years two months.
Referred by  Social Service Department, Howard Hospital (1916).
School nurse.
Because of  Backwardness in school.
School attended  Public School.
Age entered  Five years.
School history  Not complete. Two terms in 1A in regular grade.
Now in special class doing first-grade work in reading
and second-grade work in arithmetic.
Diagnosis (1916)  Deferred.
Recommendation  Transference to a special class. Medical care. Reexamination.
Diagnosis  Normal mentality.
Terman Revision  Basal age, 5.
Mental age, seven years four months.
I. Q., .72.

Report.
R?-? lives in one of the tiny houses in a back street of one of
the poorest districts in Philadelphia. With a brother and a sister,
normal, alert Italian children, R  at nine years of age sees the
life of the street flow past her without taking part in it. R 's
father is ambitious for her and the others and insists upon cleanliness
and good behavior rather more strictly than do his neighbors. The
mother is not "quite right in the head," which fact isolates the
family from others in the community for the neighbors are afraid
of her.

R  has not done well in school. Two years ago she was
brought to the Psychological Clinic because of her lack of ability to
do school work and also because her personal habits were not equal
to those of the rest of her class. Since she was primarily a case for
medical care, R was recommended to a special class, the medical
care she was then receiving to be continued. For two years R
has been receiving instruction in the special class. Her physical
condition is much improved, but the school situation is the same
as it was. R is still reading in the first grade and doing number
work but a little more advanced. She has not yet learned to use
English with any facility. Mental examination shows that she
has good ability with manual tests, but her memory span is short
and her trainability not great. She has no ability in the use of words.
What can be done for R ? She is not a fit subject for an
institution. She can learn to do simple work effectively and ought
at the present time to be receiving instruction so that she will be
prepared for occupational competency when she leaves school in
six years. The time to make her an efficient unit of her group is now.
These years in school ought to be valuable to her. She has a right
to expect that they will be.
