Irregularity on a Binet Examination as a Measure of its Reliability
=====================================================================

:Author: Sidney L. Pressey, Ph.D.,
Indiana University.

The writer became much interested, while serving as Assistant
Psychologist at the Boston Psychopathic Hospital in the summer of
1916, in "irregularity" on a psychological examination as shown by
insane patients. The results of a special study of this subject, using
the Point Scale, have already appeared,1 and were summarized
briefly in a paper at the annual meetings of the Psychological Association in December, 1917. In this paper a method for stating
"irregularity" on the Binet scale was also suggested. Briefly, this
method consisted in adding together the number of months failed
below the mental age (each failure being multiplied by the number
of years away from the mental age at which the failure occurred)
and the number of months passed above the mental age (each success,
again, being multiplied by its distance, on the scale, from the mental
age). The present paper is a brief report of results obtained, using
this method of figuring the "scatter," with the Stanford Binet scale.
A word should first be said in explanation of the method. The
method for stating "scatter" most in the spirit of the Binet scale
would, the writer believes, be simply to add together the failures
below the mental age and the successes above. This gives, as a
matter of fact, results of not a little interest. But it is obvious that
a failure one year below the mental age is not of the same importance
as a failure four years below the mental age; a success one year above
the mental age is of much less significance than a success four years
above. To put the situation concretely, a child with a "mental
age" of ten years, who fails a six-year test and passes a sixteen-yearold test, is much more interesting material for further study than the
- child with a ten-year mentality who fails nothing below the nine-year
group of tests and passes nothing above the twelve-year group. The
expedient was, therefore, adopted of multiplying the value of each
test appearing in the irregularity by the number of test groups which
that test was away from the mental age. In the case of the ten-yearold child first mentioned, the failure of "two months' worth" of test
at six would be multiplied by three (this being the number of test
groups away from the test group in which the mental age appears).
1 IYessey, S. L.: "Distinctive Features in Psychological Test Measurements made upon Dementia Praecox
and Chronic Alcoholic Patients," J.of Abn. Psychology, June, 1917,and " Irregularity as a Measure of Deterioration,"
same Journal December, 1918.

And the five-months'worth of success in the sixteen-year test group
would be multiplied, again, by three?the number of test groups
away from that test group in which the mental ages falls. We will
suppose that the mental age of this child was 9-8, that he failed
one test in the six-year group, one test in the seven-year group, two
tests in the eight-year group and one test in the nine-year group.
The number of successes or failures in the ten-year group is of no
interest; if the examination were perfectly even the child might fail
any two of the ten-year tests without its being possible to consider
him other than typical. The two months of failure at nine would be
counted as two months of irregularity, the four months at eight as
eight months' irregularity, the two months at seven as six months'
irregularity, and the two months of failure at six as eight months'
irregularity. In similar fashion we may suppose this extraordinary
child to pass one test or "three months' worth" at twelve,to fail all
the tests of the fourteen-year group, but to pass one test of the
sixteen-year group. The irregularity in the twelve-year group (one
test group away from that test group in which the mental age falls)
would be counted as three months in making up the total of irregularity, and the five months' worth of success in the sixteen-year
group would be multiplied by three?the number of test groups
which this last success is away from the test group where this child
should, if the examination had been perfectly even, have stopped
succeeding.1 The total irregularity, as thus figured, would be
forty-two.

The present brief study is based on irregularities, thus figured,
from 141 white children, 51 colored children and 16 adults. The
white children have, of course, been the basis of comparison. They
range in age from four through fifteen. The distribution by I. Q.
will be given shortly; many were tested as special cases?either
sub-normal or brilliant. The group is thus not a representative one,
but does well enough for the rough comparisons here presented.
The number of cases and median irregularity at each age are as
follows:

A<re  4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
No  1 1 12 13 18 10 24 25 17 12 4 4 141
Median  8 10 8 12 9 13 9 8 10 10 10
1 The question will naturally be asked as to why this success at sixteen was not multiple by six, the number
of years which this success is away from the mental age. This procedure was tried; it was found, however, that
since the tests above ten are already progressively weighted, the handling of the scores in this fashion tended to
double-weight irregularities above ten and increase excessively the amounts for the older children. The method
can best be understood by clearly grasping its purpose. What is being sought, of course, is a statement of total
variation of successes and failures about the mental age which shall give an expression simply, and solely, of the
consistency of a subject's responses to the different parts of the examination, and which shall make possible a direct
comparison of the consistency shown by different subjects, and at different ages. And the difficulties encountered
are due to the fact that the mental age is not an average but a sum, and that even the Stanford scale is not sufficiently systematized for any very satisfactory statistical treatment.
The small number of cases at certain ages permits only tentative
conclusions from these results, but the medians would suggest that
the irregularity was fairly constant over the range of these ages.1
If we may suppose irregularity to be at least roughly constant over
these ages, it will be permissible to lump the cases of different ages
in studying possible relations of irregularity to "brightness." The
results, when the cases are grouped according to I. Q., are as follows:
I. Q  -7G 76-90 90-110 110-125 125No  23 37 42 24 15 141
Median  9 8 9 10 14
Clearly irregularity is, as thus stated, not distinctive of subnormality.2 A greater scattering of scores in examinations from
superior children might seem suggested. But the increase is slight,
individual differences arc great; the slightly greater irregularity can
hardly, when everything is considered, be thought of any practical
importance. In fact, it is hard to see any value in such a measure
of irregularity?unless, possibly, as a special method in the study of
examinations from insane patients.

The results from the colored children and the adults put a
different light on the situation, however. The 51 colored children
referred to in the beginning of the paper make up all the pupils
(except some few who dodged the examination) in a small colored
school. The number is too small for tabulation by age; but the
group as a whole gives a median of 14 units irregularity. The 1G
feebleminded adults show a median irregularity of 26. Such
findings surely suggest that though irregularity may not vary with
"brightness" it may, nevertheless, be indicative of some factor of
importance in the examination. To see whether some further understanding of the situation might not be given by intensive study of
extreme cases, the children showing the highest ten per cent of irregularity were especially considered.
Only 15, or about 11 per cent, of the total 141 white children,
show irregularities of 20 or over. The girl who shows the greatest
irregularity (71 units, as compared with the average of 10) is the
child of a university professor. Although twelve years old she has
never attended school, never plays with other children, spends most
of her time in reading, has been educated by her mother. The
girl is thus distinctly abnormal in mental make-up and training.
Another girl, with an I. Q. of 94, has an irregularity of 27. Her
* Similar results were found for irregularity on the Point scale, as described in the writer's papers above referred
to.
2 The results are thus in accord with Dr Wallin's interesting paper, dealing with this subject in a
slightly different way. Wallin, J. E. Wallace, "Irregularity and Feeble-mindedmss," Ptycholociccd Clinic 11;
179-195, 1917, and with the results of the writer already mentioned.

vision is so defective that her teacher says she can "scarcely see
even with glasses;" the teacher also says that home conditions
are "dreadful." A third girl with an I. Q. of 72 and an irregularity
of 22 has been out of school much, and is just recovering from pneumonia. A boy with an I. Q. of 101 and irregularity of 26 was, the
examiner notes, impatient of the examination, wished to get through
with it as quickly as possible, and did not give satisfactory attention.
Another boy?thirteen and a half years old, and in the fifth grade?
gave an I. Q. of 91 and irregularity of 34. It was found after making
the examination that the boy had been tested before. The second
examination was made toward the close of the school year, after a
large number of his classmates had been "Bineted." There was
good reason to believe that the results of the first examination
(which had been for practice), along with talk among the pupils,
had influenced the examination; the scale rating was much higher
than was expected by either examiner or teacher.

In fact, of the fifteen children of irregularity 20 or over there
were only three who were not known to have some marked peculiarity
of mental make-up or training, or whose examinations were not
qualified by some such special circumstances. Something the same
situation appears in the case of the adults. They were all, with
two exceptions, inmates of a county poor asylum. Again, with two
exceptions, they were over forty years of age. A number had more
or less defective vision, several showed illiteracy beyond what would
be expected from the amount of their mental defect. That is, most
of the cases were old enough so that some affects of maturity1 (or,
perhaps, of senility) upon the make-up of the examination might be
expected. And the majority suffered from special handicaps of one
sort or another which might be expected to affect the consistency
of their showing in the examination.

The slightly greater irregularity of the colored children the
writer is inclined to explain in analogous fashion. Previous work
has shown negro children to give a somewhat distinctive "pattern"
of scores on a group of psychological tests.2 An innate difference in
abilities is naturally suggested. Anyhow, the average colored child
surely comes from a total environment very different from the
mental environment acting upon the white child; standards of living,
1 The writer has already presented some evidence to show that individuals over twenty give examinations
distinctly different from the examination given by a child of the same "mental age." See Pressey, S. L. and Cole,
L. W. "Are the Present Psychological Scales Reliable for the Examination of Adults?" J. of Abn. Psychoogy
December, 1918.

2 See, for instance, Pyle, W. II. "The Mind of the Negro Child" School and Society 1: 357-G0,1915; Ferguson
G. 0., Jr.: "The Psychology of the Negro: An Experimental Study," Archives of Psychology, No. 3G, 1916 p. 138,
Sunnc, Dagny: "A Comparative Study of White and Negro Children," J. of Applied Psychology, 1: 71-83, 1917;;
Loades Redfern, H., and Rich, S. G. "Binet Tests on South African Natives?Zulus," Ped. Sem. 24: 373-83, 1917.
moral and social attitudes, sentiments and ideals and interests and
ambitions, are all subtly but powerfully different. And it would
seem not unreasonable to expect the sum of such influences to have
some effect on the reactions to a psychological examination.
The conclusion is, of course, that a high irregularity indicates
the presence in the examination (and in the score) of some more or
less irrelevant factor, preventing a standard measurement of the
"general intelligence" of the individual. A very unusual education
or environment, marked sensory defect,physical illness,poor co-operation, possibly age and racial peculiarity, may thus operate to prevent
a satisfactory rating. And when they do thus operate, they show
their presence most distinctively by increasing the irregularity.
Irregularity might thus be said to give a measure of the reliability
of an examination?of its freedom from such factors.1 And a statement of irregularity would seem of little less importance than the
mental age and I. Q. in summarizing the findings of an examination.
These are obviously very far-reaching conclusions from a very
small amount of data. The present paper has been intended only
as a suggestion of methods and problems?and beyond this has tried
only to demonstrate that there is in this subject of "irregularity"
somewhat more promise than has ordinarily been supposed. A
priori it would seem as though we needed, as a matter of ordinary
statistical precaution, some measure of the dispersion, as well as
of the average or sum, of the scores obtained with a composite group
of tests on a given individual. And the few results above presented
surely suggest an actual value for such a measure in the use of the
Binet scale. The writer hopes further studies may be made of the
subject.

1 It might be said that the writer believes the irregularity shown by mentally diseased individuals should be
interpreted in the same way. Irregularity need not, in such instances, be the result of deterioration. It may be
simply the result of absorption in a delusional system, of distraction by hallucinations, of negativism, retardation,
or other relatively temporary conditions. But it is always the result of some factor which makes the examination
unreliable as a measure of the patent's intact mentality.
