A Clinical Examination Blank for Backward Children in the Public Schools
=========================================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. I. No. 7.
December 15, 1907.
:Author: J. D. Heixman,
University of Pennsylvania.

Children begin their public-school life at different ages,
some as early as five, others not until eight or older. Even where
education is compulsory, the age of entrance will frequently be
above that prescribed by law. This is due in part to an evasion
of the law and in part to ill-health and the influx of a foreign
population. Nevertheless, the majority of children are under seven
years of age when first entered upon the enrollment records of the
public schools.

It is the aim of the schools to have each child do the work
of one grade in a single year, so that if a child enters the first grade
at the age of six years he should, if the school succeeds in its
purpose, begin the work of the second grade at the age of seven
years; of the third grade at the age of eight and so on through
the grades. The schools, however, do not succeed in realizing
this ideal scheme of progress. A very cursory examination of
school reports or enrollment records will reveal the fact that there
is a large number of children in the public schools who must often
have failed to make the necessary promotions.

From the analysis of the enrollment figures of the Camden
schools for 1905-06 it appeared that about 2,000 public school
children, or 26% per cent of the entire number, were retarded,
meaning by retarded those children of the first grade who were
nine years old or more, of the second grade those who were ten
or more and so on. A realization of the extent of this retardation
led Mr. Bryan, the city superintendent, to study by means of
a statistical inquiry the conditions producing it, and also to consent to a clinical examination of the 2,000 children whom his
statistics showed to be retarded. This examination was carried
(189)
No. Name
Grade Class 190 Address
Grade Class 190 Address
School 190 Teacher
School 190 Teacher
Progress E G F D vD Date of birth Age
Conduct E G F D vD Age on entering school No. years in school
Attendance vR R I vl A School history (Rel)
Most deficient in
Best in
Habits
54321 54321

Father living dead Normal vG G M SI D Deficient Bkw IHIM II Id
Mother living dead Health vG G F P vP Home Care vG G F P vP
Step-father, Step-mother Nutrition F G M P St " Culture vG G F P vP
Nationality F. Support R W M P vP " Discipline vG G F P vP
" M. Occupation of provider
Birthplace Child works at
Lives with Anormality Asymmetry
Home Lang. Trunk
Older brothers living dead Arms
" sisters " " Legs
Younger brothers " " Hands
" sisters " " Feet
Eye, R. ) Cranium
Eye, L. ) Forehead
Defects Face
Disease Ears
Ear, R. | Eyes
Ear, L. j Nose
Defects
Lips
Disease Palate
Co-ordination 5 4 3 2 1 Tonsils
vB Bold Norm Shy vS Naso-ph'nx
Am Resp Pass Sull Sur Mth Breathg
Sto In A1 Nerv vN Teeth
vR Refl Norm Imp vl Tongue
Stu Wilf Firm Flex Vac Voice
Stammer (inf) 5 4 3 2 1 Speech
Stutter 5 4 3 2 1 Diseases
Filled In by Date
Laboratory of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania.
The J. Lewis Crozer Fund.
oil by me during the second half of the school year 1906-07. Its
object was to discover the social, educational and other factors
which delayed the normal progress of the child.

In order to facilitate this investigation and to secure data
that were relatively uniform and of scientific importance, the first
task was the preparation of a suitable blank. I propose to
describe and analyze this blank in the hope that it may prove
of service to others who may contemplate the preparation of a
blank for a similar investigation. The blank is of such a character that it may also serve as a model to teachers who are persuaded of the utility of keeping a permanent record of each child.
Such a record, revised each year and sent with the child as it is
promoted or transferred from one school to another, would more
than repay the teacher for the time devoted to making the records.
To do this work properly, presupposes on the part of the teacher,
a knowledge of the individual child which is really indispensable
to its proper discipline and instruction?a knowledge, however,
which many teachers lack. The required use of this blank will
go far towards compelling the teacher to gain this necessary
knowledge. A case presents itself to my mind which forcibly
illustrates how children may be made to suffer on account of the
ignorance of the teacher. This was a girl, nine years old and
in the first grade. She did very poor work and had little promise
of being promoted. The mother was very urgent in demanding
that her child should be promoted at the close of the term. Partly
owing to the parent's insistence and partly in consequence of a
school regulation, this poor child, who was a microcephalic imbecile, was detained an hour or more almost every day after the
regular school session in order that she might study her lessons.
On further inquiry, I discovered that no matter liow much time
the child devoted to her lessons, she learned nothing.
The keeping of such a record would do more than benefit
the teacher and the pupil. Properly made and preserved, these
records would constitute a repository of data, upon which to build
generalizations of the utmost significance to the school system
and all connected with it, whether in the capacity of patron or
pupil, teacher or supervisor.

All the items of the blank, which is reproduced in actual
size on the page opposite, may be classified somewhat roughly
into three groups: one group pertains to the child in the home,
?This investigation was conducted on the J. Lewis Crozer Fund,
provided by Mrs. Crozer as a memorial to her husband and to further the
scientific study and remedial treatment of backward children.
another to the child in the school, and the third to the child as a
mental and physical entity. Jnst as there are three main groups
of facts, so there are three main sources from which to gain
our information: the home, the teacher and the child himself.

When large numbers of children are to be examined within a
limited period, it is impossible to undertake to see the parents
of every child and the necessary information must be obtained
from other sources. Frequently the child's teacher will have
some knowledge of the home conditions. In my experience, however, the principal is more likely to know the home, especially
if she has held her position long enough to become acquainted
with the district. It is also a practical expedient to use the child's
appearance as an index of the home conditions. In my work,
I attempted to obtain facts about the home from the teacher,
principal and child.

The blank makes no provision for obtaining certain data
of value, such, for example, as the circumstances of the child's
birth. A number of considerations entered into the determination of the number and kind of data, for the collection of which
provision was made. To prepare a blank four times the size
of this one would have been a comparatively easy task. Our
blank limits the data to those considered most essential for an
understanding of the child's status in the school, i. e., his backwardness in grade for his years. The blank must bo as convenient
as possible to handle and must be filled with the least possible
expenditure of time. ISTot an item appears on this blank without
having had its purpose and relative value subjected to critical
scrutiny. In certain cases, however, important facts may come
to light which ought not to be passed by; these should be carefully entered on the back of the blank. The blank was only put
into its present form after several days' trial. This resulted
in a few alterations, but for the most part it was left as originally
conceived by Professor Witmer.

There are a number of preliminary data at the head of the
blank which may usually be obtained from the ordinary school
records. These are name, address, grade, class, school, teacher,
date of birth, and age; sometimes even age on entering school and
number of years in school can be obtained from the records. In
the Camden schools it was possible to obtain all but the two last
named items from the regular registration books. It will be
noticed that grade, class, school, address, and teacher are duplicated.
This is explained in the following way. When I began my work
I examined the blanks Mr. Bryan had used in his inquiry during
the year 1905-06. From these records I obtained the name, grade,
class, address and teacher for each one of the 2,000 cases of retarded children. These facts are required to identify and locate
the child, therefore I entered them upon my blank before beginning the actual examination. But when I began the examinations, I found that the location of the child had changed in a
large percentage of cases, due to promotion, transfer or change
of residence; hence the duplication. If the facts which serve
to identify and locate the child are obtained from the school records for the year in which the investigation is carried on, some of
the items on the blank need not be duplicated, but this does not
apply to grade and class. The grade and class of the year previous to that of the examination should be entered for every child
upon the blank, so that when a child's progress is reported by the
teacher as good, the investigator can at once compare this judgment
with the number of classes or grades the child made during the previous year. Frequently teachers will report progress "good" simply
because the -child in question is then doing well. They do not
take into consideration the length of time involved. When their
attention is called to the fact that the child made no promotion
during the previous year, they frequently reverse their judgment.
After we have obtained the name, grade, class, school, address,
and teacher of the child, he may be said to be located. We now
know where to go to find liim, whether at school or at home, in
order to obtain the other data called for by the blank. Moreover,
age, grade and class give the child's intellectual status, enabling
us to measure the extent of his retardation. Date of birth and
age are both called for, in order that one may serve as a check
upon the other. If there is any inconsistency, the information
must be regarded as unreliable. The same may be said about
age on entering school and number of years in school.

Closely associated with all the data mentioned above are
'progress, conduct, and attendance. After progress appear the
letters E, G, F, D and vD; these are abbreviations for the words
excellent, good, fair, deficient and very deficient. The letters used
in connection with conduct are the same as those used with proqress, and stand for the same words. The letters following
attendance are vE, R, I, vl, and A; they are symbols for the
words very regular, regular, irregular, very irregular, and absent.
These letters, standing for words, are used because they are likely
to mean more to the person doing the grading, than mere figures
standing for so many grades. However, figures may be employed.
In connection with normal, which for the sake of compactness is
used for normal mentality, both figures and letters appear. The
same arrangement is employed in connection with deficient, standing for deficient mentality. To indicate the grades of co-ordination, stammer, and stutter, only figures are employed, because
no significant words suggest themselves. Below the item coordination are five groups of letters and words which are used
to grade five different mental or moral qualities, whose purpose
will be considered later. The other qualities which it was thought
profitable to grade are health, nutrition, support, home care, home
culture, and home discipline.

I have now made mention of all the data involving the
gradation of qualities, conditions and functions; I shall next
consider the system of grading. It will be noticed that a fivepoint system is adhered to throughout, and there are some reasons
why a five point, rather than a four or six point, or some other
system, should have been chosen. It appears to be the most
natural system. In our every-day judgments we are apt to
classify with respect to a system of five grades. When asked
to grade the mentality of a child, it does not seem difficult to
say that he is either good or poor, or neither. But we constantly
meet with exceptional cases which we feel should be classed as
very good or very poor, and therefore one more grade appears
necessary at each end of the three already given. In asking
teachers to grade the mentality of their pupils, I frequently asked
them whether the mentality was good or poor, without telling them
how many grades of mentality I used. In very many cases they
responded, "neither," meaning medium, or, "lie is very good,"
or, "He is very poor."

Another reason for preferring the five-point system is its
easy adaptation to other systems. In translating this system
into the percentile system, or the reverse, the lowest grade would
include all the points from 1-20 per cent; the second from 21-40;
the third from 41-GO; the fourth from Gl-80; and the fifth from
81-100. Although somewhat imperfectly, it may be articulated
with a three-point system by combining the two points at each
extremity of the five-point system. Again, some four-point systems
are simply five-point systems in disguise. Such, for example, is the
one used in the college of the University of Pennsylvania. Hero
the symbols D, G, P, and N", stand for the words distinguished,
good, passed, and not passed, respectively. The group marked
IT has really not been analyzed and graded because tlio college
has no interest in grading students who fall below the passing
mark; but if the E" group were graded according to relative
ability, it would be found that the students in it would distribute
themselves into two groups which would be related to each other
like the D and G groups.

In connection with normal mentality, for which normal
appears 011 the blank, I wish to explain in what way the figures
are used to indicate gradation. Directly after normal are placed
the symbols vG, G, M, SI and D, standing for the words very good,
good, medium, slow, and dull. Where such words or their symbols
are used there can be no doubt as to the grade for which they
stand, but this is different where figures are employed. Here
it will be observed that D is placed below the figure 1; therefore
the figure 1 indicates the lowest grade of normal mentality.
The highest grade of mentality is indicated by the figure 5,
placed above vG; and medium mentality by the figure 3 above
M. Consequently, the higher the figure, the higher is the grade
of mentality which it denotes. This use of the highest figure for
the highest, and the lowest figure for the lowest degree of the
quality after which it appears, is followed wherever figures are
used for grading. In general, this is contrary to custom, but it
is adhered to in this blank for the sake of being consistent with
the percentile system of marking grades. Just as in the percentile
system, so in this system the lower numbers 3tand for the lower
grades.

After this general treatment of the graded items, I wish to
consider these items individually, and first mentality. The immediate purpose of the preparation and employment of this blank
was the collection of data for an investigation of the causes of
retardation. Much of the retardation may be accounted for by a
low degree of mentality; and to determine the number whose
mental capacity is low, gradation was not avoidable. The grades
of normal mentality appear on the blank after the word normal.
The symbols employed are vG, G, M, SI, and D, and they stand
for the words very good, good, medium, slow, and dull. These
words were not used to grade the class standing of the children,
but their mental capacity or ability. The use of the words very
good, good, and medium for grades 5, 4, and 3, will be accepted
without comment. It may seem that perhaps we should have
chosen the words poor, and very poor for grades 2 and 1 respectively. These words indeed are often applied, but the endeavor
was made to use on the blank, words which would appeal most
to the natural judgments of the teacher. It'was thought that many
teachers speak of their children as being "slow" and that this
means more as a grading of mental capacity than the term poor.
A "dull" child the teacher also understands readily,' and this
seemed to be a more striking term for children who are in the
lowest grade of normal mentality than the rather indefinite term
very poor. Whatever catchwords may be employed, they serve
only to assist the investigator to assign the child his proper position in one of the five grades represented by 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1.
It is commonly assumed that all children in the public schools
are of normal mentality. If this were true, it would be possible
to distribute all our cases over the five grades of normal mentality
which have just been discussed. However, it does not take a very
extensive investigation of the mental capacity of children who
are retarded in school progress to discover that many of them are
subnormal in mental capacity. Indeed, for every thousand children examined we find one or more children who are properly
cases for an institution for feebleminded children. We must
provide for a large number of children to be distributed over
classes or grades that are recognizably deficient in mentality. To
preserve the five-point system, children who are discovered to be
mentally deficient are distributed over five grades. The highest
grade of these deficient children is called backward; the lowest
grade would be the idiot. The middle grade is occupied by what
is generally characterized as an imbecile of medium grade. Between him and the backward child we place the imbecile of high
grade. Between him and the idiot we place the idio-imbecile.
In this scheme of classification we omit the imbecile of low grade,
whom we should classify either as an imbecile of medium grade
or as an idio-imbecile; and we fail to recognize more than one
grade, of idiot. The mentally deficient are therefore represented
on the blank by grades 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1, for which the following
symbols are employed, Bkw, III, IM, II, and Id.

A different point of view might have given rise to a different
system of classification. Thus, Ireland and Shuttleworth both
make use of a pathological classification. This must necessarily
be as incomplete as is our knowledge of the pathological conditions
of the feebleminded. It is undoubtedly of value, however, to
the physician, for he looks to the pathology of the idiot to throw
light upon its etiology, diagnosis, and prognosis. But these pathological conditions are usually not the causes of idiocy, but mere
concomitants. The essential fact of idiocy is mental deficiency.
In the British Medical Journal for 1002 Dr Eichholz says: "Feeblemindedness or mental deficiency is not so much a symptomatic
condition to which a medical man can apply his art with hope of
success, as a social and educational grouping which has gradually
arisen in connection with the development of elementary education
in this and other countries." Moreover, it is recognized that the
hope for the greatest improvement of the feebleminded lies in
their instruction and training,?that the problem is an educational
problem, and not a medical one. Even the physician becomes a
trainer when he undertakes the daily care of the feebleminded
child. This has been recognized from the time of Itard through
Seguin to Sollier and Barr. In Die Kinderfeliler, Vol. VII, p. 97
J. Triiper quotes the following passage by Dr Pelman, the'
psychiatrist at Bonn, from the introduction to the German edition
of Sollier's, "Psychologie de l'idiot et de l'imbecile": "What we
meet as the pathological foundation of idiocy are the sequelae
of diseased processes that have long since run their course. These
one can no longer obviate through any known medical art. The
feeblemindedness which has its basis in a congenital brain disease,
or in one acquired in the first years of life, is no longer susceptible
of cure. The task of the physician can therefore receive but a
small reward."

It appears to be generally admitted that the most satisfactory
classification of the feebleminded is psychological or educational.
A psychological classification, however, does not appear to me
as practical as an educational one. Even so fundamental a psychical process as the attention, upon which Sollier bases his psychological classification, is not such a measure of general capacity
as to bo of much service in determining the place of these children
in schools and institutions. Of all the schemes of classification
which have been offered, the most practical, in my judgment, is
that of Dr Martin W. Barr. It is based upon educability.
Omitting the moral imbecile, it is as follows: I. Asylum Care :
1. Idiot, (a) Profound, unimprovable; (b) Superficial, improvable in self help only. 2. Idio-imbecile, improvable in self help
and helpfulness. II. Long apprenticeship and colony life
under protection: Imbecile, (a)Low grade, trainable in industrial and simplest manual occupations; (b) Middle grade, trainable in manual arts and simplest mental requirements; (c) High
oradc, trainable in manual and intellectual arts. III. Trained
to for a place in tiie world: Backward or mentally feeble, mental
processes normal but slow and requiring special training and
environment to prevent deterioration.

The five grades of mental deficiency that are used on the
blank are practically the same as those which have been presented
by Dr Barr. The three highest grades of the mentally deficient
are in complete agreement. The low grade imbecile, however,
is not given a separate classification on the blank, nor is the class
of idiots subdivided into the profound and the superficial.
(To be continued.)
