Penal Reform in England
========================

:Author: : L. Radzinowicz, M.A., LL.D., and J. W.
Cecil Turner, M.C., M.A., LL.B. P. S.
King & Son, Ltd. 10s. 6d. net.

The first chapter deals with statistics of crime.
The most striking recent development is that,
allowing for all changes in conditions there is an
increase in the incidence of juvenile crime.
The causes of this are held to be smaller families,
leading to the spoiling of children, a general lack
of discipline, a failure in religious teaching, the
decay of the apprenticeship system, the short-
comings of our educational and industrial system
in regard to the adolescent and unemployment.
Many reformed penal methods are stultified
by their unintelligent use, the most striking
example of which is probation which has been
regarded by many magistrates as a sort of
universal panacea with the results that probation
officers have been overloaded, often with
unsuitable cases.

The next chapter deals with the trend of
criminal legislation from the Gladstone Com-
mittee to the Criminal Justice Bill of 1939.
This is followed by an account of the various
types of Court and their powers with special
reference to the still imperfect schemes for free
legal defence of the poor and the increasing
tendency to dispense with juries in trials for
criminal offences.

" Solicitor " describes some irregularities in
police procedure and in the conduct of Courts
which, he claims, are becoming more common.
The constitution and powers of the Juvenile
Courts are next described. It is pointed out
that two rather contradictory principles are
involved, namely, guardianship and the punish-
ment of a person who is responsible for his
crime. The attitude of different courts to
their function is apt therefore to vary con-
siderably.

No discussion of approved schools is included
in this book but the Borstal system is described
and its frequently excellent results explained.
Its chief weakness is the difficulty in finding for
the boys on discharge such work as will fulfil
the training and hope founded on this training
which they have gained while in the institution.
The present Prison system in this country is
finally dealt with, special attention being drawn
to the New Hall Camp near Wakefield, where
selected prisoners are employed on farm
work without restraining walls of coercive
detention.

In this series of essays by experts a great deal
of information is to be obtained both as to
present English practice in dealing with criminals
both young and old and as to possibilities of
advance and reform in the future.
