Personality and Mental Illness
==============================

 An Essay in Psychiatric Diagnosis

:Type: Book Reviews
 :Author: By Dr John
Bowlby. Kegan Paul. Pp. 280. 10s. 6d.

It is not easy to give a fair and adequate survey
of this book within the compass of a short
review. It embodies an ambitious attempt to
endow concepts of mental illness with accuracy
and precision. It also illustrates the more
independent attitude adopted by some of the
younger members of the psycho-analytical
school.

The author takes as the two basic personality
types the Schizoid and the Syntonic, and when
one or other is involved in mental illness, he
holds that the psychic mechanisms employed
will differ. But for a proper diagnosis, he
postulates that there are four general questions
that will need to be considered: A, the genetic
type as above; B, the personality sub-type of
which he mentions eleven varieties; C, the
degree of stability; D, the present state and how
it developed.

His first approach to the patient will not be,
is he normal neurotic or psychotic, but is he a
Schizoid who is normal, neurotic or psychotic,
or is he a Syntone who is normal neurotic or
psychotic ? And he goes on to say:

" I am not chiefly concerned to prove that
the psychoneuroses and psychoses are indivi-
sible, but to demonstrate the relation of
particular types of neurosis to particular
psychoses."

And again, the patient " must be thought of as
an individual of certain potentialities, a unity of
which the particular traits and symptoms shown
at any one time are but fleeting expressions".
In fact, the reader would not be surprised to hear
that the Life Style was of more significance than
the Oedipus Complex.

The book is mainly a study of 65 patients.
These were diagnosed in accordance with con-
ventional psychiatric practice, and orthodox
labels were attached. In all cases?and this is,
of course, important?the diagnosis was attested
by competent judges. There were 36 Psychotics
and 29 Psychoneurotics in the series. Of the
Psychotics, 32 were seen at the Maudsley
Hospital and 4 in the Department of Psycho-
logical Medicine at University College Hospital.
The supply of Psychoneurotics was drawn
presumably from the same sources. In a few
instances the differential diagnosis was doubtful.
The subsequent histories of these cases are
recorded.

Each patient was then analysed according to
the presence or absence of 105 different traits.
These traits were first grouped as follows:
Work and Interests, 22. Social Relations, 19.
Attitute to Authority, 10. Attitude to Family,
3. Mood, 16. Temper, 9. Sex, 7. Habits
and Obsessions, 12. Health, 7. In the tables
that show the results of the investigation, the
traits are arranged differently. First come 33
classified as Schizoid?then 45 Non-specific
(Depressive) and 27 Non-specific (Hyperthymic).
The " credentials " of these traits are discussed
in the two Appendices which together constitute
about one-quarter of the book.

The author adopts a reasonably detached
attitude to the whole research. When 5 or
more of the first 33 traits are present, " the
likelihood of that person being Schizoid I
believe to be enormous ". Actually 8 of these
traits were not found at all in any of the 13
Schizophrenics investigated, and less than
5 traits were present in 3 of them. On the other
hand, in one of the Syntones (a Depressive),
6 of the Schizoid traits were found. Again
among the Schizophrenics, there were only 10 of
the 72 Non-specific traits that were not found
in one or another.

Normal individuals do not apparently respond
to this form of personality analysis or, at any
rate, to the traits here selected, as their tendencies
are not usually sufficiently exaggerated. So
Psychoneurotics were analysed partly to assess
their personality grouping, and partly to serve as
controls and comparisons. They were labelled:
Anxiety States and Neurasthenia, 7; Conversion
Hysteria, 11; Obsessional Neurosis, 5; Hysterical
and Psychopathic Personalities, 3 each.

Ten of the 29 Psychoneurotics qualified as
Schizoids with 6 or more Specific traits. These
were distributed among all forms, the lowest
proportion being among those in the Anxiety
State and Conversion Hysteria groups. Here
conversely the Non-specific, i.e. Syntonic traits
were much in evidence. Some of the conclusions
arrived at are briefly:

" Anxiety States and Neurasthenia are
believed usually to be mild forms of the
Affective Psychosis."

" Hysterical and Psychopathic Personalities
are usually Schizoid." .
" Conversion symptoms and Obsessiona
symptoms may appear in either Schizoid or
Syntonic Personality."

" In all cases of sexual, neurotic or persona-
lity disorders, it is believed that it is of 'a
more value to diagnose to which main typ
and sub-type of personality the patien
belongs, than to try and settle the diagnosi
between the traditional groups, anxiety state,
hysteria, obsessional neurosis, psychopathic
personality, etc."

For the rest, the book itself should be studied?
not to try out a stereotyped and mechanical form
of diagnosis, but just to consider the suggestions
and ideas put forward in sober language free
of the jargon of any particular school of
psychological thought.
H.C.S.
