Juvenile Delinquency: A comparative study of the position in Liverpool and in England and Wales.
================================================================================================

 :Author: J. H. Bagot, M.A. With
an Introduction by D. Caradog Jones,
Reader in Social Statistics in the University
of Liverpool. Issued under the auspices of
the School of Social Sciences and Admini-
stration in the University of Liverpool-
Jonathan Cape. 5s.

This enquiry, conducted under the auspices of
the School of Social Sciences and Administration
in the University of Liverpool deals with
indictable offences committed by persons
between the ages of 8 and 17. It excludes
minor offences such as breaking of bye-laws,
minor damage, unlawful possession, etc., and,
what is more important, sexual delinquency m
girls which may have considerable individual and
social repercussions.

The incidence of delinquency in Liverpool and
in the rest of England is studied and compared-
It is noted that the increase is much greater in
towns than in the country and there is a relative
increase in the South as compared with the
North, perhaps as a result of the migration ?i
industries from North to South.

Most of the cases dealt with which are those
in the years 1934 and 1936 in Liverpool are boys,
since the figures for girls are very small. I*
interesting to note that the figures in Liverpool
are three times greater than those for the rest ot
the country. So far as types of delinquency are
concerned, the proportion is smaller in the tvvo
years studied, larcency, the minor offence, beinS
twice as great as breaking and entering whns
offences against the person are very
Larcency is greatest between the ages of 12 aD
14 and then decreases, but breaking and entering
continue to increase with age since the mor
serious crime needs more planning. The author
suggests that the increase in stealing may be due
to changes in methods of sale since the population
is persuaded that it must have certain articles and
these are often displayed on open shop counters.
Thefts from the latter are specially by girls from
14-16, the goods taken being clothes, cheap
cosmetics, etc. A fruitful source of larceny
seems to be lack of money to spend on sweets,
cigarettes and cinemas compared with other
members of the group. Offences are most often
committed in idle times, i.e. half-holidays and
Sundays, except that girls tend to steal from open
counters when shops are specially busy on
Saturday afternoons. In Liverpool fewer cases
are placed on probation than in the rest of the
country but more are dismissed under the
Probation of Offenders' Act. Liverpool sends
niore children to approved schools and a large
number are fined which, in the case of children,
seems of very little use. The Justices seem to
Profit very little by experience as they are not
able or do not trouble to follow the future
histories of their cases. It is found that one-
third of the cases are recidivists; 44 per cent, of
the cases were Roman Catholics from Inner
Liverpool. Poor physical health did not seem
to be an important factor but the chances of
delinquency were greater among backward
children but not amongst actual mental defec-
tives. Backward children were also likely to be
recidivists. As a whole, clubs did not exert the
influence for which they are often given credit,
since much depends on the leadership of the
clubs, the number of attendances by the boys,
and especially whether the clubs admit delin-
quents. If they do not, then any claim to
Prevent delinquency must be dismissed.

Unemployment is very important but the same
cause may be responsible for both unemployment
and delinquency. Amongst employed delin-
quents, most are engaged in blind alley occupa-
tions and change their jobs frequently.
Nevertheless, employment was better in 1936
than in 1934, though the delinquency figures
^vere worse. Groups or " gangs " influence the
'ncidence, especially among younger delinquents,
.ft the effect of being in a group is more
?rnportant than that the group may have one
delinquent leader. Poverty is very important
and so is overcrowding, because under such
^?nditions children are drifting on to the streets.
Removal to housing estates eventually diminishes
delinquency though where the removal has been
very recent no improvement is noticed for some
*lrne. Large families seem to favour delinquency
ut they also favour poverty and overcrowding
and other delinquents in the family seem to
avour delinquency and especially recidivism.
Lack of discipline in the home is very important
and will often stultify all the best efforts of the
Probation Officer. Similarly " broken homes "
exert a similar influence.

The conclusions and recommendations are
summarized at the end of the book and appen-
dices discuss very briefly adult offences, and
delinquency during wartime. With regard to
the latter, the following points are suggested:
1. More thought should be given to the
extent to which parents may be made
responsible for the misdeeds of their
children.

2. Methods already proposed whereby delin-
quents would be deprived of some liberty
in their leisure time should be re-examined.

3. Much could be done by collaboration
between the police and the court on the
one hand and the teaching profession on
the other.

4. The possibilities of a curfew should be
examined.
