Central Association for Mental Welfare
=======================================

News and Notes

The C.A.M.W. is planning to open an additional Emergency Home for defective
children as soon as suitable premises can be obtained. It is hoped to provide for
from 30 to 50 cases, to include a considerable proportion of " cot and chair " cases,
and so urgent is the need for accommodation that already the majority of the vacancies
have been booked.

The Social Case Work Department (comprising the Guardianship and Case
Section, the work for epileptics and the Register of Foster-Homes run jointly with
the Child Guidance Council) has had an exceptionally large volume of work during
the past three months, chiefly due to the large number of cases which have been
received through the Mental Health Emergency Committee. Of the 698 cases dealt
^ith, it is estimated that 195 applications may be said to be directly attributable to
war conditions. They include not only requests for special help on behalf of
individuals suffering from nervous strain due to bombing, but also applications from
parents and relatives of mental defectives or of mentally unstable patients who can
no longer be adequately cared for at home.

Miss Ruth Thomas, the Association's full-time Educational Psychologist, is
giving lectures to educational societies and teachers in various parts of the country
on "Children's Problems in Wartime", the Education of Backward Children,
Group Teaching, and other similar subjects. She was also loaned to the Mental
Health Emergency Committee for a visit to Southampton to enquire into the possi-
bilities of helping air raid victims, and for helping in Barnet to organize play groups
for evacuated children. Mrs. Bathurst, part-time Educational Psychologist, visits
Kettering fortnightly for psychological work amongst evacuated children as well as
amongst the ordinary school population, and it is interesting to note, from her
experience, the opportunities that occur for helping teachers to deal with children
whose previous history is unknown to them.

Some Education Authorities are now experiencing difficulty in dealing with
M.D. children owing to the fact that their Certifying Officers have been called up,
and the Board of Education and the Board of Control have therefore sanctioned the
holding of the usual annual Course in Mental Deficiency for medical practitioners, in
co-operation with the University of London Tutorial Classes Council, if it can be
arranged. Although owing to the absence of the necessary facilities for practical
work it will not be possible to hold the Course in London, it has been ascertained that
facilities could be provided at Oxford if the necessary number of applications are
received, and a preliminary announcement is now being issued.

Child Guidance Council
-------------------------

Owing to the dearth of trained and experienced workers, Mrs. Hardcastle, loaned
by the Council to the Mental Health Emergency Committee as Organizer, has been
working in Coventry for three months to assist with mental health problems created
by the recent raid. Other members of the Committee's staff have generously under-
taken to divide Mrs. Hardcastle's duties between them, to enable this important piece
of field work to be carried out.

In response to a request from the representative for Civil Defence Region 2 to
the Mental Health Emergency Committee, the Council has asked Mrs. Henshaw,
educational psychologist, to devote three sessions a week until March 31st, 1941, to
work in Leeds where the establishment of a comprehensive psychiatric service for
children and adults on lines similar to those laid down in the Report of the Feversham
Committee, is in process of development. As the Council's funds are fully employed,
the Mental' Health Emergency Committee will undertake to supply a psychiatric
social worker for a limited period.

The Sunderland Child Guidance Clinic has appointed an educational psychologist
to its staff, thus completing the team and qualifying for recognition by the Council
as a Group I Clinic. The Clinic in the Public Health Department at Barnsley, which
recently has been able to avail itself of the services of the educational psychologist
employed by the Education Committee, hopes to obtain the services of a psychiatric
social worker also, and thus would become a Group I Clinic. The Council has
agreed to assist with the salary of the social worker appointed, if one can be found,
until March 31st, 1941, by which time the Local Authority will be able to assume
complete responsibility.

York Education Committee has advertised for a psychiatric social worker.
This development follows on recent activity among teachers and magistrates to whom
the Council was asked to supply information and literature. Plans are expected to
mature shortly for some kind of child guidance service in several other areas in which
mterest has been apparent for some time past. On the other hand, most of the clinics
m London have been obliged to close.

As far as educational work is concerned, the Council is investigating the
Possibility of introducing psychological lectures into courses for student midwives,
and in January Mrs. Hardcastle lectured to a group of Midwife Teachers at their
quarterly meeting. This is the result of an enquiry received from an important
Gaining centre.

Efforts are also being made to introduce knowledge of the principles of child
Psychology into the curricula for orthopaedic nurses and a few lectures have already
been arranged at one training centre.

Cental Treatment Clinics
---------------------------

The National Council for Mental Hygiene has recently compiled for the Ministry
?f Health E.M.S. a Directory of Out-Patient Mental Treatment Clinics in Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. Data collected by the Council since the outbreak of
hostilities has been carefully checked in order to bring the information up to date
and the Directory therefore gives particulars of out-patient psychiatric services which
are available at the present time. The names of the psychiatrists in charge have been
deluded for the information of those who wish to refer cases, and the auspices under
which certain clinics are functioning are also indicated, as well as particulars as to
days and times of sessions.

The Directory is being issued officially by the Ministry of Health to all
Neuroses Centres and to the Services, in order that these may have information on
where to refer Service patients, discharged owing to nervous disabilities, for treat-
ment near their homes. The Ministry of Pensions is also arranging to issue it
t? hospitals under its control. Enquiries with regard to the Directory may be sent
t0 the N.C.M.H., 76-77 Chandos House, Palmer Street, S.W.I.

A valuable report on case attendances at Out-Patient Clinics giving comparative
figures for 1939 and 1940, has also been prepared by the National Council for Mental
hygiene for the Ministry of Health E.M.S. The Report shows that although at some
the clinics there has been a considerable drop since the war in the number of
attendances and a few clinics have had to close (usually because of the seconding of
the medical staff for service with the Forces), at the majority there has been no
Appreciable decrease in the number of patients treated, in spite of evacuation,
black-out " difficulties and other unsettled conditions which have prevailed.

Mental Health Emergency Committee
----------------------------------

The Committee has continued to allocate workers for work in connection with
air raid victims suffering from mental or emotional strain as the result of bombing,
or who by reason of mental deficiency, epilepsy or some other permanent disability,
are in need of special treatment or billeting. Some account of this work will be
found in an article published on another page. Such emergency help has been
given in Bristol, Coventry, London, Manchester, Barnet and Warwickshire (for cases
evacuated from other areas). The possibilities of giving help to further areas which
have suffered from intensive air attack is under consideration.

In Region 10 (Lancashire, Cheshire, Westmorland and Cumberland), the
Committee's Regional Representative, Miss Martland, has continued her vigorous
activities. A loan worker supplied by the Committee is working amongst evacuated
children in Westmorland, and the Border Rural District of Cumberland has accepted
the offer of a worker (part-time).

Miss Findlay, the Committee's Regional Representative in the East and West
Ridings, began work in the autumn and has made useful contacts with the various
officials and organizations in the area, arousing considerable interest in mental
health problems.

The Ministry of Health has recently agreed to consider applications from Local
Authorities for grants to enable them to employ mental health workers to deal with
problems arising among evacuated mothers and children, as well as amongst children
who are unaccompanied, where it can be shown that a real need exists, and an
increased demand for the Committee's loan workers may therefore be expected.
The following Resolution has been passed by the Committee, in connection with
Hostels for Difficult Children and incorporated in its recommendations on the
subject:

"The Committee wishes to put on record their opinion that where residential
accommodation is provided for difficult children by central or local authorities or by
voluntary organizations, it is essential that there should be adequate psychiatric
supervision. It recognizes, however, that such psychiatric supervision in all Hostels
may not be feasible under present circumstances, but urges that it should be secured
wherever possible."

Reprints of the article on Hostels which appeared in our last issue are now
available and may be obtained from 24 Buckingham Palace Road, London, S.W.1>
at the price of 4d. each, or 3s. 6d. a dozen, post free.

Lord Memorial Essay Prize Competition
---------------------------------------

This competition, which is held under the auspices of the National Council far
Mental Hygiene, is open to certificated mental nurses, male and female, of the rank
of staff, charge or chief charge, in the Mental Hospitals of England and Wales, and
the subject chosen for the 1940 essay was, " How can the Nurse help the Refractory
Patient ? "

The Council's Selection Committee have awarded the prize of ?4 and a
medal to Sister Eileen B. Mason, of De La Pole Hospital, Willerby, consideration
rhaving been given to matter, style and production, and her essay is published in this
issue. The essay submitted by Staff Nurse Charles H. Howes, of Severalls Mental
Hospital, Colchester, was placed second. In all, 32 essays were sent in.

The Selection Committee report : "It was interesting to note, quite apart from
the personal factor in the contributions, the effect of the ' atmosphere ' of the institu-
tion in which the nurse had worked. As might have been expected, two main lines of
spproach were adopted, the psychiatric and the psychological. In some essays, the
importance of the nurse's own freedom from psychopathological strains was empha-
sized, while in others, particular and detailed attention was called to such matters as
diet, personal hygiene, opportunities for rest and relaxation, decorative colour
schemes, etc. In nearly all the essays, stress was laid on the importance of the
nurse's getting to know the patient as an individual, with special reference to a study
?f his family and social life, so as to arrive at an understanding of the patient's
situation and how he had been reacting to it."

Appointment of County Consultant Psychiatrists
It is learned with pleasure that Dr W. J. T. Kimber, Medical Director of Hill
End Hospital and Clinic, has recently been appointed County Consulting Psychiatrist
for Hertfordshire, and that Dr Muriel Barton Hall, Joint Medical Director of the
Liverpool Psychiatric Clinic, has been appointed Consulting Psychiatrist to the
County Borough of Birkenhead.

Dr Kimber's appointment will secure the co-ordination of mental health work
Jn the area concerned and all problems relating to mental health will be referred to
him. Dr Barton Hall's work includes attendance at the Birkenhead Municipal
Hospital or at any of the Municipal Clinics if required, the examination of patients
ln connection with the Mental Treatment Act, 1930, and the Mental Deficiency Acts,
1913 to 1927, weekly visits to the mental wards at the Birkenhead Institution and
?ne out-patient clinic a week at the Municipal Hospital, together with supervision
?f the work at the Borough Occupation Centre for the low-grade mentally
defective.

These two appointments, together with that for Oxford?the precursors, it is
h?ped, of many others?constitute an outstanding advance in the field of mental
health and a welcome recognition of the value and need of specialized services of
the kind indicated.

Sottish Association for Mental Hygiene
----------------------------------------

In the Mental Deficiency Section, there has been little change to report. In
those areas in which Occupation Centres have had to be closed, every effort is being
made to keep in touch with their pupils by means of home visitation and home
training. The Social Club for M.D. lads boarded out on farms and crofts, in the
^orth Argyll area, has been resumed this winter.

The Mental Health Section has organized lectures on the psychological aspects
of air raids for A.R.P. Wardens and other voluntary workers and for the general
public.
Miss McCallum is now Hon. Secretary of the Child Guidance Section in place
of Dr Ferguson Rodger who has been appointed Psychiatric Adviser to the Scottish
Command.

Members of the Emergency Committee have recently been in contact with the
Scottish and Southern Command regarding the question of M.D. lads being called
upon for military service and on other matters of mutual interest. The Committee
has agreed to a request made by the General Board of Control for Scotland that the
services of the Secretary of the Association should be diverted to the use of the Board
from time to time, in order to assist to relieve pressure of work due to illness amongst
members of the permanent Medical Staff.

The address of the Association is York Buildings, Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Leeds Mental Health Services

In the Twenty-Fifth Annual Report of the Leeds Mental Health Services Com-
mittee, attention is called to the decrease?from 129 to 81?in the number of children
notified by the Education Authority for supervision or institutional care under the
Mental Deficiency Act. A number of those who would, in normal conditions, have
been notified, were evacuated on the outbreak of war by the Education Committee
and have been away ever since. Moreover, no new children have been '' ascertained
in the elementary schools, and with the cessation of compulsory education many
defectives who should be in Special Schools or in Occupation Centres have been
left to roam the streets. This is regarded by the Committee as a deplorable state
of affairs, and one which is not likely to show any sign of improvement so long as
the war continues. Despite the lack of new notifications, the pressure on accommoda-
tion at Meanwood Park Colony continues acute, and during 1939 it has been
impossible to find vacancies for a number of low-grade children urgently in need
of them.

On the outbreak of war, the three Occupation Centres for imbecile children were
closed, and some time elapsed before arrangements could be made for their reopening-
It is, however, encouraging to read of the transference of one of the Industry
Centres hitherto held in old and unsatisfactory premises, to premises providing ampl?
accommodation for the 50 lads in attendance with facilities for physical training and
recreation as well as for instruction in tailoring and boot repairing.

The Mental Health Course
--------------------------

In the ten years' history of the Mental Health Course there have never been
such varied demands made upon past students as there have been during last year.
Never have those concerned with these services looked with so great expectation to
present and future students.

Local authorities in areas where, before the war, child guidance clinics had been
scarcely heard of, have made successful requests to the Ministry of Health for the
salary of a psychiatric social worker to help with difficult evacuated children. Some
have recently even started clinics. Loans of experienced psychiatric social workers
have been made by the Mental Health Emergency Committee to Civil Defence
Regions, to bombed areas, and to districts where the homeless are arriving in great
numbers. Past students have been in demand for children's hostels, for shelters,
for rest centres, and for carrying out social surveys. These new types of posts have
emerged, in addition to the regular steady demand in mental and general hospitals,
and in the old-established clinics.

Circumstances as well as planning have brought the training into close touch
with many of these activities. The practical work with adult mental patients is
carried on from a busy E.M.S. Hospital for civil and military patients in Mill Hill.
The Child Guidance Training Centre is working in co-operation with the Oxford
Education Committee, where the demands upon the services of the existing Clinic
have been greatly increased by evacuated children as well as by the homeless families
?f London. For this practical training, taking place in the second and third terms
of the Session, a foundation of knowledge and enquiry is laid in a first term of
theoretical work in Cambridge, where the School is now spending its second
Session.

For the first time in the ten years' history of the Course the voluntary mental
health organizations are this year taking a share in its cost, as well as in its direction.
Fortunately the generous scholarships of the Commonwealth Fund are still available.
These are advertised for the coming Session in this Journal.

Progressive Matrices Tests
----------------------------

Readers will remember an article on these Tests, invented by Dr Penrose and
John Raven of the Research Department of the Royal Eastern Counties Institu-
tlQn, which was published in our issue of January 1940. It is interesting to hear
that the Tests have now been adopted by the War Office for use in the R.A.M.C.,
and an edition of 1,000 copies is being printed for the purpose. The first private
edition of the Tests is now exhausted, and a second edition is in the press.

Institute for Scientific Treatment of Delinquency
--------------------------------------------------

We are asked to announce that owing to air raid damage, the Institute was
obliged to move from 8 Portman Square, and is now at 17 Manchester Street, W.l
(Telephone, Welbeck 6037).
A series of 24 lectures (University Extension Course) is being given on " Social
Philosophy " by Mr. K. B. Smellie, Reader in Political Science in the University of
London, and is excellently attended despite the fact that the lectures have to be held
?n Sunday mornings. The Course began on January 5th, but single lectures may
he attended for a fee of 2s.

After-Care in Birmingham
--------------------------

The Birmingham Special Schools After-Care Sub-Committee recently issued its
Annual Report for the year ending 26th July, 1940, which includes a Statistical
Summary of the position of 7,800 cases, of which 4,563 are still on the visiting list.
Of the total number, 2,816 were doing remunerative work at a weekly wage averaging
in the case of males 29s. 4d. and in the case of females 22s. 6d; 86 boys were serving
in H.M. Forces.

These statistics date from 1901 and some of the " boys and girls " concerned
are now over 50 years of age. Visitation has hitherto continued automatically, but
during the year under review it was decided to withdraw from supervision those who
could be considered to be permanently stabilized. Particulars of some of the cases
so withdrawn are interesting as showing that certification as educationally defective
by no means implies social deficiency showing itself in a permanent incapacity to
become a useful member of the community. Thus we are told of a woman of 33
who left a Special School at 16 and was placed under statutory supervision. At 18
she was earning ?1 a week, and at 21 she married. She now has four normally
healthy and intelligent children and a well-kept home. Another woman of 42,
leaving a Special School at 16 and placed under voluntary supervision, has for twelve
years kept house very successfully for a widowed father. All cases withdrawn are
notified to the School Attendance Department in order that track may be kept of
the children of any of the families concerned, and it is hoped that the records thus
compiled may be of substantial value.

Copies of the Report may be obtained on application to the Chief Education
Officer, Education Offices, Margaret Street, Birmingham.

Rest Periods for Air Raid Victims
----------------------------------

The Merseyside Hospitals Council, which has had a wide experience in arranging
convalescence for its contributors and their dependants, has acquired 800 additional
beds in suitable Rest Homes, mainly in Lancashire and North Wales, which are set
apart for the use of those needing rest and quietness after the experience of losing
their homes and possessions as the result of enemy action.

Recommendations for this service are received from general practitioners, clergy*
members of the Women's Voluntary Services, A.R.P. workers and other responsible
officials, and every encouragement is given to applicants by means of personal visits
from members of the Council's staff of home visitors, to take advantage of the scheme.
Within 48 hours of the application being received, candidates are examined by the
Council's Medical Referee and, if approved, can then at once be sent away. Clothing,
pocket money and railway fares are provided where necessary.

A three weeks' stay in the Home is given to each patient and a note received from
the Council comments on the amazing way in which " 21 days of quiet and regular
sleep and meals, and more especially loving sympathy, can restore the nerves and
mental poise of the average housewife and young women workers who have faced
this new and terrible ordeal of devastation by bombs
