The Merrill Palmer School
==========================

A Report of
Twenty Years, 1920-40. Published by
the School.

Here is a report of a philosophy of education
in practice, of which we in England stand in dire
need. " Education for home and family living "
is a conception which would give new life to our
junior and infant schools and a new direction to
the training of our adolescents.

In 1920, Lizzie Merrill Palmer, wife of a
U.S.A. Ambassador to Spain, left her fortune
for the endowment and maintenance of a school
to train young women for " the functions and
service of wifehood and motherhood, and the
management, supervision, direction and inspira-
tion of homes In twenty years, the governing
corporation of the Merrill Palmer School has
interpreted the terms of the will to include the
establishment of a laboratory school for children
of nursery years, to study their mental and
physical problems during the course of their
schooling.

It has become a training centre for students
previously qualified by college or university
training, in all aspects of the care and develop-
ment of young children. As the children pass
beyond the nursery period, the centre caters for
their leisure needs by recreational clubs in
graded ages, and as the parents have been drawn
within the circle of the School's interests, a
programme of parent advice and education has
evolved. It has also been a pioneer in summer
camps for the young.

The School is now an international training
ground for those who are interested not in
isolated aspects of child life but in the child
fabric of the family society.

Though it is best known in England for the
results of its researches into the technique of
mental testing for young children, the School's
big contribution to our present national needs
is this recognition that the child cannot be
helped apart from its family. The early
services of a liaison officer between the School
and the homes of the children, quickly elicited
the need for bringing parents together to talk
and be talked to. The parents were from all
social strata with possibly only one aim in
common?their interest in their children.
Lectures and study groups quickly developed
and now there are regular sessions where parents
and expectant parents may bring their problems.
" It was interesting to note that when the
staff had to think about parents and their needs,
they were literally forced to think about the
child as a whole."

This had constant effects on educational
techniques. School reports, to mention one
instance, had to be revolutionized to meet the
recognition that parents are interested not only
in growing intellects but in growing people.
Closer knowledge of the parents has established
the need to help them to expand their own lives
to include larger social, recreational and
intellectual interests, and the Centre has taken
this, too, into its scope.

In this country we expend much verbal
devotion on the family ideal, and in point of
fact sacrifice a good deal to it in actuality. We
do much less than is necessary, however, to
ensure that family life is not an unequal struggle
with ignorance on how good social relationships
can be retained, and above all, what are the
rights and needs of children in this respect.
A school that was a child and family centre would
necessarily evolve a very different attitude to
a child's emotional life than that which is at
present implicit in an immoderately intellectual-
ized school programme and in staffing and
organization incapable of letting the child be
known except as a unit in a mass.
R.T.
