Griffith Edwards
=================

For a culture to evolve it has to pass through many stages of crisis yet experts are almost forming a queue to prophesy doom for American society.

They seem unable to accept that man co-exists with crisis, pain and guilt
and that there can be no instant recipe for salvation.

Philip Slater, formerly chairman of the Department
of Sociology, at Brandeis University, Massachusetts,
is clearly a sensitive and concerned man who is pained
and perplexed by the state of his country. He feels
responsibility not only for making the diagnosis but
also for proposing some of the solutions; he is not an
academic content to remain in an ivory tower. His
central proposition is that American culture is 'at the
breaking point', and he aims to identify the forces
that are tearing that culture apart.

Why should a book written with such humane and
excellent purpose read rather like a volume of
sermons destined to be 'remaindered' for 5p? The
secondhand bookshops are packed with works of
nineteenth-century divines who were moved to put
their pious words into print. In time the works of
Professors of sociology will join those of doctors of
divinity - there's going to be no end of a space
Problem.

Slater's writing lacks credibility chiefly because,
time after time, some complex social problem is oversimplified to the point of utter falseness. One cannot,
?t course, interrupt a sermon ?and Slater's style
somehow has exactly that pulpit air - but there is
n?thing to stop one muttering after church.

Here is one example of the totally unsubstantiated
and largely questionable, presented in the guise of
gospel truth. It is stated (p. 105) that 'drug users are
behaving like good American consumers'. Slater
Suggests that the mass media has conditioned.

The Pursuit of loneliness: American culture at the breaking
Point
^ Philip E. Slater,
'en Lane, The Penguin Press, ?2.25
Americans to believe that material products can fulfil
every emotional need. This conditioning is seen to
be responsible for the scale of the country's drug
problem. All so facile, all such welcome support for
an underlying thesis which is going to find support
come hell or high water, and all based on a blithe
dismissal of many relevant facts. Thailand has a
heroin problem which makes the American narcotic
problem look like a beginners' class. In parts of India
cannabis has been used for centuries and the licensed
shops still sell the drug to anyone.

In the USA, long before the mass media became a
popular evil for 'pulpit denunciation', there was a
substantial opiate problem-in 1918 the Treasury
Department made an estimate of 237,655 cases.
Faced with facts like these, what really is the worth
of the simplistic and confident assertion that Slater
makes about the relationship between drug use and
what he dislikes in American culture?

Much of this book is a matter of an assertion called
in to back up an early assertion which in turn is
backed up by yet another assertion . . . American
culture 'deeply and uniquely' frustrates the desire for
community. Therefore the flight to the suburb and
the do-it-yourself movement 'both attempt to deny
human interdependence and pursue unrealistic fantasies of self sufficiency'. The Americans 'suffer mass
impersonal injuries from mechanical forces' and it is
suggested that America's difficulty in fighting back
at the computer and at the impersonal corporation
may be a frustration somehow related to the Vietnam
war and the 'uniquely American characteristic' of
'killing from a distance'.

In later chapters this leads on to the assertion that
the major characteristic of the American housewife is
that she has been desexualized; that 'the recruitment
of physicians selectively favours cold, ungiving, exploitative, competitive and mercenary personality
types'; that nuclear war holds an unconscious attraction 'because it offers a final explosive release from
the tensions that afflict us'; and .that 'the only
obstacle to Utopia is the persistence of the competitive
motivational patterns that past scarcity assumptions
have spawned'.

The talk of 'crisis' in itself is very reminiscent of
the sermon technique. If you can persuade the congregation that they are in imminent danger of damnation and that you are the merchant of salvation,
then you are most certainly in business. The crisis,
says Slater, is 'self evident' and he then goes swiftly
on, with a swipe at any who would disagree with
him - 'the blandness exhibited by old-culture adherents in the face of it [crisis] is difficult to explain
without recourse to psychopathology'.

So, to contribute some personal psychopathology,
I would like to know what factual evidence or wellreasoned argument can be put forward to persuade
me that America is at a greater stage of crisis now
than it has been at many times since Columbus. What
about the Civil War? And what about the Wall
Street crash?

Surely an evolving culture is one which is likely
to be in a more or less continuous state of 'alarm'
and had not this better be accepted - without too
great a presumption that the world will come to an
end in 1981?

The second point is that the relationship between
the quality of individual human life and the structure
of society is extremely uncertain - to propose that
this or that change in social structures and institutions
or cultural assumptions will make for greater personal
happiness may well be true ?but it may equally well
be false. Utopia is not quite so easily built as Slater
would have us believe.

Is this book worth reading? The answer is undoubtedly 'yes', and the verdict goes that way not
because it offers shimmering new truths and great
new insights, but because it so clearly illustrates one
particular aspect of the American scene today - that
the American citizen who is deeply and responsibly
concerned about the problematical quality of life in
his own country feels pain and guilt, and then
demands an instant recipe for salvation. He feels, in
his bones that there must be a radical and absolute
solution. To accept that man co-exists with crisis,
pain and guilt - to suggest that there is no Utopia - is
intolerable to one of the best sorts of American
conscience.
