A Point Scale of Performance Tests
===================================

:Type: Book Reviews & Abstracts
:Author: Grace Arthur, Ph.D. New York. 
Common-wealth Fund Division of Publications.
Pp. IX. 82. Price $1.50.

This little book is a manual for use in clinics,
and is confined to a brief explanation of the
use of the scale and the way in which it was
constructed, directions for giving the tests,
and the necessary tables for scoring purposes.
A separate volume will give a full exposition
of the details of scale construction for those
who are interested in this aspect of the work.
The variety of the problems presented in the
Binet scale has been an important factor in its
success, but it is always desirable to supple-
ment it by giving performance tests, and some-
times 110 other method of examination is poss-
ible. Although there are a number of per-
formance tests in use, each claiming to be a
test of general intelligence, in clinical practice
a variety of these tests are given, but their
results are stated separately. The advantages of
a Point Scale by which the results can be
grouped together and expressed in terms of a
single Intelligence Quotient and Mental Age, as
is done in the Binet test, are obvious, and it is
such a scale that Dr Arthur presents in this
book.

There are two forms of the scale, so that the
second can be used for re-test purposes. The
make-up of the two groups is similar, the Knox
Cube, Seguin Form Board, Porteus Mazes, and
Kohs Block Design occurring in both, while
the " puzzle " form boards (such as the Casu-
ist), the picture puzzles, and picture comple-
tion tests differ. In each group one " puzzle "
form board (e.g., the Triangle Test), serves
the purpose of a " shock-absorber " for this
kind of work, the result not being counted in
the final score. The test takes on an average
about 35 minutes to administer. The score is
obtained from the tables given, and a sample
score card is shewn 011 page 32.

Dr Arthur and her collaborators have been
working since 1917 to standardise the results
satisfactorily. In the first place, 1,100 children
were tested and the Intelligence Quotients and
Mental Ages compared with those obtained on
the Binet-Stanford, or Binet-Kuhlmann ratings.
It was found that in 50% of the cases the re-
sults obtained were the same to within five
points, that is, there was no more variation
than might be found between two examina-
tions at different times by the Binet Scale. As
a means of finding out whether the larger vari-
ations were due to defects in the test, or to
factors extraneous to it, 535 of the same child-
ren were then tested with Form 2 of the Scale.
These examinations had to be conducted under
school, instead of under clinic, conditions,
after a year's interval and these factors, to-
gether with the smaller number of children
tested, may account for there being a larger
Probable Error between these two Perform-
ance ratings, than between the Binet and the
Form 1 ratings.

The results are sufficiently interesting to en-
courage further investigation and work along
these lines is more useful at the present time
than the attempt to produce new performance
tests. There are a large number already in
existence, and what is wanted now is the estab-
lishment of a reliable scale which can be used
either to supplement the Binet findings, or,
where necessary, to take its place. The claims
of any scale to validity can only be finally
established when it has been used for some
time by a large number of workers dealing
with children of all types and ages, so that it
remains for others to finish the work Dr.
Arthur has so usefully begun.

N.T.
Social Control of the Mentally Defective.
By Stanley Powell Davies, Ph.D., State
Charities Aid Association of New York.
With foreword by Frank wood E. Williams,
M.D., Medical Director, National Committee
for Mental Hygiene. Pp. 389. Thomas Y-
Crowell Company, New York.

This is a simple and interesting account of
some aspects of Mental Defect. When discuss-
ing important problems the writer is inclined
to give lengthy quotations describing first old,
and then more recent investigations, without
pointing out which are the most reliable work-
ers or which findings commend themselves to
him; a more authoritative pronouncement
would have been welcome now when the pub-
lic are beginning" to realise Mental Defect is an
important social problem, which must be
tackled. As regards Prevention, the question
pf Heredity is dealt with at some length, and
it is shown that it is impossible now to ascribe
almost all the blame to inheritance; the writer,
however, goes too far the other way, because
We do know that it is by no means a neglible
factor. After discussing Heredity, more should
have been said about the results of a bad en-
vironment. Scant reference is made to the con-
sequences of Toxaemia and Infectious diseases
?f one or both parents before conception, a
field in which there are hopeful possibilities of
Prevention. A good deal of investigation has
been done in this country in recent years, and
the National Council of Mental Hygiene
(England), among others, has published a use-
ful pamphlet on this subject.

It is a pity that the moron, or feebleminded,
as he is called on this side of the Atlantic, and
who is described as having a mental age from
eight to twelve years, should be placed " on
the border-line between deficiency and normal-
ity." majority with a mental age below
ten and a considerable number whose mental
a?e is between ten and twelve present no diffi-
culty in diagnosis to the expert, who does rec-
?gnise that " social competency," and not
Cental age, is the " final criterion." In this
c?nnection there is fitting appreciation of the
recent survey of Dr E. O. Lewis for the Men-
al Deficiency Committee of the Board of
Education and Board of Control, but there is
n? mention of Performance Tests.

The chapter headed " Eugenic Alarms " is
^"-balanced, but exception must be taken to
he statement on page 87 that Feebleminded-
ness " is the Mother of crime, pauperism and
^egeneracy." Pauperism and degeneracy may
e, accepted, but the cause of crime is usually
bad environment, especially as regards atti-
^ ,e to life, and lack of good training. The
,,riter does not seem to understand all the
^ newer aspects of behaviour," and so is not
0n is best in dealing with them. The chapters
So i r^sation and Segregation are excellent;
^ also are those dealing with Institutions, and
Possibilities and results of training; they
be of great value to those who have only
wuted knowledge of this important subject.
W. A. Potts.

The Psychiatric Study of Problem Child-
ren. By Sanger Brown II, M.D., Assistant
Commissioner, Department of Hygiene,
State of New York, and Howard W. Potter,
M.D., Assistant Director, Psychiatric Insti-
tute and Hospital, and Professor of Psychi-
atry, Columbia University, New York City.
Utica, New York, State Hospitals Press,
1930. pp. 148.

The treatment of the difficult child has be-
come so much the subject of investigation
throughout America and the Continent of
Europe, and now in England, that it has be-
come necessary for all those who are engaged
in the work of diagnosis, investigation, and
cure to have clearly in mind the essentials of
the problem. In every branch of medicine it
is an imperative that a method should be
worked out which shall, with economy and
thoroughness, deal with all the material rele-
vant to a particular class of disorder. In
general medicine such method, or methods, are
comparatively simple because the data are on
the whole reasonably clear and the allied de-
partments to which a case from time to time
has to be referred are also possessed of methods
of their own, sometimes much in advance of
the department in which the case falls; for ex-
ample, biochemistry may be clearer in its con-
cepts than the study of diseases of the kidney,
which uses the results of biochemistry.

The psychiatric study of the problem child
needs a careful method of investigation, not
only because its central problem?the child?
is so very complex as an entity, but the depart-
ments of knowledge which have to be referred
to in the study of the difficult child are them-
selves complex and sometimes hazy. Eor this
reason, this little handbook is to be welcomed.
It sets out with great conciseness and clarity
the various stages in the working out of the
problem child from the psychiatric point of
view. The first chapter, The Anamnesis, points
out how carefully the history of the case has
to be invesigated. Both family and personal
history have to be carefully scrutinised. Not
only must a history of a child's temperament
and behaviour be taken but all his physical dis-
orders must be enumerated under such heads
as will throw a light upon the causes of the
problem. Environment too?home and school
?is subject to a careful investigation. The
authors are very conscious of the fact that
modern psychology, particularly the investiga-
tions of Freud, have shewn how very import-
ant are the formative years of the child in rela-
tion to its parents, and how the problems of
the home have their repercussions in school
life.

The child is then carefully examined from
the physical point of view. Each organ is in-
vestigated through established clinical chan-
nels. Its constitution is determined in accord-
ance with what knowledge we have of the
organs of internal secretion and heredity. For
the latter, an anthropometric survey is made of
each case, presumably to aid in establishing
the constitution, and to determine to which
particular type of physique the child belongs.
Every source of infection is explored?ears,
nose, throat and teeth, are known to be sources
of infective poisoning, and a poisoned nervous
system means crippled reaction to the world,
in addition to which poisoning of the glands
and of the digestive tract leads, as is now well
recognised, to changes of temperament. Con-
sequently, at times erratic behaviour results.

The child is also examined by all the
methods of psychology which help to deter-
mine the mental age in terms of verbal (Binet-
Simon) and non-verbal (performance) tests.
The psychiatric examination is of a more qual-
itative variety. It involves the determination
of general attitude, motor activity, and the
emotional state. It attempts, by kindly and
judicious questioning, to discover the mental
attitude and the trend of thought. Most deli-
cate of all will be the enquiry into the child's
attitude towards home, towards school, towards
neighbours, and environment. The attitude
towards self is also enquired into, and while it
is recognised that the sex life also needs inves-
tigation, this has to be dealt with with extreme
tact and in a different way in every case.
The second half of the work leaves the purely
objective examination and deals with types of
problem child. These, of course, will be class-
ified according to the various physical dis-
orders which from time to time cause behav-
iour problems. Such disorders are congenital
and acquired, and these again may be sub-
divided into constitutional and infective, and
the latter into acute and chronic. Most inter-
esting of all, the organic disorders which have
disordered behaviour as sequelae are Enceph-
alitis Lethargica, and disorders of the glands
of internal secretion.

A chapter, brief though it is, is given over to
the cases with variations in intelligence. We
must not forget that problem children are not
only the defective and retarded, but the
" superior " child and the child with special
abilities may be the subject of behaviour dis-
order in consequence of his very endowments.

The book closes with a third part on the
management of problem cases. This, of course,
is the most difficult of all subjects to deal with.
While it is always possible to examine a case
methodically and widely, the management of
the case becomes essentially personal. One is
almost obliged to throw one's method not
away, but into the background in order that
the personal equation shall be uppermost in the
mind. Of this difficulty the authors are fully
aware. They end the book with interesting
specimens of questionnaires, schemes for the
management of Child Guidance Clinics and
even give specimens of the dietary suited to
children of various ages. We close this book
with a feeling of satisfaction that the pioneers
in the latest department of medicine are ready
with a good foundation of method and en-
thusiasm.

E.M.
Aphasia in Children. By A. W. G. Ewing,
M.A., Ph.D. Oxford Medical Publications.
1930. Price 10/6.

This little book is one of great interest and
importance to the aurist, to those interested in
speech and to teachers of the deaf. It is mainly
a very thorough investigation of ten children
who had " aphasia," that is, mutism or great
speech deficiency.

The first question investigated was the hear-
ing condition, the testing of auditory acuity
was carried out with extraordinary thorough-
ness and great ingenuity. By clever use of the
audiometer, exact measurements were made
possible not only of hearing in general, but of
auditory acuity for each of eight different
notes, i.e., vibration frequencies of 64 to 8192-
In the course of this work the striking fact \vas
noted that 6 of the " aphasic " children had a
marked lack of hearing capacity for sounds of
high frequency vibration. The author gives a
closely reasoned account of how this would
cause inability to discriminate certain vowels
and consonants and thus account for failure oi
speech development, and therefore he calls
these six children cases of " high frequency
deafness." The other four children, who did
not show this peculiarity of hearing", he calls
"linguistically retarded." A discussion follows
pf the differences between the speech peculiar-
ities of these children and those of the cases
?f aphasia due to injury or disease in later life
and incidentally a masterly resume of the work
of Broca, Hughlings, Jackson, Marie, Head,
and others is given, and these chapters are
Worth the attention of physicians and neurolo-
gists.

Of congenital aphasia there is, he says, but
little literature. The work of Miss Fildes on
the psychology of word blindness is noted, but
no reference is made to the almost classical
Writings of Dr C. J. Thomas on Congenital
Aphasia in 1904.

Dr Ewing shows emphatically that on per-
formance tests none of the children was men-
tally defective or even subnormal but he does
not describe any investigation to ascertain
Cental abnormalities. These must have been
the cause of the speech deficiencies of the four
linguistically retarded children whohadnormal
hearing, and it is at least possible that with the
cases of high frequency deafness too, psycho-
logical factors were also at work. It would be
?f great value if the subject could now be
studied from that angle with methods similar
to those used by Miss Fildes.

A topic of great interest especially to teach-
ers of the deaf, is how far hearing for practical
Purposes can be improved by special teaching.
r- Ewing's own results are very striking and
?thers have obtained much success with child-
ren who had been deemed almost completely
(leaf. ]\"0 doubt the essential factor is the cul-
lvation of attention and the habit of listening,
eading to improved recognition and interpret-
ation of sounds, but sometimes the gain is so
great as to make it seem as though the actual
aUditory acuity had been raised.

To those who have to deal with the ascertain-
ment of mental deficiency, the book comes as
Warning. It would be a misconception if
cluotation from Dr Burt on pages 107-8 led
? the idea that there are to-day several cases
Pure word blindness and word deafness in
Uools for the mentally defective, but such a
?ssibility is only excluded by the fact that
decisions are not made solely on verbal tests.
An outline of the research was given by Dr.
Ewing in Mental Welfare for January last, but
the book itself should be digested and taken to
heart by a very wide circle of students.

A.C.W.
Children at the Crossroads. By Agnes
E. Benedict. Commonwealth Fund Division
of Publications, New York. Price $1.50.
" Children at the Crossroads " is the first
book to present individual case stories of mal-
adjusted rural children treated by the visiting-
teachers in the programme of the National
Committee of Visiting Teachers (America). It
shows how the work described in " The Visit-
ing Teacher at Work," has been adapted to
meet the requirements of rural school situa-
tions. Rural life under its best conditions offers
many important advantages to children, but
many children in the country as in the town,
grow up inefficient, antisocial, frustrated, due
to maladjustments that might have been pre-
vented in childhood.

There are ten narratives of rural school
children who presented problems, with ac-
counts of the methods used by visiting teachers
to help them. In these narratives are shown
factors in a child's out-of-school life which
militate against his success in school; such
factors as the grinding pressure of farm work,
the belittling of education by the parents, etc.
The stories show many ways in which the rural
setting must modify visiting teacher work.
If the worker is to accomplish results in her
own field, she must be prepared to do work in
allied fields as well. She is expected to help
Mary overcome her inferiority complex when
these feelings arise out of the fact that Mary's
father is the village ne'er-do-well. She must see
that John's work improves, when John, whose
sight is defective, is sitting at his desk all day
thinking that the R's in his reader are B's.
Again, she is expected to deal with Ethel's
stealing when Ethel steals largely because she
has no one to play with, no chance to play, and
no toys that are hers.

The nearest clinic or psychologist may be a
hundred miles away, so like Robinson Crusoe,
the worker proceeds to get the work done some-
how, doing much of it by her own effort and
fashioning a set of home-made tools for her-
self. To appreciate her work we must follow
her along the winding country roads, through
the tiny villages to the scattered rural schools
and learn from the stories of actual children at
the Crossroads what has been done to help
solve their problems.

B.C.
Board of Control, England and Wales, Six-
teenth Annual Report. H.M. Stationery
Office. Part 11/9, Part II 6/6.
It was to be expected that in their Sixteenth
Annual Report for 1929, the Board of Control
would deal first with the Mental Treatment
Bill which received the Royal Assent on luly
10th, 1930. A most important provision of the
Act and one which il heartily welcomed by
the Board is the authorisation of Out-Patient
Clinics, where treatment can be given in the
incipient stages of mental illness. These clinics,
used as preventive medicine, would also en-
courage more severe cases to present themselves
voluntarily for treatment at mental hospitals.
The Board calls attention to a still more im-
portant feature of the Act, which is the pro-
vision of temporary treatment of non-volitional
patients on the recommendation of two medi-
cal practitioners without the intervention of
any judicial authority, so that where prospects
of early recovery are favourable, the patient
can escape the supposed stigma of certification.
The Board further has power to approve that
institutions and hospitals other than mental
hospitals, be equipped and staffed to receive
cases requiring temporary treatment. It rests
with the Local Authorities to co-operate in
these epoch-making changes, to establish out-
patient clinics and separate admission hospitals
supplemented by convalescent villas.

The Board points out that in future Local
Authorities should investigate the needs of
their particular area; this survey will no doubt
increase the number of ascertained cases and,
as public opinion becomes more educated, the
demand for treatment and accommodation will
be difficult to cope with. Medical Officers with
special experience in this branch of medicine
will be required, together with psychiatrists
and trained mental health workers, to under-
take the social side of the work.

For those who have not had the opportunity
of studying the Mental Treatment Act, we
would recommend this introductory chapter of
the Board's Report. It is an excellent summary
of the main provisions of the Act and of the
possibilities of future developments.
The figures for Ascertainment show an in-
crease. At the end of 1929, the number of
mental defectives reported to local authorities
was 71,439, an increase during the year of
4,981, nearly four times as great an increase
as in 1927. The ratio discovered per thousand
of the estimated population of England and
Wales is now 1.81, as compared with a ratio
of 1.69 a year ago. It should be borne in mind
that the estimate made by the Wood Com-
mittee was 8 per thousand.

The provision of new accommodation again
exceeds that of the previous year. Five more
Local Authorities have opened institutions
during the past year, in addition to the six
who are members of the North Eastern County
Boroughs Joint Board. Referring to the re-
organisation under the Local Government Act,
the Board expresses the opinion that some of
the better Poor Law Institutions could be
adapted at reasonable cost for the accommoda-
tion of defectives and if sufficient land could
be acquired, these might serve as a Colony.
But they do not consider that young, trainable
and employable defectives should be perman-
ently detained in Poor Law Institutions; where
Local Authorities are building Colonies, they
might be accommodated temporarily in these
Institutions.

The Board calls attention to the increase in
Hostel accommodation both by way of Certi-
fied Institutions provided by Voluntary Com-
mittees and functioning solely as hostels, and
by Hostels forming branches of a Colony estab-
lished by a Local Authority. There are noW
four such Hostels in each category. Though
still in the experimental stage, a measure of
success can already be recorded in this branch
of the work.

Forty new Occupation Centres have been
opened during the year. Of these, five are
organised directly by Local Authorities and 35
through voluntary associations. Several honie-
teaching schemes have also been put into opei"'
ation during the year.

Some interesting figures are given of the em-
ployment and wages earned by defectives out
?n licence from institutions. Taking 5/- a
^'eek with board and lodging as equivalent to
^lf-supporting, and 20/- a week when living
put, it was found that out of 300 cases exam-
Jned during the year, 126 are self-supporting.
J his compares favourably with the number for
last year, which was 105. On the whole, the
Practice of sending defectives out on licence
ls proving a successful one.

For the information of readers we quote in
hill the paragraphs dealing with the vexed
Questions of the marriage and sterilisation of
Cental defectives : ?

^ e are still of the opinion that an Act of Parlia-
ment prohibiting the marriage of defectives while
J^der statutory care would be a preventive measure
j great social utility. Not only would it draw pub-
,lc attention to the lack of wisdom in allowing
j^ .ives to marry, but it would place Local Author-
? le.s in a far stronger position by enabling them to
sist on proper precautions being taken by the per-
ns to whom defectives are licensed and by their
agents and guardians.

the question of sterilization we have little to
Q ^ to what has been said in previous Reports. Since
r last Report was written, Denmark has passed a
iw- Permitting sterilization with the consent of the
1 Uent or his guardian. But this measure, like much
Ration on this subject, is still so recent that no
r ^ient data are yet available by which to test its
for s" We still think that the whole question calls
th fCare^ul study and investigation, but we recognize
Jiff Se'ent'fic an(l impartial enquiry is rendered
ste v ^ 'Jy the atmosphere of controversy which
^.T'l'zation excites and also by the exaggerated
jz!'?*s which are put forward by its advocates. Steril-
Ye will not solve the many problems of the pre-
it w n" mental defect ;indeed,itisdoubtful whether
it \ appreciably reduce its incidence. In any case,
obv.?ul<l he absurd to suggest that its adoption would
in,rlate the need for the institutional care and train-
those defectives whose social inadaptability
the es it impossible to leave them at large. But
adv.e are> in our opinion, cases in which it might be
oftean^a8eous; and if the claims of its advocates are
entj. exaggerated, the condemnation of its oppon-
rests on an equally unsubstantial foundation.
T. J. D.
