The Sterilization of Mental Defectives
========================================

April, 1930.
Sir,

I have read Dr C. J. Bond's letter with great interest, and desire to offer
the following comments. It is obvious that before any measures can be taken
successfully to prevent Mental Deficiency, we must have an accurate know-
ledge of its underlying nature and causation. It is generally agreed that the
majority of cases are due to a germinal change and probably the most import-
ant question is, as Dr Bond says, whether this change is one which is specific
to mental defect, or one which is of the nature of a general impairment of
germ cell vitality " affecting not only the development of the brain but the
condition of the organism as a whole." Now, although many fervid devotees
of Mendelism have attempted to prove the former, nevertheless, as I stated in
my article on Sterilization in this Journal, and as I have shown more fully in
the chapter on Causation in my book on Mental Deficiency, these attempts
have hitherto been quite unsuccessful. Dr Bond brings forward no new
evidence. Beyond the vague statement that " the way in which mental defic-
iency may be latent in one generation and segregate out among the children of
the next. . . strongly suggests the influence of a specific element," he not only
fails to adduce any reason in favour of the germ change being a specific one,
but he accepts and actually quotes certain facts which are strongly opposed to
this view. Thus, the fact that the germ change can show itself in " other
forms of mental instability, for instance, dementia precox," knocks a very big
hole in the theory that the nature of the germ change is a specific one. When,
in addition to this, we bear in mind the undoubted facts that the relatives of
defectives may, and do, not only suffer from mental instability, but from
almost every variety of minor or major psychosis, that even mental defectives
differ amongst themselves enormously in the degree and kind of their defect,
and that many of them show signs indicative of a defect, not only of mind, but
of " the organism as a whole," it clearly becomes impossible to regard the
change in the germ material as a specific one.

Whilst, therefore, I think it is true that Mendelism affords a satisfactory
explanation of the inheritance of many qualities, a consideration of the above
facts and the study of many hundreds of family histories of defectives, caused
me long ago to come to the conclusion that it was quite inadequate to explain
the nature and mode of transmission of mental defect. On the other hand,
the view that the germ change is not specific, but is of the nature of a vitiation
which may vary considerably in degree in different cases does explain the
clinical facts. Consequently, in the present state of our knowledge, I hold it
to be the best working hypothesis. If we accept this hypothesis, we see at once
that Mental Deficiency need not have as its precursor, mental defect; but that
the ancestors and collaterals of defectives may suffer from many other manifest-
ations of this impairment of the neuronic determinant within the germ cell.
There is ample evidence that this is so. Everyone with any considerable prac-
tical experience of defectives will agree that whilst in the majority of cases
the parents present some nervous abnormality, that they may, in fact, be
" carriers," very few of them, in relation to the whole, are mentally deficient.
It follows, and this is the important point, that neither the sterilization nor
the segregation of all defectives would have any considerable influence in
diminishing the incidence of mental defect. In order to do this, it would be
necessary to prevent the propagation, not only of all defectives, but, and much
more important, of all " carriers." It is for this reason I have urged that the
popular idea that mental deficiency would be eliminated by the sterilization
of defectives is a pure delusion.

Dr Bond raises another point, namely, that sterilization might still be
made use of in certain selected defectives for whom suitable occupation could
be found in the community, and in whose case the chief danger is procreation.
I gather from his letter that he does not go so far as to advocate the steriliza-
tion of such persons, but merely suggests that the question is one which should
be considered. With this view we shall all be in agreement. I dealt with the
point in my article, and the Central Association some time ago passed a resolu-
tion urging the need for an enquiry into the causation of Mental Defect, and
into any means, including sterilization, by which it might be prevented. Unfort-
unately, a good many individuals and some societies show more of zeal and
less of judgment in the matter. They either urge that sterilization should be
enforced without any preliminary investigation at all, or, if they admit the
need for such enquiry, they prejudge the issue by embarking upon an ex-
tensive propaganda before the enquiry has been made. This is surely as
illogical as it is deplorable. Let us press for an enquiry by all means, but do
not let us advocate any change in the law until all the facts appertaining to
this very difficult question have been subject to thorough and impartial in-
vestigation.

Yours faithfully,
A. F. Tredgold.
