Home Aspects of Mental Health Work
===================================

In view of the great public interest aroused in the Mental Treatment Bill, which passed
its Third Reading in the House of Commons on the 14th May, it seems opportune to place
before our readers in this issue the following composite article in which workers of specialised knowledge and experience deal with certain branches of mental health work which will,
it is hoped, be further developed and extended when the Mental Treatment Bill becomes law.

EDITOR.
Training for Occupational Therapy
Nature of the Work

The kind of training needed for a trade or profession depends on the
kind of work to be done and the result it is required to produce. In Occupational Therapy the work usually consists of some form of art or craft: the
result required is the education or re-education of an individual with special
needs. With mentally deficient children our aim is education: for adolescents or adults with discordant nervous systems, re-education. In either case,
the art or craft most suitable to the person at the moment is a means to an
end: whilst using this means our end is to establish his nervous harmony.

The method or technique consists in helping the individual to focus his or
her nervous energy upon a suitable form of creative effort, the suitability being
a matter for the patient to decide. This is fundamentally important, since
the effort to choose is the first practice in focussing a dispersed energy; it is
the first step away from discord and toward harmony.

Thus the nature of the task, the result desired, and the technique employed, determine the nature of the training, the type of student, and the
professional status of the work. Occupational therapy is plainly a branch of
education: the students will become teachers. The training will aim at an
introduction to as many forms of art and craft as possible: the more the
merrier, since these are the links with which we establish connection with the
widely differing minds of the patients. But training in craft alone may be
worse than useless: there must be a mastery of the method, the technique, of
therapy. Such technique can only be based on a general knowledge of the
nervous system and a particular acquaintance with the special needs of the case.
Take an example. An individual with a sluggish digestion and a poor
circulation may do much better work after playing ball for a few minutes,
since conscious thought depends directly on the supply of blood to the brain.

But, if he or she has a weak heart, some other method of helping the circulation must be found. Or again, an irritable and depressed person who is
incapable of prolonged effort, who cannot work for more than five minutes
at a time, may find weaving unsuitable, yet be benefited by sawing wood and
hammering together a rough box. Another may like a long slow job on one
day and prefer a short quick one on the next. These very simple instances
show how essential it is for the teacher to know at least the outlines of the
history of each case, if technique and method are to be satisfactory. They also
indicate the type of student needed to make a successful teacher. Valuable
though it is to have a wide range of crafts from which to choose, and to know
the processes of each, it is even more necessary to be able to adapt them skilfully to the individual need. It is through this adaptation that the education
or re-education must be obtained. No mere craftsman can do the work: what
is required is a teacher working in close co-operation with the doctor.

Its Status
----------

This concept of Educational Therapy as a branch of education cuts right
across existing conditions. Doctors are accustomed to prescribe a treatment
and nurses to carry it out, but few doctors are teachers, and most nurses are
not craftsmen. In any case, it is impossible to prescribe a dose of leatherwork
as one would a tonic. And though nurses or attendants might, and often do,
wish to do something new for those in their charge, they are not expected to
make suggestions. The doctors do not know; the nurses are afraid to try.

The water-tight-compartment system in some Mental Hospitals means
that an occupational therapist, instead of having opportunities for discussing
patients freely with doctors and nurses, is working in the dark. Where a
number of specialists are gathered together to help a person, knowledge must
be pooled; the military system of ranks and orders is out of date. The type
of student and the training for occupational therapy must be such that the
teacher may become a colleague, not a subordinate. This is a basic principle
which no organization for training such teachers can afford to neglect. The
result will not be arrived at quickly, but a start can be made by a careful choice
of the students.

Type of Student
----------------

The main qualification for a student of occupational therapy is a certain
attitude towards life, rather than a remarkable ability in art and crafts. The
manner of approach to patients is of vital importance, since the object to be
made is merely a centre upon which all the curative processes taking place in
the patient, and between teacher and patient, are focussed. Those students
who are sympathetic, sensitive and tactful, have the making of the best
teachers. An inelastic, overbearing person may produce showy articles, but will
never help to heal disordered minds. Those in the hospitals who, so often,
have been broken by shock and trouble, greatly appreciate teachers who themselves have had a varied experience of life, and for this work the teacher who
is not young may prove of even more value than the twenty year old who
charms by freshness and youth. The age limits for students might well be
as wide apart as 18?40 years.

Conditions of Work
--------------------

In view of the great drain upon their vitality, students should pass a preliminary medical examination. To conserve this vitality, training colleges
should expect teachers not to take posts of more than 5 days per week. The
length of holidays in mental hospitals will be a question of much discussion.
One month yearly for rest and re-creation is at present supposed to be ample.
Actually, eleven months is too long to do really good work at a stretch
patients go back, not forward, with a jaded teacher. Everyone who has
worked amongst the insane knows of the inertia which creeps over attendants,
adding dullness to dullness, making chronic patients of those who should be
temporary residents. As to numbers?when a medical officer tells me that
the thousand odd patients under his charge are known to him " inside out,"
it is no wonder that teachers are expected to teach dozens, or even hundreds
without help from nurses. Apparently, in some hospitals, it is sufficient to
hand any patient some raffia and to return hours later to find it a lovely basket.
practice, the majority of patients need help every few minutes, many of
them all the time. There is a need for those working amongst non-normals
to associate frequently with normals, so as to keep their eyes fixed on health
rather than disease.

The Teacher
------------

In character, the occupational therapist of to-day needs to be a pioneer,
a research worker, an experimentalist, who is not entering into a standardized
profession, but is making new history in the study of human minds under
very difficult and disheartening conditions. Possibly those who have been
altogether trained outside mental hospitals bring into them as teachers a less
hampered personality than the nurse who slips into such a post with little or
no training.

Particular Training
-------------------

At present we have in England no training college for occupational
therapists?they are gathered haphazard. Such a college, both for residential and
non-residential students, might well be founded near London. It is an educational project: the aim is to cure, but to cure by education, not by medicine or
surgery. The Head of such a college should therefore be an experienced
teacher in art and craft, with knowledge of the conditions of mental hospitals.

Intending students should be able to produce evidence of having benefited by
their previous education. A slow mind sometimes makes a better teacher
than a brilliant one, and the lack of Senior School or Matriculation certificates might be waived after a personal interview. Training should extend
over a period of three years. These years are not too long for the end in view.

Students might take somewhat varied courses, but each needs at least an
elementary knowledge of six crafts, with a specialized training in three of
them, and a study of what is generally called " art," or Drawing and Painting
in its varied branches. Pottery, Carpentry, Weaving, Basketry, Rhythmic
Movement, Bookbinding, Leatherwork, Metalwork, Gardening, Embroidery,
are some only of the many branches from which a student might select his or
her subjects. In addition to courses of lectures, there must be practice in learning to express their observations by essays and discussions. Teachers are
practising psychologists, but at the moment they are rather dumb before the
" theoretical psychologist." These teachers must be able to do, and then to
explain what they are doing, when they take their place in the hospitals.
Vitally important is the necessity for understanding the anatomy and physiology of a human body, particularly of the nervous system. It is suggested
that instead of any lectures upon psychology the students, until the last year,
should learn to know the structure and function of the nervous system and
gather their own impressions in regard to normal and abnormal conduct from
their own observations. To help them, second and third year students should
have first one, and then two or three mental defectives and insane persons to
teach. They will have studied, under an enthusiastic and experienced college
staff, primitive and modern methods, but they will need preliminary and unhurried practice in adapting both the apparatus and the presentation of the
subject to their patient. During the third year students should attend lectures
in psychology and modern medical treatments.

Students would pay their own fees. The college would possibly be an
individual organization recognized by the Board of Education. Such a
scheme, the details of which would arrange themselves quite simply, demands
a fuller recognition for the work, a higher standard of training and an increased remuneration for the teacher. It will seem more than justified when
we remember the material with which we have to deal, not looms, nor clay or
raffia, but that most delicate, most complicated of all organisms?the nervous
system of a living human being.

Ruth Vaughan Roper.
