Freddie, A Problem in Diagnostic Education
===========================================

:Author:  Alice M. Jones, B.S.,
Graduate Student, University of Pennsylvania.
Freddie presented so obviously the picture of the "poor little
rich boy." Utterly clean, impeccably clad, obviously putting up the
best possible front, yet such a miserable specimen of humanity
withal! He had bright brown eyes, it is true, but defective vision,
one eye being practically blind, and the other having only approximately one-fouth vision, and thick, unsightly glasses entirely spoiled
what might have been an asset. His ears were large and asymmetrical.
His teeth and lower jaw were degenerate, still uncorrected after two
years of orthodentic work. A mouth full of braces did not add to the
attractiveness of the picture. Freddie's hands were decidedly
infantile, awkward and spastic in their movements, and noticeable
for their peculiar position when he walked. His gait, too, was spastic.
His general coordination was poor in all movements, and hopelessly
bad in small movements. At nine years of age he was two years
retarded on the growth scale. This is the physical picture which
Freddie presented when I first saw him in January, 1921.

Although an unfortunate environment had contrived to make
Freddie a serious disciplinary case, the boy did have certain personality assets. He had an ingratiating smile and a delightful vivacity
(albeit of a decidedly infantile type). He was generous, talkative
and, so long as he was not crossed, very good company. He was a
prime favorite with older people. He was also popular with younger
children, but was quite impossible as a companion for boys of his
own age.

For two years Freddie had been under the care of a nerve
specialist and had been on thyroid and pituitary tablets. During
that time he had also made weekly trips to the dentist. His parents
reported that under this regime he had shown remarkable improvement, both physically and mentally.
This report of his parents brings us to the question of his history.
There is one older boy, seventeen, normal mentally, but very delicate.
He shows none of the physical stigmata of this child. Between him
and Freddie was a still-born child. Freddie's birth was normal, but
he was reported to be very slow in everything. He walked (but very
badly) at three years. He did not talk at all until five years. There
is a history of convulsions up until six years.

To supplement and abet his natural backwardness, Freddie was
blessed with a mother and a doting grandmother whose sole aim in
life seemed to be the prevention of the child's education in self help.
He was waited on hand and foot. So assiduous was their attention
that, at the age of nine years, I doubt if Freddie had ever so much as
been permitted to put on his own cap to go out to play. He had had
no opportunity whatever to develop any of the finer coordinations
?and what was still more serious, had probably never had in all his
young career the slightest opportunity to use his initiative.
At six years Freddie began his brief school history. So far as I
could judge the boy did not have kindergarten competency at the
time he entered school. He was a disturbing element in the class, and
in a year failed to show the slightest ability to learn to write, draw or
acquire number work. At the end of that year he was removed from
school because of his failure. The curious part about the story,
however, is that even at that time, he had acquired approximately
first grade efficiency in reading. He was insatiable in his demand
for books.

For the following two j^ears Freddie had no school affiliations,
but received spasmodic attention from a private tutor, a regular
grade teacher. Under this regime of laissez-faire he developed into
a more and more serious disciplinary case.

Just preceding my work with Freddie, he had had four months
of work with an excellent diagnostic teacher. She had succeeded in
teaching him the fundamental addition combinations, had made a
fair beginning at writing, and had improved his coordination by
carefully selected hand-work. She had also begun the noble work
of educating the parents in their attitude toward the child. She had
not, however, conquered the child or won his cooperation.

My first problem, then, was a purely disciplinary one. The boy
tried out every stunt which he had ever found effective with others.
He shrieked. He cried himself ill. He rolled on the floor and refused
to get up. He refused absolutely and definitely to begin every task
presented, only to find tjiat after an interval the work had been done.
It was apparently a most disconcerting experience, but at the end of
a week we had comparative peace in the school-room; interest began
to take the place of the old antagonistic attitude, and real work began.
From the beginning I noted three assets. The first was his good
memory span and trainability and retentiveness of memory. He
learned rote material very readily and retained it very well. Material
like the multiplication tables was thus extremely easy for him.
Another asset was his visual imagery. In view of his extremely
defective vision his power of visual imageability was truly remarkable.

I discovered this ability with the design blocks, but I was able to note
it again and again throughout my work with him. I frequently
utilized it, especially in teaching arithmetic, which was the most
difficult subject for him to grasp, although he could get a great deal
of it parrot fashion. The other asset which I employed productively
was his ability to read. It was through this, for instance, by the use
of interesting material, that I got real efforts at writing. At the end
of the six months I had him under instruction, Freddie had acquired
an efficiency in reading excelled by very few fifth graders. There was
not the slightest doubt that, with him, reading was actually a tool,
ready for use, as such, in the content subjects.

Freddie's most obvious deficiency, to the lay mind, was his lack
of facility in common coordinations. During the six months, he
received at least an hour a day of intensive instruction in mechanical
tasks?work with Plastecene, weaving, hammer and nails, scissors,
crayons, blackboard drawing and definite exercises designed to
develop independent strength in his fingers. For the larger movements he had calisthenics, running, directed play, all designed with
the one idea of improving his particular situation. The improvement
was remarkable.

With the improvement in general coordination, Freddie's writing
automatically improved. To the last, the writing remained less
efficient than the other school subjects, but'lie did attain to what I
should call the efficiency of a second grade child.
A Terman test made in June gave Freddie, at nine years, nine
months, a mental age of eight years and four months, which gave
him an intelligence quotient of 85.4. He had finished the work of
the second grade in arithmetic, spelling and language. He had
approximately second grade proficiency in writing and fourth grade
proficiency in reading.

In view of his excellent memory span (which is a real operative
span), his good visual imagery, and his mastery of reading as a tool,
my prognosis is that Freddie's chance eventually to succeed in the
school world is an excellent one. On the basis of his acquirements I
recommended that in September he be given a trial in the third grade
of the public school. I have a report from his mother (February 5,
1922) that Freddie is passing this year in his school work. He still
has some trouble in arithmetic, but there is no doubt that he will be
promoted into the fourth grade in June. She also reports that he
always is marked "perfect" in deportment, which indicates that
there has been an extraordinary transformation in the boy's
motivation.

From a case of apparently hopeless retardation, I believe that
Freddie bids fair to make a decent citizen. At the present time the
normal environment of the public school is by far the best thing for
him. But six months ago? Freddie was at that time most obviously
a problem for the diagnostic teacher. His many apparent disabilities
were sufficient to cast him out of an ordinary class. Yet he had
special abilities which were capable of bringing him through. What
chance had such abilities for recognition under the ordinary teaching
regime? It is in cases such as this that the trained diagnostic teacher
can give her greatest service.
