Birth Rate and Native Intelligence
===================================

:Author:  Willis W. Clark, M.A.
Sociologist, California Bureau of Juvenile Research, Whittier, Calif.

Introduction. It is commonly considered that families of low
mentality have more children than those of normal intelligence; i. e.,
are especially prolific in reproduction. "Feeble-minded beget feebleminded and they propagate fast" is the essence of usual statements
in regard to this phase of the social problem. Elderton (2, p. 21)
states: "It seems only too true at the present time that the physically and mentally weaker stocks are reproducing themselves at a
greater rate than those of sounder physique and intelligence."
Data which may be interpreted in relation to this problem, and
which may tend to modify radical statements concerning the relatively higher birth rate of inferior stock, are available in the laboratory of the Department of Research, Whittier State School.
Qualitative data. Family histories of boys committed to Whittier
State School from the various counties of California have been prepared by trained field-workers during the past five years. The
process of obtaining the history includes in practically all cases a
visit to the home and relatives of each boy, and analysis and synthesis of mental, physical, and social factors affecting each member of
the family (see 7, pp. 71-82), and finally the preparation of a family
history manuscript, elaborating on the plan outlined by the Eugenics
Record Office (3, pp. 35). The histories vary in size from 10 to 50
typewritten pages, averaging 20 pages, contain data concerning from
2 to 6 generations, and average 20 to 30 individuals for each history.
The essential accuracy of the information concerning the number of
siblings (brothers and sisters) used in this study is assured.
Each boy has been given an intelligence test, using the Stanford
Revision of the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale in all cases. This is
generally accepted as the most accurate measure of native intelligence available (see 6 and 8); the intelligence quotient (I. Q.), which
is the ratio of mental age to actual or chronological age, may be used
in preparing a statistical table indicating the frequency distribution
of native intellectual endowment.

That there is a high correlation between the intelligence of children and parents is usually assumed as being governed by the laws
of heredity, and has been verified by mathematical formulae. For
example, Pearson (4, p. 24) found a coefficient of correlation of 0.58
between the intelligence of father and son. Unpublished correlations prepared by Popenoe (5), using data of Department of Research
concerning the same cases included in this study, found further
evidence of this positive relationship. Where the intelligence of one
parent and one child was known, the correlation was found to be
0.43 (P. E. 0.023), frequency, 1301 cases. Again, using a more highly
selected group in which the intelligence of both parents was known
and was in the same general group; e. g., both normal, both feebleminded, etc.?a positive correlation of 0.70 (P. E. 0.029) was found,
indicating a high relationship between the two factors. Thus it
appears that we may assume, for the purposes of this study, that
the I. Q. of the boys in the School would show the relative degree of
intelligence of the parental stock.

Quantitative data. A distribution of the I. Q.'s of 323 boys in
Whittier State School concerning whom we have both an intelligence
examination and an accurate family history, is given in Table I.
The I. Q. classification is given in groups of ten points. The range
of number of siblings is from 1 to 14 children, giving a total of 1204
children. In considering the number of brothers and sisters in the
family only those of full relationship are included, and still-births,
as well as half-, step-, and foster-fraternity, are eliminated from the
distribution. This table was used in the calculus of correlation.
Table II presents a reclassification of the data into general social
intelligence groups, as superior, average-normal, dull-normal and
borderline, and feeble-minded according to the usual estimates of
1. Q. values. It is seen that 3.5 per cent are superior, 25 per cent
average-normal, 50 per cent dull-normal or borderline, and 21.5 per
cent feeble-minded.

Statistical analysis. Statistical measures of averages and relationship between the native intelligence of the boys (therefore, as
previously indicated, the intelligence of the parents) as measured by
intelligence examinations and the number of fully related brothers
and sisters are given in Table III. The coefficient of correlation
derived from Table I by use of Pearson's formula is ?0.079 (P. E.
0.037). Strictly interpreted this indicates a very slight tendency for
the more intelligent families to be smaller and for the less intelligent
to be larger, but it is of such small variation to be practically negligible. The principal feature of the distribution is the wide range or
scattering for all of the groups which itself indicates a low correlation.
Considering further the averages presented in Table III, we find
verification only of the same slight tendency. In the 323 families
there were 1204 children of full relationship, an arithmetic average
of 3.7 per family. The arithmetic average for the superior groups
is 3.0 children; average-normal, 3.4; dull-normal and borderline,
3.9; feeble-minded, 3.8 children. The mode, not marked in any
group, increases from 1 child for the superior and average-normal,
to 3 children in the two lower intelligence groups. Finally, the
medians for each of the groups show the same tendency as the other
measures of averages,?there is a slight tendency for those of inferior
intelligence to be members of the larger families.

Qualifying factors. Two factors concerning the validity of data
for statistical purposes should be considered. They are (1) the families used as a basis for this study are a selected group, and (2) the
average intelligence is low.

Each family considered have one factor in common; namely, a
boy has been committed to a state industrial school. Otherwise
they are from various racial groups, from city, town, and country,
well-to-do and poverty stricken, of various grades of moral character,
and from a great variety of home conditions.

The median I. Q. for the group of boys in this study is 81.5,
while Williams (8, p. 25) found the median I. Q. for the usual population of the School to be 82, a negligible difference. This I. Q. indicates an average mental age of 13 years for adults in this group.
While this is considerably below the expected average adult mental
age for school children as found by Terman (6), it is practically identical with the average mental age of adults, which Doll (1) finds
that the U. S. Army tests indicate.

Thus it appears that the data may be used as a relatively unselected group and with reasonable expectation of trustworthy results.
Summary and conclusion. The data presented in this study
show only a very slight tendency for boys of higher intelligence (by
implication, parents of higher mentality) to be members of smaller
families indicated by a correlation of ?0.079 (P. E. 0.037). It would
seem to indicate that the usual assumption that persons of low mentality have much larger families is invalid, and that the tendency is
practically negligible. However, there is nothing in these data which
should militate against the desire to reduce the frequency of disgenic
characters; all efforts to promote a higher birth rate among the more
eugenic groups should be encouraged.

References.
-----------

1. Doll, Edgar A. The Average Mental Age of Adults. Journal of Applied
Psychology, IV-4, December, 1919.
2. Elderton, Ethel M. The Relative Strength of Nurture and Nature.
Galton Laboratory Lecture Series, III. London. 1915.
3. Laughlin, H. H. How to Make an Eugenical Family History. Eugenics
Record Office, Bulletin No. 13. 1915.
4. Pearson, Karl. Nature and Nurture: The Problem of the Future.
Galton Laboratory Lecture Series, VI. London. 1910.
114 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
5. Popenoe, Herbert. Unpublished correlations prepared in Department of
Research Laboratory, Whittier State School, Calif. 1919.
6. Terman, Lewis M. The Measurement of Intelligence. Houghton,
Mifflin Co. Boston. 1916.
7. Williams, J. Harold. Individual Case History Outline. Journal of
Delinquency, V-3, May, 1920.
8. Williams, J. Harold. The Intelligence of the Delinquent Boy. Whittier
State School, Department of Research. Monograph No. 1. 1919.
Table I.?Intelligence Quotient of One Boy and Number of Children
in Family.
i.Q.
Number of Children in Family.

9 10 11 12 13 14
Total
121-130..
111-120..
101-110..
91-100..
81-90...
71-80...
61-70...
51-60...
41-50...
2
9
29
52
82
79
44
21
5
Total.
58
51
69
37
35
36
16
11
323
Table II.?Intelligence Classification of One Boy and Number of
Children in Family.
Classification.
Number of Children in Family.
1 2
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Total
Families.
Superior
(I.Q.'s 111130)
Average-normal
(I.Q.'s 91110)
Dull-normal and
borderline
(I.Q.'s 71-90)
Feeble-minded
(I.Q.'s 41-70)
Total
11
81
161
70
323
BIRTH RATE AND NATIVE INTELLIGENCE. 115
Table III.?Statistical Averages and Intelligence Groups.
Classification.
Total
Families.
Total
Children.
Arithmetic
Average.
Mode.
Median.
Superior
(I.Q.'s 111-130)
Average-normal
(I.Q.'s 91-110)
Dull-normal and borderline
(I.Q.'s 71-90)
Feeble-minded
(I.Q.'s 41-70)
Total.
11
81
161
70
323
33
276
627
268
1204
3.0
3.4
3.9
3.8
3.7
3.25
3.43
3.93
3.79
3.76
