Albert? A Lazy Boy
==================

Diagnostic Teaching
By Winifred B. Stewart, A.B.,
University of Pennsylvania.

Albert is an enthusiastic member of the Boy Scouts, and the
leader of the neighborhood "gang." He is a real "boy"?big,
strapping, good humored and full of fun. I have known him ever
since he was a little fellow in rompers and used to play on our lawn.
He was then a very bright and energetic child. It was, in fact, not
until he started to school, and indeed until the fourth grade, that
anyone began to suspect that he was not as bright as he might be.
Having entered the first grade at the age of six, he went through
the first two grades with fair success. He repeated 3d A and when
he finally attained 4B he remained in that grade three sessions. His
parents, being intelligent people, had ever since he began school
done everything to help him with his work and encourage him to
study. When soft words and kindly assistance did no good they
encouraged him with the strap. It all apparently rolled off "like
water off a duck's back," and he did no better. Then, thinking
that the fault might be with the school, and the fact that he had
got a bad reputation there for conduct as well as work, his parents
sent him to another school. There he did no better and is in the 5B
grade for the second time, being retarded three years. Having
received the permission of his parents, I brought him to the Psychological Clinic at the University of Pennsylvania for examination on
March 18, 1922. He was examined by two clinical examiners.

He did exceptionally well with the mechanical tests. He completed the Witmer formboard in 22 seconds on first trial?25 on the
second and 15 on the third. He used both hands and showed studied
discrimination. The cylinders he completed first in 59 seconds and
second in 42, showing good form discrimination. He handled
Healy A extremely well. Upon first trial he completed the problem in 55 seconds. Upon second trial, he placed the two small blocks
first and completed the list in 11 seconds. His memoiy span is 8 for
visual and 7 for auditory. Neither could be raised even on four
repetitions. On the whole, all the mechanical tests pointed to a
normal if not superior intelligence.

On the Binet test, however, he showed a mental retardation of
two years and five months, as his I. Q. is only 83.6. This classes
him as backward but not feebleminded. The diagnosis given was
that he is normal mentally but mentally lazy. He also lacks interest
in his work. It was recommended that he be given special teaching
and that this teaching should be of the nature of pushing him in
his work with the aim of gaining his interest and causing greater
mental activity. A possible explanation for his retardation is the
fact that he exceeds the norms for fifteen in both height and weight.

Accordingly, I started giving Albert special lessons?I found
his special deficiencies to be in spelling and arithmetic. After
several lessons I found that the reason for his poor spelling was
insufficient attention to the word when reading. His reading was
careless and full account was not taken of all the syllables. I stressed
the point that he must pay attention to the words and divide the
longer ones into syllables. He grasped the idea and as I go over his
spelling every week I notice a decided improvement. His marks in
school also have been better.

His arithmetic is perhaps the most interesting problem. The
work of the fifth B is fractions, and Albert had not been doing exceptionally well considering the fact that he was repeating the grade.
He was able to do the problems mechanically if they were set down
on paper, but he could do little with a written problem. This held
true for his work in multiplication and division of fractions. In
division he seemed unable to discriminate between the divisor and
dividend and would invert either. I had to explain to him that one
generally divides by the smaller number, puts it to the right and
inverts it. This he finally grasped after several lessons but did not
understand the reasons for it. I tried giving him problems to do
mentally from ones such as, "John had six pencils and gave twothirds away, how many would he have left," to, "if three boys can
build a shed in six days, how long will it take one boy to do it? two
boys? six boys? " It is interesting to note that he did these concrete
problems very well. He could do them very much better when I
said them to him than when he read them from a book and did much
better when the problems dealt with pencils, tops and railroad trains
than when they dealt with yards of cloth and potatoes. He seemed
to enjoy these problems. By this time he began to get better marks
in both arithmetic and spelling in school and in order to encourage
him I promised to take him to the movies as soon as he brought
home a paper in either subject marked 90.

As he was showing marked progress in his fifth grade work I
thought that I would see how he liked to work with geometrical
figures and problems concerning them. I thought thereby to improve, if only slightly, his visual imagery. Accordingly, I taught
him what a square, rectangle and triangle are, and demonstrated the
relations of the lengths of the sides and how to find the areas. I also
assisted him in proving?by Socrates' method?the Pythagorean
theorem. Naturally, before this I had taught him the elements of
square root and told him how to find the square roots of whole
numbers. All this took several lessons, as he was not very quick to
learn and forgot every week what he had learned the last. He liked
it, however, because there was something concrete to see and handle.
I gave him a problem about the number of yards of canvas it would
take to make a tent. His cry was as usual, "Aw, I can't do that.
How do you start? " He never had enough confidence in his ability
to do things. With some assistance from me he did the problem and
seemed to enjoy it. I gave it to him again the next week. He had
entirely forgotten it but attacked it anew, insisting that he couldn't.
Then his April report came out. He entered my house with a
whoop and announced that he had got a seven, the first in a year.
He was overjoyed. We are still continuing with arithmetic and
spelling.

He told me that he had made a radio receiving apparatus out
of an oatmeal box. His parents assured me that this is true and
that it is successful, moreover; from the way he talked to me about
it he seemed to know what he was doing?although he is not at all
fluent in expressing himself. His aim in life is to be a civil engineer,
as he likes the idea of doing big things out of doors. From my
teaching, although it is by no means completed, I should say that
he will probably not be able to go through the strenuous college
education which prepares for this profession. Albert, though not
actually mentally deficient, is not what one would call bright and I
doubt very much whether he will attain a very high intellectual
level. However, he has a very marked aptitude for mechanical
things, and probably will be most successful in some work along that
line. I should recommend that he be put in some private school
where more individual attention could be given him and where he
could be given the encouragement which I have shown to be necessary to spur him on to work. I am also suggesting to his parents
to send him to summer school so he will be able to catch up to children of his own age, as I think association with those so much younger
has a very bad effect on him as it encourages his lack of initiative
and dulls his interest. He will also get out of the mental rut in
which he is at present and develop more self assurance if he gets in
a new atmosphere and is pushed ahead. His attitude is that everything connected with school is hard. I said to him once, "Al, this
problem is easy?it's just like a game." Said he, "It may be playin'
for you?but gosh!" and scratched his head.
