Four Cases of Diagnostic Teaching
===================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1919, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XIII, Nos. 8-9 January, February, 1922

By Gladys Poole, B.S.,1
Trenton Normal School. Formerly Clinic Teacher, University of
Pennsylvania.

In 1919, the Psychological Clinic at the University of Pennsylvania added a teacher to its staff. The child's response to teaching
has always been a factor in determining his mental status, since
failure in school is often taken to indicate the need of a psychological
examination. Nevertheless the use of teaching for the purpose of
discovering the mental status of a child is commonly beyond the
province of the grade teacher.

The aim at the Psychological Clinic is not to educate the child.
Although the teaching a child receives may incidentally further the
purpose of the school, and in all cases is intended to be of some value
to the child, nevertheless it is not used to bring backward children
up to grade, nor to supplement in any way the work of the regular
or special class teacher. Its aim is the diagnosis?especially the analytical diagnosis?distribution, and persistence of attention, the
retentiveness and trainability of memory, the accuracy of observation and other mental qualities necessary to the education of the
child. To do this, didactic material is chosen which will bring out
the particular point desired. If a child has been failing in arithmetic,
although competent in reading, the emphasis is placed upon such
material as will demonstrate what the difficulty in arithmetic is.
Diagnostic teaching has always been considered by Dr Witmer one
of the most important methods of the clinical examination, but the
Psychological Clinic did not have a special staff officer, called the
Clinic Teacher, before 1919.

The following cases are cited to show several different types of
children who have come before the Clinic and the results which have
accrued from their careful study:

1 Miss Rebecca E. Learning and Miss L. Doris Wilcox were appointed Clinic Teachers for the
Psychological Clinic at the Summer session of the University of Pennsylvania, July and August,
1919. In October, 1919, Miss Gladys Poole was appointed Clinic Teacher and a regular member
of the staff of the Psychological Clinic. Miss Cornelia Mann served as Clinic Teacher during the
Academic year, 1920-1921, and Miss Charlotte Easby has been appointed Clinic Teacher for the
Academic year, 1921-1922.

Teddy.

Although but four years of age, Teddy had already acquired an
unsavory reputation in the community in which he lived. He
pulled the neighbor's flowers, teased his dog, slapped the children
who came to play and generally made a nuisance of himself. At
home, his mother found it difficult to keep the peace between Teddy
and his younger brother. The latter, smaller and of a more retiring
disposition, was unable to keep his property safe from the depredations of his brother, and in attempting his own self-defense, he
was always worsted. Toward his mother, Teddy displayed an
"excessive determination" extremely difficult to deal with. He
refused to obey and no amount of persuasion or punishment seemed
to move him from a position once taken. His father was in no
better favor with his eldest born.

Teddy was brought to the Clinic for diagnosis. He refused to
try to do any performance test, and later, when he did try, would
only take the most simple of material so that he did not appear to
be more than two years advanced in his mental development.
Observing the examiner occupied in conversation with his mother,
and being unable to follow what was said, he finally pulled the
Witmer formboard nearer, and gave a performance quite equal to
that expected of a child of his years. More complex tests were then
introduced and once the child's interest had been captured, there
was no further difficulty in getting him to work. He was taught
to use this material, and so successful was he that he succeeded in
doing the Witmer cylinder test, a test standardized for children much
beyond his years. Several puzzles were used to advantage with this
boy, the teaching method being that one which consists in setting a
task well within the proved capabilities of the child, and then leaving
him alone to do the work. This was a very successful method with
Teddy, since he did not lack in persistence of attention and his
interest had been fully aroused in work of this sort.

Teddy's mother reports that oftentimes when he really wants
to do something very badly, he still refuses to do it. This was shown
in the Clinic by his refusal to accept a piece of candy offered him,
this piece being a Hershey Bud which his mother had brought in
case he should be late to luncheon. He wanted it, but refused to
accept it at the hand of a woman he knew very well, although when
it was left on the arm of a chair, he was finally willing to move over
very slowly and take it.

After several weeks of being taught an hour each week, Teddy
had covered at the Clinic all the material which he could possibly
use. His mother had been encouraged to get him blocks, peg boards
and other kindergarten games to keep him busy at home. At the
same time, she began teaching him to count and to recognize some
of the letters of the alphabet, as the amount of mechanical educational material is limited, and the next step had to be the continued
use of more complex forms, i. e., figures and letters. Teddy readily
learned to count, to count objects, to count backwards. He learned
simple combinations and the usual simple words. While yet inclined
to take his own time to do things, his mother found him much easier
to handle at home, and at the last report, considered that a cure had
been effected, educational work having taken the place of his former
annoying activities. Discipline ceased to be a problem for Teddy.
Mental activity and occupation of the right sort changed the boy
from a crying, obstinate child into a smiling, interested one. Teaching was the method employed at first and continued because it
offered the best means of interesting the child.

James.
-------

James, a nine and a half year old Irish lad, red hair and all,
was brought to the Clinic because he was not getting along in school.
He is in the third grade, but not doing passing work. He is very
obstinate in school, and will not try to get the lessons. He sits with
his head down making no effort at all. Mental examination showed
him to be normal, with an intelligence quotient of one hundred on
the Terman Revision of the Binet-Simon tests. There is no evidence
from the examination that he is not very well able to do his work.
James was given special teaching for several periods. He is
certainly able to do the work he is supposed to be doing. During
the periods, his teacher succeeded in discovering two rather important points. The first one is his very evident dislike of school. His
relations with his teacher are not sympathetic, due to a lack of
understanding on the part of both. He does, however, like drawing,
and wishes to be a cartoonist. From specimens of his drawing made
at the Clinic, it seems likely that he will be able to make his dream
come true. With this as a clue, his teacher began trying to find
out what appealed to him most in his school work. She found that
he disliked his arithmetic very much, but liked history and geography, in both of which subjects he was rather better informed than
was to be expected. He is fond of stories and makes up adventures.
Possessed of the ardent, Irish temperament, full of dreams and
fancies, it is not to be expected that this youngster would find the
dull, stale routine of regular grade work pleasing. Effort was made
to show him that he would have to go to school, and as an added
incentive, arrangements were made for his admission to a Sketch
Club in the city. Here children of promise are trained free of charge
by the best talent available for such work.

Raymond.
---------

Raymond was brought by his mother to the Psychological Clinic
because he made no progress in school. He is eight and a half years
of age, and has had two years of school work, one of which has been
in a special class under an excellent teacher. He has learned almost
nothing in that time.

The general mental examination showed that Raymond was
considerably below the mental level usually reached by boys of his
years. Poor distribution of attention, lack of control and co-ordination of muscles, a limited memory span and a general inability to
follow instructions were among the defects noted at that time. He
knew none of the number combinations upon which he had been
drilled at school, and only one or two of his letters. He knew about
three words. Since the class of which he is a member is a large one,
and since his teacher could apply very little of her time to Raymond
alone, he was given special teaching at the Clinic to determine more
particularly his deficiencies, and more especially his t-rainability, as
it did not seem, from the evidence taken at his examination, that he
was educable.

A Clinic teacher gave two periods to Raymond's teaching. She
used performance tests, writing and anagrams as a part of the
material for the experiment. She found Raymond's co-ordination
so poor that in attempting to write, he held his right wrist with his
left hand to keep it steady, and even then nothing that he made was
legible. He was so easily stimulated with some new bit of material
that it was almost impossible to keep him at any one thing long
enough to discover whether he could do it or not. This easy distractability of attention was his most noticeable defect. He talked
constantly to himself, and on this account it was difficult to reach
his consciousness with instruction. No amount of effort would get
him to add a digit in a given series one beyond his memory span of
four, and his retentiveness of such words and numbers as he could
be taught was like that of the parrot. He was willing to show them
off, but he could not use them for any further purpose.

A second period of teaching confirmed the impressions received
at the first one. Nothing that he had tried the first time had been
retained. The distractability of attention continued. With his
limited memory span, poor retentiveness and easily distracted attention, it is impossible to educate this boy, and very difficult to train
him. Because of this diagnosis, Raymond was recommended to an
institution which cares for children of his type. There is no place
for him in the public school or, later in life, in his social group.
Harvey.

Harvey was another boy brought to the Clinic because he has
not been getting along well in school. He is nearly eight years old,
yet his appearance is that of a four-year-old. His height and weight
are right for that age, and his general carriage and presence belongs
to that age. Because he was seven, however, he was sent to school.
The school found it impossible to deal with him anywhere, for he
failed to respond in either the kindergarten or the first grade and
there was no other class in which to place him.

Harvey's general examination placed him at the same mental
level as did his physical appearance. He had poor distribution of
attention, a lack of understanding of matter with which he should
have been familiar, and very little interest in anything to which he
was introduced. Because his general physical condition appeared
to be good, he was recommended to a Clinic teacher to determine his
trainability.

The Clinic teacher discovered that he could not be pushed very
hard as he seemed to lack physical stamina. He showed an easy
distractability of attention, but once his attention was secured, and
he was shown the way, he was able to remember how to do a particular piece of work. There seemed to be no difficulty with his
retentiveness of memory and he had good imageablity. He made
designs both from imitation and from memory. He really became
interested in the work that was offered him, talking constantly about
what he was doing. His attention fluctuated and it was with difficulty that he could be kept at a task until he had finished it. His
method of attack was to do a little and then seek his teacher's approval. Since his physical condition did not permit the boy to put
''pep" into his work, although it seemed likely that he could be
trained, it was recommended that he be sent to a skilled physician
to see whether something could be done to induce physical growth
and development before further educational treatment was suggested.
At the present time, he lacks strength for the real educational effort
needed to show whether he has a mental equipment sufficient to
make training profitable.
