A Clinial Survey of a Fsirst Grade
===================================

:Author:  Gladys G. Ide, Ph.D.
Director of Special Education, Public Schools of Philadelphia.

Education in the past has concerned itself with groups or a
hypothetical individual representative of a group. The individual
as a factor in retardation, in fixing the standard of grade work, in
arranging a curriculum, has not been considered for himself alone.
It has been taken more or less for granted until the past few years
that there must be some laggards, but there has been no attempt to
solve the problem of the laggard, any more than there has been an
attempt to solve the problem of the extra-bright child. The sort
of material that was dumped in the hopper of the first grade has not
been the concern of anyone except possibly the first grade teacher
who wanted to make a record for herself.

The entrance of the school doctor and nurse into the domain of
education showed the lamentable condition of those children who
are forced to compete with others in better health, with others older
or younger, feebleminded or very bright.

Following the advent of the doctor and the nurse came the
psychologist, who is interested in the state of the child from the
standpoint of mental equipment. What is a child like who enters
first grade? What does be bring to school? What does he lack
for efficient work? With what children should he be associated? Is
there a danger to him in his associates? What can be done with
the group as it appears the first morning of school? Of what value
will it be if an attempt is made to sort the children? Will it be of
economic value, aside from the education of a good social product,
that is, will it pay the community in terms of dollars and cents?
These are some of the questions now being asked of the psychologist.
The Local Problem.

To contribute toward the ultimate solution of this problem, the
Psychological Clinic of the University of Pennsylvania sent a member
of its staff, together with two students who had shown some ability
for the work, to 'a town a short distance from the city to test the
school children of the first grade there, and to report both to the
school and to the clinic the results obtained, the methods employed
and the conclusions drawn.

The school in question is located in a town which has for its
main support two huge steel mills. It is a fair sized town with the
1 This Survey was prepared by Dr Gladys G. Ide when Executive Officer of the Psychological
Clinic, University of Pennsylvania. She was assisted by two students, Miss Rebecca E. Learning
and Miss Cornelia Mann.
usual stores and moving picture shows, a town which does not draw
much of its support from the surrounding country. It is a town
where there are many foreigners and negroes, and where but a small
group of the inhabitants belong to the professional class. There is
a school population, including the high school, of 3000 children of
which approximately 400 are in the first grade.

The children examined included all of the first grade group and
those of the second grade who had entered school in September of
1919 and who had been found competent to do the work of the
second grade before the end of the year.

The School Organization.

The grade work is so planned that the children are placed in
classes according to the teachers' estimates of their proficiency. Thus
a group of bright children are placed in one room or section of a room,
while those who are of average ability, are in a second, and the
children doing poor work are put in a third. Where there are three
first grades in a school, there are at least three rooms of children of
different capacity, with different levels of competency. Each room
is further subdivided, the better children occupying the seats at one
side of the room, the poorer ones at the other. There is no differentiation of curriculum for these children, but there is a differentiation
in the amount which the children are expected to cover. The best
children are promoted as fast as possible to higher sections and, the
moment they seem ready, into other grades, without waiting for any
definite time for promotion. There are no mid-year promotions.
The teachers of the different sections, at this time were much on
a par in training and ability. Largely through experience and better
opportunities, two of them did much better work than the rest, but
all were co-operative, both in trying to teach the different groups to
the best of their ability and also in handling the children for the
psychologists' tests.

The Method of Testing.

The children were brought from their school rooms to an empty
room, either an unused school room, an office, or a room used by
the nurse and doctor. They were brought in groups of six, as that
was a convenient number to test at one time. Each examiner
arranged for a series of tests which she continued throughout the
period of examination so that she became familiar with the reactions of this group on that particular series. While the tests were
all done in the same room, it was possible to avoid observation by
the children through the arrangement of chairs and tables. The
results were dictated to two stenographers who sat near by. The
children responded to the tests with enthusiasm. In no case did they
seem afraid or emotionally overwrought by the situation. They had
already been in school for some months, and were used to the routine
they found there.

The Tests.

There were three different sorts of tests used with these children,
educational, psychological and physical. The last consisted merely
in observing the general condition, emphasizing especially the teeth,
the throat, and any obvious physical defects.

The educational tests consisted, for this group, in reading from
a book their teacher believed they could read, and counting to 100.
They were also asked for the addition combinations up to six. In
the reading examination the book was opened at random to some
page with which they were supposed to be very familiar, and the
child was asked to read a sentence at some point along the page, but
not the top line. Several lines on different pages were tried. If the
child failed to do this, he was asked for words commonly taught in
the first grade, and if he failed there, he was asked to give letters,
either phonetically or by name.

The children counted to 100 fairly readily. Where they seemed
to know the sequence well, they were asked the question, "What
comes after 59, 79?" or what not, in order to save time. Each child
was asked for all the combinations up to 6. The question as stated
was, "How much are 2 and 2?" etc.

For the psychological tests, three trials of the Witmer formboard
were given, three trials of the puzzle designated by Iiealy as A, and
two designs on blocks called the color cubes, a series commonly used
in kindergartens. The designs were a square within a square, in red
and white, and a blue chevron in a yellow field. Besides these performance tests, the child was asked for his auditory memory span,
and the tests given at the seven year level of the Stanford Revision
of the Binet-Simon scale.

The formboard has been analyzed by Young.1 Its possibilities
are rather wide in range, and it gives a good learning curve when
used for successive trials. It is well below the six year level so that
most all of a group may be expected to pass it. It is a very satisfactory test of attention and learning. The Healy puzzle was not
given in accordance with the strict requirements of Terman in his
Binet revision at the ten year level. The child was given the opportunity to work it out three times by himself in five minutes. At the
?The Psychological Clinic, November, 1916, Vol. 10, p. 149.
A CLINICAL SURVEY OF A FIRST GRADE. 277
end of thai time, if he failed to do it at all, he was shown, and given
two more minutes to complete it. If he failed this time, he was
shown again. The most important element to be observed in this
test is imageability. The other qualities which may be easily observed
are the child's learning ability, his planfulness and his general knowledge of relations.
The color cubes were introduced to see whether they are satisfactory as a test for children of these years. They give an opportunity for a child to analyze and copy a design from a model.
The Binet series of tests at the seven-year-level were chosen to
show the general information possessed by the children, as well as
to give the child an opportunity to display his vocabulary. It is to
be expected that children just finishing the first grade will be seven
years of age, or very close to that age, if they enter the first grade
at six, and it is not asking too much of them that they show what
they can do at the seven-year level. The older children are certainly
not handicapped by the requirements of an age level less than their
chronological ages.

The Group.

The group of children included all who were in the first grade.
They ranged in age from five years ten months to twelve years, and
in nationality through all the geographical shades. Of these children
28 per cent were negroes, 45 per cent called themselves Americans,
11 per cent were Italians, 3 per cent were Hebrews, 4 per cent were
Hungarian, and the remainder of the group were about equally
divided between Ukranian, Scotch, Syrian, Polish, Slav, Austrian,
Russian, English and German children.

As far as it was possible to determine, 67 per cent of these
children entered school in September and October of 1919, 21 per
cent entered during the first three months of 1920, 12 per cent entered
in 1918, and 7 per cent entered in 1917. This record is not accurate,
as the school records were often incomplete, and the children themselves did not know when they had entered school.
Of the white children 47 per cent were six years of age, and 38
per cent seven years of age, 13 per cent eight years of age, 3 per cent
nine years old, and 1 per cent ten years old. If eight years is considered a maximum age for children to complete the first grade, then
but 3 per cent of the group could be considered over-age.

On the basis of the work the children did with performance tests,
they were divided roughly into four groups, the decision whether the
children were actually in one group or another depending largely
upon whether or not they were able to analyze a performance test
and do efficient work with it.

The ages of the children placed in Group A averaged seven years
five months, those in Group B seven years two months, those in
Group C seven years eight months and those in Group D eight years
two months.

Physical Dcfects.

Of the 305 white children in the first grades, 121 had defects of
the teeth, most of them of a serious nature. Many children could
scarcely chew, their teeth were so badly decayed; three of these
children had no teeth at all on the lower jaw, one apparently had
never had any, and the others had had them, but they had decayed
so that they barely showed above the surface of the gums. There
is the greatest need of dental work with children whose first teeth
are lost or nearly lost before the second teeth appear, Also many
suffer the loss of their six year molars because the neighboring teeth
are in such bad condition. The disturbances of nutrition so common among the children, may, therefore, be due in part to the condition of the teeth.
One hundred and twenty-two of the children also showed hypertrophied tonsils, many of them badly in need of care. Twenty-five
cases of obvious eye deficiency included ten cases of strabismus.
Doubtless there were many more eye defects, but these were cases
which was easily detected. Nine of the children had defective hearing, and 8 had speech defects other than those caused by the absence
of teeth.

The most important point noted in regard to the children of
this entire first grade group was their slow responses. They lacked
energy, or that quality known to the high school boy as "pep."
Very few of them, in fact really possessed the energy necessary to
complete efficiency for the first grade. This lack of energy in some
cases was explained by physical deficiency caused by tuberculosis,
diabetes or related diseases, but in most cases was probably due to
lack of proper food. The people in the town are not poor, for their
wages are good, and there have been no strikes to interrupt employment; but they do not know how to cook food properly and especially
for a growing child. It is doubtful whether any of these children are
suffering from a lack of quantity in food, but many are suffering from
a lack of quality suitable for their age. On being questioned a number of children reported that their breakfasts consisted of bread and
coffee, "just taties," cookies and milk or some other light foods not
considered adequate for a child's breakfast, especially as that breakA CLINICAL SURVEY OF A FIRST GRADE. 279
fast is served early in the morning, because the mill whistles blow
at seven o'clock. This is the customary breakfast for the foreign
children, and it is among them that much of real mal-nutrition exists;
but the old American families are also remiss in this respect, and
their children show it, in an unmistakable slowness and lack of
energy, even when they are fairly well nourished.

An open air class will aid in clearing up some of the more obstinate cases requiring medical attention, especially those with tuberculosis, but fresh air is not a substitute for food, and the school at
the present time has not been able to do much toward solving his
problem.

Still more work from the school doctor and nurse in connection
with a dietician is necessary before the majority of children are really
ready to do school work. Defects of sense organs are especially bad
for the nervous, under-fed child, and the drainage from infected nasal
and throat passages does not augur well for his general physical condition. The more that is done to increase the physical efficiency of
the group the less retardation there will be.

Educational Tests.

On the educational scale it was found that the eleven children,
who were promoted into the second grade some time during the
year, had second grade or better proficiency in reading; 36 had first
grade proficiency in reading one month before the end of the school
year; that is, they were able to read any first grade book with a
fair amount of ease and with a knowledge of all the common words;
and 25 did not read at all. Of the others, all had a proficiency in
reading less than that required by the first grade, generally about
half as much as is expected of the first year.

The poor reading in this school has been due largely to the
prevailing system of teaching. The first series of books are based
upon familiar tales. These are told to the children first in complete
story form. Then the readers based on these stories are presented
to the children. The books are profusely illustrated with clever
pictures, and even a comparatively unintelligent child can guess at
the reading matter in connection with these pictures. The completed sentence is used as a unit, and very little work is given in
phonics and word drills. In consequence, the children read very well
when they are permitted to start at the top of the page, and especially
so when there are pictures on the page, but they do not know the
words when asked for them separately, that is, they are reciting
material they have formerly committed to memory. Asking a child
to begin further down the page spoils his reading entirely. The
members of the group do not really read, although they apparently
can read well. The fault lies in the system, which fundamentally is
good, but which requires much more extensive drill on words and
phonics than has been given if it is to succeed with children who are
not unusually bright. The bright ones get along all right with it.
No special emphasis is placed on numbers in this school system,
so that the amount of number work the children know is limited very
much to their experience with numbers, 59 per cent of the wholegroup of children were able to count to 100, and all were able to
count some. Sixty per cent of all the children knew their addition
combinations up to 6. There was a very evident difference in the
ability to count and add in the different schools. Three-fourths of
the children in one school succeeded with the test, while in another
less than half were able to add and count. The school requirements
were not rigid in this respect.

The Performance Tests.

The average time for the formboard for the first trial for all
white children was 43.2 seconds, minimum 27 seconds and maximum
130 seconds. For the second trial it was 36 seconds, with a minimum
of 19 seconds and a maximum of 162 seconds. For the third trial, the
average time was 3.4 seconds with a minimum of 15 seconds and a
maximum of 90 seconds. The results in this test show that the
ranges for those succeeding in the test were not extensive. In some
cases, where the first trial was not successful and the time therefore
was not included, or where for any reasons a failure was recorded
and the time was not included, the time was greater than this, but
there were few children whose average time was not under sixty
seconds for the first trial.

On the basis of their success with the formboard, especially on
the way they solved the problem and on the sort of attention they
displayed, the group was divided roughly into four groups known
as A, B, C, and D. These divisions cannot be justified on other
grounds than an examiner's opinion, but the results of the averages
of time for the different groups show that there was some sort of
difference which the examiner was able to use as a basis for a judgment as to quality of performance. The A group averaged 40.1, 30
and 26.3 seconds respectively for their three trials, the B group 44.3,
36.5 and 32.2 seconds for the same three trials. The C group required
46.9, 37.8 and 35.9 seconds respectively for their three trials, and the
D group required 52.1, 66.1 and 47.9 seconds for the three trials.
Two of the group failed to complete the test. It will be noted that
as the group became poorer the average time required for the completion of the formboard became greater.
With the Healy A puzzle 68 per cent of all the children succeeded. This means that they did the puzzle three times without
help. There was no time limit. Of the remaining 32 per cent approximately 85 per cent succeeded after they were shown the first
time. Of the remainder, two failed entirely and could not be taught
how to do it in the time allowed to the examiner, and of the rest,
several failed on the second or third trial or both.

This test gave the examiner an opportunity to make observations especially in regard to imageability, both from the standpoint
of the image before the puzzle is completed and the memory image
of it after it is once completed. The analysis of the relations of the
blocks required in the first trial was beyond many of these children,
but the ability to retain a memory image of the relations was present
in over four-fifths of the cases.

The design blocks were used to find out whether children of this
age could be expected to imitate a given design. Ninety per cent
of the entire group succeeded with the test. No one group showed
any particular advantage over another, but group D was the poorest.
Results seem to show that the test is valuable for this age, providing
a more complete analysis can be made of it. At the present time it
does not bring out qualities any better than Healy A, and its use is
complicated by the Kindergarteners, who value it as training material.
The Binet Tests.

Eighteen children of this entire group passed the Binet test at
the seven year level. Six full tests were given. Forty-one of the
group passed five of the tests, and sixty-two passed four of the
tests. Two tests?naming the days of the week and the memory
span of 5 caused the most failures. Less than half of the entire
group did even passably well with the Binet series.

Part of the difficulty in passing the Binet tests is the lack of
language. Tests like the days of the week, counting the fingers and
tying a bow, show nothing more than whether the children have or
have not been taught to do these things, and while they are significant
in regard to their general information they give no indication of
mental ability. When a child fails on the memory span test, it
follows that either the tests are standardized at too high a level or
the children are of a poor type. Since the average age of these
children was past seven years, and the average memory span for the
group is 4.4 digits on auditory presentation according to the Binet
standard, it follows that, for this group of children, the Binet standards are unsatisfactory.
On tests requiring the use of language, the difficulty is of another
type. When there are twelve different nationalities represented in
a rather small school, and when the children come to school prepared
according to the home standards, and especially when that home does
not teach English, it is not surprising that some children are unable
to do the work of the first grade. Some of this group could not yet
speak a word of English. They could not understand a word of
directions; the only communication between the teacher and child
must be by imitation or gesture To be sure, this group is very
small, but the school is not only for the majority, it is also for the
minority. More than one-third of the children do not speak enough
English to make their first readers really intelligible, nor do they
understand the difference between certain words well enough to use
them. Often it has been found that children of foreign speaking
parents do not understand the difference between the word different
and the word alike. The relatively poor results obtained from the
Binet test indicate that the children's English vocabulary is extremely
limited, although without these words they are unable to progress at
a normal rate through the grades. Many children who do well with
performance tests, whose memory spans are adequate and whose
rate of learning is high, still do not succeed in passing language
tests, because they do not understand what is wanted. Still less do
they understand what is required of them by their teachers. Even
some children of native-born Americans do not possess words enough
to express their ideas, since in the home they are not trained in
language.

Because of the absence of language, and because of an absence
of information common to children of seven years, not half of the
children of the group reach the point required of them by Terman.
Terman's standards are based upon a different group of children,
but nevertheless they approximately represent, what is expected in
school by the teachers of the first grades. This group of children was
much below the seven-year level. While it is not at all necessary
that a first grader pass these tests, it is necessary for him to possess
a certain amount of general information as well as to have the use
of a certain number of words. In this respect the group was lacking,
and so must be considered inadequately prepared to do first grade
work with the greatest efficiency. It is likely that an effort on the
part of the school can produce much improvement along this line.
Taking the tests separately, it was found that the average
memory span for all the white children was 4.4 digits with auditory
presentation. With the exception of the A group in one school,
which returned an average of 5.1 digits, there was no averages above
4.8. The group averages did not vary in any significant fashion,
except that several children placed in group D had a memory span
of 3. No child had a memory span of less than three.

In the differences asked in the seven year test 43 per cent of all
the children succeeded; 79 per cent were able to draw acceptable
diamonds for this level; 81 per cent were able to count the fingers
of both hands; 25 per cent knew the days of the week, and 66 per
cent could tie a bow knot.

Results: 1. The results show that this group of children was
lacking in vocabulary and in general information, if the standard
made by Terman is correct or even approximately correct.
2. Performance tests show them to be slow, but otherwise capable of doing good work.
3. The memory span is less than is ordinarily expected of
children of these ages.

4. The amount of work done in the majority of cases is less
than should be expected for a good first grade.
5. Still more work by the school doctors and nurses will tend
to increase the efficiency of the classes by a decrease of physical
disabilities.
Recommendations: 1. More intensive work by the school
doctors and nurses for the removal of physical defects.
2. The rearrangement of curriculum, and further training of
teachers to enable the school work to be more effectively done.
3. Further effort to increase the nutrition of the children through
training of the parents in the homes.

The Colored School.

Of this group of tested children 28 per cent were colored. With
the exception of one child these attended one school, under the supervision of a colored principal and with colored teachers in the school
rooms. The conditions surrounding these children were rather better
than in some of the white schools, and the teachers and principal
seemed affable and efficient. The children were clean, well-dressed,
and, if physical development is of any indication, fairly well-fed.
An examination of the teeth of these children showed that they
were farther along in the second dentition than their ages seemed to
warrant. Inasmuch as the doctors reported the children rather
over-weight and taller than the white children of corresponding ages,
it seems likely that there is a slight acceleration of growth in colored
children. If this is true, then the ages reported, which are probably
not accurate, do not compare with the physical acceleration of the
children. The average age is 7.7 years for this group of children,
but the ages range from five years ten months, to twelve years.
The fact that there are so many over-age children in this group is
accounted for by the influx of colored families from the south, who
came to work in the steel mills. Many of the children, nine, ten and
eleven years old, have attended school not more than three months
in a year, or in some cases have never attended school at all until
the present year.

The children were graded on a five point scale as to the depth
of pigmentation of the skin. Supposing that 5 indicates the deepest
color, the lightest color shown by these children was 4.2, with the
majority in the 5 group. Two of the children showed the redness of
skin which is associated with the Indian, and one of the children had
red hair of a somewhat dusky shade.

Physically the group were in good condition. One child was
badly paralyzed probably due to a birth palsy. He is not likely to
get along in his social group because he is not a very bright boy and
is physically too handicapped to be efficient. Forty-five out of the
group (about 50 per cent) showed some enlargement of the tonsils,
only a few cases, however, especially bad. Twenty-seven children
(about 33.3 per cent) had badly decayed teeth, two had mal-occlusions, five had obvious eye defects, three had running ears, and two
had speech defects. It is also noted that three of these children had
tufted hair, characteristic of some African tribes, and one had hazel
eyes. In general it seemed that this group of children showed better
energy than the white children in the same school. If the state of
their clothing was an indication, the housekeeping at home was
better than in the homes of many of the white children. The school
has attached to it a visiting nurse who is doing good work in teaching
the mothers some of the simpler facts of sanitation.

In educational tests these children did not do well, but, inasmuch as they had had very little schooling, they probably did as
well as could be expected. Only one child of the entire group was
able to read with first grade efficiency, that is, well enough to warrant
his placement in a good second grade. Of the others, sixty-nine
had IB proficiency in reading, that is, they read about as well as a
child ought to read who has just completed half of the first grade
work. The remainder did not read, but only one was judged to be
unable to learn to read, and of the others, two had been in school
not more than a month. The same criticism which holds good for
the reading of the white children holds good for the reading of the
colored children. Young teachers without adequate experience and
the poor methods used in teaching reading tended to lower the
efficiency of the work.

The children were tried on their ability to count. It was found
A CLINICAL SURVEY OF A FIRST GRADE. 285
that forty-eight (approximately 50 per cent) were able to count
to 100. Of the others all could count some, the poorest counting
being done by a child who reached only 10.

On the psychological tests this group of children did very well,
but proved themselves slow for their age. They were given two
trials on the formboard. The children who were judged best, that
is those called group A, succeeded in 39.1 seconds for an average
time for the first trial, and 29.6 for the second trial. The B group
did the first trial in 37.1 seconds, and the second trial in 32.4 seconds.
The C group did the first trial in 44 seconds and the second trial in
37.4 seconds. Of the D group, of which there were two, each trial
took more than a minute. One child failed completely on the formboard. The children were then tried with the Healy A puzzle.
Forty children (approximately 50 per cent) succeeded in all three
trials of the Healy A, while the remainder 21 succeeded on the last
two trials, having been shown the first time. Only the very poorest
of the class failed to complete this test after having been shown once.
With the memory span this group of children showed up very
well. The average memory span for the group is 4.4 digits on oral
presentation. Divided into groups, we find that group A gets an
average memory span of 5, group B of 4.9, group C of 4.1 and group
D of 3.5.
The other two tests given these children were the drawing of a
diamond after a model shown them the differences as suggested by
Terman in the seven-year-level of the Binet Tests. Of the former,
approximately half the children were able to draw a diamond which
could be credited on the Binet Test. The younger children were
poorer than the older children, so the children in group D did better
than those in group A. Of the differences the condition is quite
reversed. Eighty-six per cent of group A succeeded in passing this
test according to the Binet requirements, while 53 per cent of group
B and 44 per cent of group C passed. Of the children in group D
one succeeded and one failed. Thus approximately a little more
than half of the children succeeded in passing this test. It is worthy
of note that although these children succeeded they did not return
stereotyped answers. Almost none of the replies were those suggested either as successes or failures by Terman. This suggests a
need of closer study of the children's vocabulary.

The purpose of the examination of the colored children was to
determine, if possible, the ten or fifteen children who could be expected to do fairly well in school, in order that they might be trained
for leadership among the people of their own race. The general level
of these children was very much alike. They all proved slow in
reaction. They showed less initiative than the white children, but
they were also more responsive. Very few children could be chosen
from the group as being predominantly better than the others. Not
more than 8 per cent could be placed in a group for satisfactory work
under pressure.

Results: 1. Physically the children proved to be in better condition than the white children of the same social group. Although
many cases of enlarged tonsils were reported, not many were in very
bad condition.
2. Educationally the group has not advanced a full year's work
in either reading or numbers, the majority having accomplished about
a half year's work.
3. The performance tests show the group to have adequate
ability for training but slow reaction. Very few of the children are
alert enough to indicate rapid ability to learn. Only about half the
group do the performance tests with the highest degree of efficiency
for their age.
Recommendation: 1. S6me further medical care to reduce the
number of physical defects.
2. A change of curriculum which will permit the introduction of
work more nearly filling the needs of the children.

Results.

The psychologist may discover what the child entering the first
grade is like, if he also has the co-operation of a social service worker,
the doctor, the nurse, and the teacher, together with the parent.
Even then many children will not be understood, but, with so large
a group co-operating to give the child the best of opportunities much
better work should be done than has been accomplished in the past.
The psychologist stands in relation to the child's mental ability as
does the doctor to the physical condition of the child. While it is
not possible to know everything about a child, one can at least know
many of the qualities which are directly necessary to a child's success
in the first grade. For instance, a child who does not have enough
language to take and execute ordinary verbal commands is not likely
to work to his full capacity in regular grade work. A child, whose
imagery is distinctly auditory in character does not do well under a
teacher who makes her chief appeal to the eye, and the child with
a limited memory span, the child who might do very well where
material is stated in simple form, does not succeed at all when the
material is expressed in a more complex way. The child who is
deficient in any one of these fields, when associated with other
children of the group, suffers socially because of his apparent dullness,
for children are the keenest critics of their own group. The brightest
children do best when they are placed in competing groups of about
equal ability. The same may be said of the average children and
also of the dullest ones. It does not follow, however, that the groups
should be utterly isolated from each other, but only that they should
be isolated in classes for group instruction. The danger to the child
who is inferior on an intellectual scale is that he will believe himself
inferior in other respects. This inferiority does not follow at all,
and he may be more successful than his brighter brother in some
particular occupation, or in a particular social group.

The sorting of children into groups can be done very nicely on
an educational scale alone, but not until opportunity has been
created for the children to try educational work. The first morning
when the child appears in school as a stranger to his teachers there
is no way for him to be placed in the proper class, or to sit where
he ought to be. Only a trial will* show this. The psychologist, on
the other hand, brings to the work material which is ready for use
and which he is ready to apply on short notice. The child who is
slow but dull, will be placed in his proper group at once, because the
test will show him to be that kind. The tests are not omnipotent,
nor is the judgment of the psychologist without possibility of error,
but the chances are good that he will select the group in which
Johnny belongs and save time for the teacher in the presentation of
her work. It will be more economical when differentiation is made
in the curriculum, and undoubtedly such differentiation will be made,
as we come to understand the great amount of individual difference
common to an ordinary first grade group. It will be found that
the placement of a child in a group or class where the work can be
most efficiently arranged for him will be the greatest contribution of
the psychologist to the school. The child who is sidetracked because
of illness, poor physical condition, or any other reason, will be enabled
to do the best that is in him, through the investigation of the psychologist in the first place and secondly through the auxiliary teacher
who will tutor him. The loss of a prospective citizen, well-trained
and efficient, is too great to the community to warrant any other
measures than the best that can be given.
