Notes about Institutions for Defectives
========================================

F. Douglas Turner M.B. (Lond.) etc.
I am of opinion that the amount of Institution accommodation that will
be required in the future is much larger than is generally recognised. My
experience as a specialist in seeing patients in their own homes for the Essex
Mental Deficiency Committee has shown me the very large number of defectives
in one County alone that need and should have Institution care.
I believe tha,t large Institutions taking all grades of mental defect from the
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 33
lowest idiot to the higest type of feeble-minded are the only way of dealing with
defectives. The cases would necessarily be classified according to their mental
capacity in different blocks of buildings. 1 he small homes have done admirable
work at small expense, and have helped considerably in making some provision
for defectives, but it is to be remembered that few of them took low grade cases.
When, however, a public authority is dealing with defectives it has to take all
classes of paor it is no use. It is just as much the duty of the local authority
to provide for the paralysed idiot unable to feed or do anything for itself as to
segregate the good-looking feeble-minded girl who may become a danger to
society. When a County Authority, or two Counties combined, realise that they
will eventually have to provide for say a thousand defectives, it is inconceivable
that they will do this by means of homes scattered about the County with forty
or fifty patients in each. The expense would be prohibitive, the duplication of
staff for teaching and for cooking and supplies alone would make it impracticable, and the difficulty of supervision would make it unworkable. 1 he large numbers of defectives that will have to be dealt with in the future can only be dealt
with in the large Institution.
A valuable point in favour of the large Institution is that it enables the
patients to be better classified, according to their respective mental and physical
capacities. The larger the total number to be classified the easier it is to divide
them up so as to secure about the same degree of defect in each class. I think
the tendency will be to have Institutions containing a thousand or twelve hundred
patients, but personally I should prefer one with not more than six or seven
hundred, because I think this is the largest number a superintendent can keep in
actual touch with, and it is important he should have a personal interest in all
his patients.
Of necessity also the large Institution must take all grades of defect. The
County Authority with a thousand defectives to provide for cannot have one
Institution for those called feeble-minded, another for inbeciles, and another for
idiots. But there are better reasons than convenience. The all-grade Institution
is more economical. The high grades do the skilled work for the low grades,
the low grades do the unskilled work for the higher grades. An Institution
composed of high grade cases alone would be very nice, but there would be a
very great waste of labour. Much of their time would be taken up in doing
work that might easily be done by lower grade patients. For instance, it is a
waste of ,time for a boy who can make a brush to spend his time sandpapering
the back to make it smooth, when another boy who cannot make a brush and can
never learn to make one could do the sandpapering; or to keep a boy who can sole
a boot merely cleaning boots when there are other boys, who cannot sole a boot
and will never learn to, quite able to polish a boot. Many other instances of this
kind could be given. The principle applies to each trade that is taught. Those
who can do housework even though not very high grade, can do the housework
of that part of the Institution where there will be helpless idiot cases who can do
34 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
nothing for themselves. The nursery can find useful employment for some ot
the higher grade women helping under supervision to look after the children.
It is work the women like and it is good for them. An Institution confined
only to low grade cases would be very expensive if the whole of the labour had
to be supplied by paid staff. If the Institution takes all grades, then the better
patients will make all the clothing and boots, brushes, etc., do the laundry work
and supply the labour necessary to provide the vegetables and milk, for the lower
grade patients. There is another point in favour of the all-grade Institution,
which in practice saves trouble. Patients improve, patients deteriorate; a word
from the Superintendent sends them up or down one or more classes. The
change will take place much less often and will take much longer in the doing
if it means a transfer to another Institution.
One of the most important points in organisation is the number of classes in
which the patients shall be divided. Their classification must depend on mental
and physical capacity alone. I am referring to their life in the Institution and
not to the organisation for school work. That is a different matter, and as I
have already indicated you snould get in your workshops a mixing of grades if
you are to get the best results. There must, of course, be a male side and female
side to the Institution. On each side you will want at least the following clesses.
' First class ' means the highest grade mentally : First Class Adults, Second Class
Adults, Third Class Adults, Youths' Class, First Class School Children, Second
Class School Children, Nursery or Third Ciass Children, Adult Feeble and
Paralysed Class, Hospital It is worked out for an Institution of six to seven
hundred patients. A larger number will enable further improvements in classification to be made.
The Nursery Class should take the babies and the helpless cases the size of
children; as everyone with experience will know, size with this class of patient
is no guide to age. They may be any age. If placed on the female side of the
Institution it can be used as a combined class for male and female nursery cases.
The Youths' Class is for high and medium grade boys from about fourteen to
eighteen. Many boys of fourteen are too big or know too much to live any
longer with school boys, though they may still attend school for part of the day.
They are not big enough to be with adults. A separate day room, lavatory, and
bedroom is necessary. I am not sure the class corresponding to this is necessary
on the female side though I think it desirable, but in place of it, most Institutions will want a special class for the higher grade cases too vicious to mix with
the ordinary patients. I do not think a separate youths' class is necessary for
lower grade boys. It is not necessary to have separate classes for epileptic
defectives. They may go to the class indicated by their mental capacity. The
other defectives do not appear to mind the epileptics and the cases having the
worst and most frequent fits tend to deteriorate mentally and to sink to the lower
grade classes. In many places, the adult feeble and paralysed cases tend to drift
to the hospital and block that building. It is better if possible to have separate
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 35
accommodation for them and keep the Hospital free for the acute cases. The
hospital must provide separate accommodation for tubercular patients, but it is
necessary to have in addition isolation accommodation for dysentery. Dysentery
can be just as great a bugbear in an Institution for defectives as in one for insane
people. Isolation accommodation is also necessary for the ordinary infectious
diseases like scarlet fever. An Institution for defectives is as bad as an ordinary
school for spreading infection. If it is possible to arrange with the local sanitary
authority to receive these cases into their Infectious Hospital, it saves a good
deal of anxiety and gets them right out of the Institution and it is in my opinion
the best way of dealing with the matter. If this is not possible, a separate
isolation hospital is necessary with facilities for doing the whole of its own
laundry work and cooking.
The Board of Control have published suggested plans for mental deficiency
Institutions of three hundred and twenty beds, and six hundred and forty beds
so that it is unnecessary to go into these. A suggestion I would make is that
more day W.C. accommodation be allowed for the lower grade patients. In my
opinion the lower grades want one W.C. to seven patients if they are not paralysed or nursery cases. The nursery cases are generally treated like babies and
the paralysed cases mostly need special commodes.
The next thing to consider is occupation and training for the patients. Those
under fourteen will go to school, except some of the paralysed, nursery and very
low grade children, but most of those commonly called low grade will benefit
considerably by some kind of training. In the upper classes the school work
approximates to that of second standard in an ordinary school with plenty of
musical drill and dancing. Dancing even such a complicated thing as "The
Lancers" or "La Triomphe" is well learned and of exceptional benefit physically
and mentally. In all classes taking three R. work, every afternoon should be
devoted to manual work including, even for boys, sewing, making button holes,
etc. The ordinary manual occupations arc so well known I need not go into
them. The classes below these upper ones will be doing the elements of three
R. work. There should be plenty of simple object and conversational lessons;
let the children not only see but touch and use the things on which the lesson is
being given. Have special speech training lessons. The dancing can be nearly
as advanced as for the upper classes. Then there should be a class into which
doubtful cases can go, a kind of testing class. If after a probation here, it is
thought the child will do any good at three R. work it is sent up to the lowest
three R. class, but if it is decided that the child will never do any good at these
subjects it is better not to waste time trying to teach him but send the child to
the lower classes where the whole teaching is oral-manual, where in fact the
object is to train chiefly the patients' hands and legs. It does however
frequently pay to put a child you think will do fairly well at the three Rs., first
for a month or two into the oral manual class. It will wake him up, teach him
to carry himself properly and to use his hands and feet and certainly benefits
36 STUD1KS IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
his after-training. The personahty of tile teacher in the lower grade classes
counts tor much. She must have great energy and patience, but she must have
initiative also and be frequently thinking out fresh exercises, the simpler the
better. A lot of instruction for these children can be got out of a pair of steps,
an old box or two, a couple oi 9 inch wide planks, a small wheelbarrow, a box
ol skittles, a rug, a pillow, a skipping rope, and a good many wooden bricks of
various sizes. J_et everything be made in the Institution. The best size bricks
are four inches square so as to give the hands some work to do. Smaller bricks
are not heavy enough and do not stretch the lingers enough. In addition for
building and balancing have some 9" x 3" * 1" and some 4^" x 3" x 1". Have
an equal number of each painted with eacli oi the six brightest colours. Bright
colours are essential lor lower grade work, a fact not recognised in the Montessori apparatus. As the children become fourteen each case should be considered
separately. Some are still doing well at ordinary school subjects and may continue in the school classes ior another six months or a year but many or most
will benefit by going half-time into a proper shop where they will be taught
the hrst steps of a trade and if they get on at this work they should in my opinion
go ail day to the shop oil or before, reaching fifteen. With girls, their manual
work in school consists so much of needlework and laundry work which is the
very work they will probably be doing when they leave school, that there is not
the same need for them to leave the school classes for the industrial classes so
early as the boys. In regard to manual occupations for adult defectives, an old
established Institution is in a little different position to that of a new Institution. The new Institution will not, to begin with, have a large number of
patients available for occupations and it will be necessary to concentrate those
they have on the work that must be done. Their efforts will therefore be
devoted to house work, that is making beds, sweeping up, setting tables, washing up and cleaning generally for males and females, and to boot repairing,
garden and farm work for males, and laundry work and needle work including
iepairs for females. As the numbers increase, the other ordinary occupations
can gradually be added, such as making suits and dresses, brushes, baskets,
mats, furniture, cutting up firewood. Later, printing and a tinsmith's shop
may be added, and if the Institution is ambitious and has sufficient labour, the
weaving of cloth, blankets, and shirting, as at the Western Counties Institution.
Far more, however, will be learned about industrial occupations by a day at
Darenth Industrial Colony or at the Western Counties Institution than by any
number of written articles. So far as my experience goes, the following are
a few practical points. Basket and hamper making is one of the most difficult
occupations. It is not easy to get the baskets a proper shape as there is no
fiame or shape to make 011, it is all a matter of hand and eye. Brush making
when confined to the wire-drawn brushes is one of the easiest occupations. For
an ordinary scrub it does not matter much even if the amount of stuff in each
hole varies a good deal. It does matter, though, for a clothes or hair brush.
STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY. 37
Tiic pitch-work brushes are more difficult. Yarn, wool-bordered and wool
mats made 011 a loom are 1101 an easy occupation, but it is a paying one, and
picking the fibre is useful work for quite low grade patients. A loom makes
better mats than a frame, but the frame is easier, though only yarn mats can
be made 011 it. There is 110 difficulty in finding a ready sale for these mats
whereas the wool rugs made on canvas in school, though they are a good occupation and one the patients enjoy, are not easy to dispose of in any quantity.
The wool costs so much. The carpenter's shop will find plenty to do in the
way of repairs, but the aim of this shop should be the making of every bit of
furniture the Institution requires except bedsteads. Ihey should not be satisfied with tables, cupboards, and chairs, but should make staff chests of drawers,
wardrobes, washstands, sideboards, etc. Wood carving is not perhaps an
occupation for every Institution, but where a good trainer is available it is
interesting work for the patients and pays well. Begin with chip carving and
go on to relief work later. In the girls' needlework department aim at making
the patients' dresses and every bit of underclothing, male or female, that the
Institution wants in the same way that the tailor's shop makes all the suits
and men's uniform. Stockings and boys' jerseys are also knitted in the girls'
department. Stocking knitting is easily picked up, though monotonous work.
Jersey knitting is difficult. In the laundry, which will of course be a machine
one, it is best to have the washing department cut off from the ironing part,
then male labour can be used in the former, where the work is heavy, and
female labour in the latter. In most cases it is better not to keep the girls at
laundry work morning and afternoon, but to let them put in half the day at
needlework. Garden work and farm work naturally fall to the men and absorb
a lot of low as well as high grade labour. The girls can only be employed at
garden work in a mixed Institution if their part of the garden is well shut off
?from the male side. The girls enjoy it the greater part of the year and are
healthier lor it. Chickens are best looked after by girls.
Amusement is as necessary as work for defectives but the desire for it has
to be stimulated or many will sit round quite contented to do nothing. For
exercise for the males, football, cricket, gymnasium and athletic sports are good.
I have not had experience of boxing. The girls, however, are not nearly so
keen on exercise. They will play cricket after a fashion, they will kick a
football about to keep warm and they seem to like rounders. Lately we have
tried hockey and they seem to like this best. Tennis and croquet they take
little interest in. A a matter of fact, girls, especially those who are grown up,
seem to prefer doing crotchet and knitting lace in their spare time. There
should be a dance once a week or fortnight in the winter, combined with musical
chairs, and songs and sketches for the lower grade who cannot dance, but barn
dances, military two-steps, veletas, etc., are easily learned. A Brass Band is
a necessity; it should consist almost entirely of patients. All the better patients
can learn whist; an occasional whist drive with small prizes is appreciated; a
few can play chess, many draughts, and a great many snap, ludo, etc.
38 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
We find that in an Institution taking all grades, the proportion of staff to
patients works out at one to five. This includes the whole staff, teachers, industrial trainers, artizans, and domestic staff as well as attendants. Whereas the
very low grade patients need a large number of attendants to look after them,
the expense of looking after the high grade cases is increased by the necessity
of having teachers and industrial trainers. Every trade taught needs one properly qualified tradesman, not an amateur to teach it. If the shop is so large
as to require more than one staff, the second one can be an unskilled or partly
skilled man or woman who has been taught in the shop itself. In the schools
it is necessary to have certificated and uncertificated teachers for the higher
classes, but for the lower grade classes where the work is oral-manual, school
attendants can be successfully employed.

Bibliography

:Reference type:  Journal Article
:Record-number: 17208
Author: Turner, F. D.
Year: 1920
Title: Notes about Institutions for Defectives
Journal: Stud Ment Ineffic
Volume: 1
Issue: 2
Pages: 32-38
Epub-Date: 1920/04/15
Date: Apr 15
Short-title: Notes about Institutions for Defectives
Alternate Journal: Stud Ment Ineffic
PMCID: PMC5109084 
Accession-number: 28909962
Notes: Turner, F Douglas
eng
England
Stud Ment Ineffic. 1920 Apr 15;1(2):32-38.
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5109084/
Name-of-database: PubMed
Language: eng
Copyright:Attachment: 	internal-pdf://0164392850/Notes about Institutions for Defectives.pdf



