The Definition and Diagnosis of Mental Deficiency
=====================================================

Part II. I /
:Auhtor: Cyril Burt, M.A., 
Psychologist to the London County Council.

DIAGNOSIS OF TEMPERAMENTAL DEFICIENCY.
----------------------------------------Suspected deficiency of temperament, which provides by far the more
perplexing problems, we may perhaps consider first. It is here that the
psychographic scheme need's to be followed with great thoroughness and to be
filled in with greatest detail. With these cases the question as to degree of
deficiency resolves itself into two issues: how unstable is the patient, and what
amount of instability is necessary to form a ground for his certification?
If, with some authorities, we restrict mental defect to defect of intelligence
alone, then it might seem that the criterion for temperamental or moral defect was
given in the statutory clause relating to the moral imbecile. The instability, it
may foe urged, is certifiable as deficiency when it is so extreme as to issue in
incorrigible vice or crime. But, unfortunately for this interpretation, \icious and
criminal propensities, however violent and refractory they may be, form, according to the statute, no ground for certification, unless coupled with signs of early
and permanent defect. Hence, if mental defect implies inadequacy of intelligence
alone, the diagnosis after all will turn upon the question. is the patient s
intellectual inadequacy sufficientlv profound to be characterised as deficiency*
If, however, as I have urged, the term mental defect be extended to cover
deficiencies of temperament, as well as of intelligence, then temperamental
instability is not to be identified merely with moral imbecility : it falls also under
the definition of feeblemindedness. To be certifiable, such instability need not
of necessity include vicious or criminal behaviour. It need only be so pronounced
as to necessitate care and control in the interests of the patient and the community.

This being so, I suggest that the same developmental level be adopted for the
temperamental defective as I shall presently propose for the intellectual defective,
namely, a mental age of about 8 or 9. This limit relates to institutional cases in
adult life, that is, to persons who have passed the calendar age of sixteen. For
younger persons the same ratio may be adopted, namely, about half the actual
age; and for supervision cases a level proportionately higher. A boy, therefore,
of fourteen who is so unstable in temperament as to -need the t>ame control and
supervision as a child of seven or less, is, so far as degree of instability is concerned, prima facie, a defective in the technical sense.

It must, however, be demonstrated that the apparent defect is genuinely
mental, by which I understand that it should be both inborn and also pretty
general. A child's delinquency may arise as a reaction to friction at home,
or as a transitory phase of adolescence; or it may affect one instinct only, for
example, acquisitiveness or sex; I should not then cons:der the child mentally
defective. That the defect is inborn may be presumed, as the Act suggests, from
the fact that it emerged early and appears permanent,?the rough test of permanence being indifference to punishment, and, I would add, to other.available modes
of rational treatment; but more cogent evidence, such as may be gained by
mental analysis or by mental tests, is always desirable. That the defect is general
can hardly, indeed, be shown at all without such analysis and tests. But upon this
second qualification?the generality of the defect?some, it is true, would not
insist. I should, however, argue briefly as follows. First, on theoretical grounds:
if only one instinct or emotion is affected, even if the affection be inborn, it yet
can hardly ibe described as a defect of temperament; and if it is not a defect of
temperament, it is not a mental defect in the sense in which I understand the
phrase, that is, a defect which affects some general aspect of the mind as a whole.
Secondly, upon practical grounds: if the defect affects one instinct or emotion
alone, then in the present state of scientific knowledge regarding those several
tendencies, we can hardly affirm with certainty that it is, in any particular case,
inborn or permanent; and, indeed, the balance of probability would usually be
that it was not.

What tests and methods are available, then, for diagnosing the presence and
measuring the intensity of inborn general instability ?

The methods are numerous, but not reliable. In the psychological laboratory
the degree of emotional instability can be estimated in quantitative form by recording various physical and mental responses to standard emotional stimuli. Changes
in pulse or respiration, slight involuntary movements or slight secretions of sweat,
induced by the report of a pistol or the application of a pin, can be accurately
registered and measured. These records have of late been used with practical
success in the selection of candidates for the air-force. Individuals showing
reactions beyond a certain limit have been rejected as of too unsteady a temperament. In the diagnosis of hysterical and neurotic tendencies, experiments upon
associative reactions and with the so-called psycho-galvanic reflex have afforded
valuable results. All these investigations, however, are still in their infancy,. It
would be impossible to formulate the borderline for normality in terms of an
average galvanic duration. Further, the technique requires special apparatus and
special experience, which are not at the command of all. The Porteus Maze
tests, although designed originally to measure practical intelligence, throw much
light upon temperamental difficulties. They require only the simplest materials,
and are too little known in this country. On the whole, however, for the diagnosis
of temperamental deficiency the best guide is expert judgment and methodical
observation.

The chief symptoms of instability to be noted1 in children I have enumerated
at length elsewhere * Here I need only recapitulate the principal headings and
rubrics.

Observations may best be directed1 in order to two main levels of activity,
hereditary instincts and emotions, and acquired sentiments and complexes. The
former include the various manifestations of fear, of anger (pugnacity, destruo
tiveness, violent or sulky temper), of curiosity (including the hunting and
wandering instincts), of disgust (often in defectives conspicuously absent), of
affection (love, in the sense of tenderness), of pride (in the sense of assertiveness,
vanity and self-display), of humility (submissiveness, and certain suggestibility),
of sex, of sociability (gregariousness, the herd-instinct, response to the presence
of persons), of joy and laughter, of sorrow and crying, and1 perhaps of the
acquisitive instinct (hoarding, pilfering, etc.), and the constructive instinct. The
strength, the ease, the mode, with which each of these is exhibited, should be
observed. The average strength of the whole may be taken as indicating the
patient's general emotionality. But specific tendencies should also be remarked.

It should be noted whether the emotionality, though inwardly strong, is
suppressed, and whether the predominant emotions are of the weak, negative,
asthenic type (fear, sorrow, and the like) ; or whether the emotionality is
unrcpressed, and the instincts predominating are of the aggressive type (anger,
vanity, assertiveness, and so forth). The acquired sentiments or interests should
then be analysed : those for persons?for self, father, mother, and other individuals
within the family and without (brothers, sisters, teachers, playfellows) ; those
for concrete but impersonal objects and institutions (toys, clothes, money,
Possessions, school, etc.), and, finally?if the child's intellect is sufficiently
advanced for such to have been formed?sentiments for more abstract objects
and ideals (work, duty, virtue, authority, reputation, religion, the community as
a whole, etc.). It should be discovered whether these sentiments are repressed
(forming 'complexes ') or unrepressed; whether they are sentiments of love, of
hatred, or perhaps ambivalent; and whether they are well co-ordinated; and
whether they are perhaps systematically organised around some master passion,
good or bad, that may serve at once to consolidate the entire character, to give
Purpose to the entire mental life, and to harmonise and sublimate the various
instincts, so that they are no longer discrete impulses, but subdued to some higher
aim. Nett strength of character or will may then be expressed as the ratio of the
stability of the controlling sentiments to the instability of the several instincts
and emotions.

Such analyses of character may seem elaborate; but they are indispensable.
Indeed, it can hardly be reiterated too often that the mere fact of abnormal
conduct is not in itself a sufficient proof of mental defect. Its basis must be
probed and explored. A child may be an ingrained vagrant or a habitual thief;
he may have causeless fits of violence or show himself inconceivably cruel; he
may be utterly beyond his parents' control, or have been convicted of repeated;
sexual or even murderous assaults ; punishments and rewards may have no
* See Child. Study, Ice. tit suf. ' The Unstable Child.'
influence whatever upon his vicious habits and criminal propensities; and yet a
close study and a careful treatment of his case may at length reveal that these
tendencies were phases only, often fully explained by his environment and his
history, and neither permanent in themselves, nor the outcome of any inborn
general deficiency of intellect or temperament!.

It is to be remembered that a large proportion of individuals of all ages
among the poorer classes, and a large proportion of adolescents among all classes,
display tendencies which, in the "eyes of those accustomed only to the society of
cultured adults, strongly suggest instability. Hence, criteria likely to convict
of temperamental deficiency an appreciable percentage of the population?say,
more than one-half per cent.?must be rejected. And, personally, in the absence
of any concomitant approach to intellectual deficiency, I should not be eager to
consider a person temperamentally defective, unless the instability was associated
with causal indications, clearly pronounced and fairly permanent,?symptoms,
for example, of chorea, of epilepsy, of hyperthyroidism, or marked psycho-pathic
or neuro-pathic tendencies, occurring either in the patient himself, or among his
immediate relatives.

One other problem under this head has still to be decided. A person may
show a definite instability of temperament, but a normal or nearly normal
intellect. Should such a case be certified as mental defective in the legal sense? ?
Those who have to deal with delinquents, where the alternatives are usually a
prison or reformatory, on the one hand, and a home or guardianship, on the
other, will generally be disposed to certify. Those who have to examine children
as they enter or leave the special schools, will usually be inclined to refrain.
Upon theoretical grounds, the former course is no doubt justifiable. But, upon
practical grounds, I had rather err, if error is unavoidable, in the latter direction.
To accommodate side by side, whether in a school or an institution, a few highly
unstable children with a group of ordinary defectives or imbeciles, who are often
excitable and almost always suggestible, is to risk undoubted harm to both
parties: such an association cannot fail to impair the intelligence of the one and
the moral character of the other. The law has always been intellectualistic. It
has been framed upon the assumption that human conduct and efficiency are
dependent solely upon reason and intelligence. The excuse of the over-emotional,
the plea of the victim of temperament,
Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor, i
finds no echo of sympathy or comprehension in the statute book. Until the
social menace of the unstable is more clearly realised, until, to those whose
disabilities are temperamental rather than intellectual, legal recognition and
institutional accommodation are more freely accorded, any procedure must of
necessity be but a makeshift.

Fortunately the problem of purely temperamental deficiency confronts the
certifying officer only upon rare occasions. With intellectual deficiency diagnosis
is simpler. By the use of tests of intelligence a decision can be reached with
far greater certainty and far greater speed. As before, acquired capacities are to
be carefully discriminated from those which are inborn. Poor attainments do
not always indicate poor abilities; and, while the dull are usually backward, the
backward are not necessarily dull.

Tests of acquired attainments will be chiefly scholastic in character, although
tests of general information and out-of-scliool knowledge are often highly
suggestive. The best plan is to assemble ten questions for every age?ten words
that can be read, ten words that can be spelt, ten mental sums that can be worked
?by average or median* children of each year of school age. Attainments can
thus be measured in terms either of standards or of an educational age. Inborn
general intelligence and acquired scholastic attainments are, as a rule, closely
correlated. The normal school standard can be deduced from the child's
calendar age by the equation:?Standard = Age?6. A child of ten, therefore,
who is working in Standard II., and, not being promoted thither merely for age
or size, is able to do the work of Standard II., is not likely (except possibly oai
rarer grounds of character), to be defective, though he is very probably backward.
On the other hand, through absence, ill-health, slow promotion, or other cause,
a child's apparent attainments may be much below the level of his intelligence.
For these cases, some scheme designed for the measurement of inborn ability
is necessary. The most useful is the Binet-Simon scale. The tests are far from
perfect; and need drastic revision before they can be legitimately applied to
English children.f Intelligence is measured by this scale in terms of mental
age. A deviation from the normal is expressed as a backwardness of so many
years, that is as so many years of retardation behind the average. The child's
method of attacking the test-problems is even more significant than the mere
correctness of his replies. But it is convenient to have a single summary measure.

Of all those proposed, the most convenient expressions, for both ability andl
attainment, are those which may be termed the child's educational and mental
ratios. The mental ratio is obtained by dividing the child's mental age by his
chronological age. Thus, a child aged 12 years 6 months, with a mental age of
7-5 years has a mental ratio, or intelligence quotient, of 60 per cent. The
educational ratio is computed similarly. On the average, as investigation will
show, this ratio tends to be constant throughout school life. Thus, if at the
age of 5 a child has a mental age of 4, and, therefore, a mental ratio of 80 per
cent., then at the age of 10 he will probably have a mental age of 8, and have
reached Standard II.; at the age of 15 he will have a mental age of 12, and1,
having left school somewhat low in Standard V., will probably, throughout his
adult life, progress little if at all beyond this level.

What degree of backwardness is to be taken as indicative of mental deficiency?
?This question is most easily resolved iby a statistical survey, by a psychological
census, as it were, of all the children in a typical group of schools, special and
ordinary elementary. Such a survey I have carried out, both for educational
and for general intelligence:, in a representative London area!.} The' results
* For the rough standardisation of tests it is not necessary to test all the children in a
given age-group, but only the middle children in the middle class : e.g., for age 10, only those
of that age left in Standard IV., after eliminating, say, the ten highest and ten dullest in that
class.

t A revised version of this scale, including a set of scholastic tests, prepared with the
assistance of Dr Simon and a number of London school teachers, will, I hope, shortly be
issued by the London County Council.

t The Distribution and Relations of Educational Abilities. P. S. King and Sons, 2s. 6d.
shortieSU*tS ^ *uvest*Sat'on uPon distribution of general intelligence will be publishei
reveal a striking overlap between so-called normals and so-called defectives. The
brightest children in the special schools are distinctly brighter than the dullest
children in the ordinary schools. Apart from a few rare exceptions belonging to
a definite pathological type, there is between normals and defectives no clear
distinction; ho hiatus, no gulf, no gap. The one group merges into the other
by insensible gradations, as night into day. The point of demarcation, therefore,
is purely a matter of convenience and convention, as artificial and as arbitrary
as the moment we term midnight or the hour we select for lighting up.

Where is this point to be fixed? The replies to this question conflict and
differ almost beyond belief. In the report of an American Census for 1910 the
proportion of defectives, both within and without institutions, was put at 0.2
per cent. Binet, on the other hand, assessed the percentage as " somewhere in
the neighbourhood of 5.0 per cent. " ; and a group of American psychologists
have more recently given a figure almost as large. One estimate thus recognises
twenty-five times as many defectives as another. Upon what scale is an education
authority, such as that for the County of London, to provide when one calculation
would declare that between the ages contemplated, 22,500 wTill be defective, and
another only 900?


Considerations, based upon current practice and' confirmed by actual
experience, concur with a priori inferences to suggest that, in the case of children,
the most convenient borderline to adopt is that indicated by a mental ratio of 70
per cent. A child who has less than seven-tenths of the abilities possessed by
average children of his age is to be regarded as mentally defective; thus, a child
aged 10 who is backward by more than three years, and is, therefore, below the
mental level of an average child of 7, is a fit candidate for a special school. A
child who is backward by less than this amount should be educated in a class for
backward children in the ordinary school. A child whose ratio is under 40 per
cent, proves, as a rule, to be ineducable. But again the borderline is purely
artificial.

This is equivalent, at any rate in an industrial town, to cutting off the
lowest 15 per mille. of the school population. And for such an area my definition
of the intellectually defective child would be one who for intelligence ranks
among the lowest per cent, of his age group. The definition should doubtless
vary from one type of area to another; and provisionally should depend upon
the amount of accommodation available. Too often high-grade cases, examined
at an early date or by a certifying officer with a high standard of normality, are
accepted, and transferred to a special school; then cases of a lower grade,
presented for examination later on, are forced to remain in the ordinary school,
or even at home, because the milder cases have usurped their room. Such a lack
of co-ordination is manifestly unjust. There should be one weight and1 one
measure. The merit of any criterion lies not so much in its absolute character,
which is arbitrary, but in its uniform observance, which is essential.

CRUCIAL TESTS FOR CHILDREN.
--------------------------With the line of demarcation here suggested, the following tests in the
Binet-Simon scale l>ecome borderline or crucial tests for the several ages: age
5, distinguishing pretty and ugly faces in a picture; age 6, performing a triple
order and naming the four primary colours (a test assigned' by Binet to normals
aged 7, but far easier for London children) ; copying a diamond or transcribing
three words of 3 to 6 letters; age 8, recognising 3 pennies and 3 halfpennies
as 4^d. and the missing features in unfinished portraits; age 9, giving simple
differences between concrete objects (wood and glass, etc.) ; age 10, naming the
months, the date, and perhaps giving actual change for a twopenny article out of
a shilling (the coins necessitating the use of a sixpenny piece as well as the odd
coppers) ; age 11, counting backwards from 20 to 1, or repeating six numbers
(one trial correct out of three) ; age 12, arranging 5 weights in order; age 13,
building two sentences toi contain 3 words; age 14, drawing Binet's two designs
from memory, and perhaps explaining the absurd sentences. In terming these tests
crucial I do not, of course, imply that failure or success in the one test specified!
for a given age can decide the question of deficiency; all I suggest is this: with
the complete series of tests, arranged in the order of their difficulty for defective
children, a child who fails with tests easier than those mentioned is presumably
" deficient," and a child who answers harder tests is presumably " normal,"
that is, not necessarily of average ability, quite possibly distinctly backward, but
as regards intelligence not mentally deficient.

For measuring the intelligence of older cases above the borderline?for
example, dull or backward unstables?the Binet tests are unsatisfactory. 1 prefer
some form of reasoning test. A graded age-scale of reasoning tests, together with
a revised version of the Binet scale, will be found in Dr Ballard's recent book on
Mental Tests.

For mental deficiency among adults the legal definition differs wholly from
that given for mental deficiency among children. The former hinges on economic
competence; the latter on school progress. More than half of the children
relegated to special schools as unable to benefit by the instruction in the ordinary
school have yet sufficient ability to float in society when they leave, and, with
tolerable success, to earn their livings and manage their homes.

If for adults we retained the criterion above suggested for school cases,
then, assuming, as has commonly been done, that intelligence advances little, if
at all, beyond the age of 16, we should have, as the upper limit of mental
deficiency for those above school age, the mental age of n. This is a high
level. But the borderline suggested by the American Psychological Association
is higher still, namely, a mental age of 12. An upper limit so comprehensive
would include among the mentally defective an excessive proportion of the
population; and seems plainly inadmissible. Psychological tests have been
recently applied upon an enormous scale to recruits for the American Army; and
the results show that in the United States the general average of the population
lies about a mental age of 13. In this country many are below this level. Rural
labourers in Warwickshire, dock labourers in Liverpool, and domestic servants
of the poorest type can, in a benign environment, manage themselves and their
affairs, unsupervised and uncontrolled, with a mental age, as given by my tests,
of only 8 or 9. Provisionally, therefore, while accommodation for adult defectives
is so small, and while ignorance of the psychology of borderline cases is so great,
I should hesitate to consider a person defective on the ground of intelligence
alone, unless his mental age were only 8 or less, that is to say, unless his mental
ratio were below 50 per cent., and his attainments only half those of an average
adult.

This means that many, who will not be deemed' defective in maturity, are
during childhood certified, stigmatised, and segregated. Our special schools, in
fact, appear to contain cases of three grades: (1) Children with mental ratios
between 40 and 50 per cent. ; these will fall amongst the lowest ^ per cent, of the:
population, and are likely to become institution cases; (2) Children with mental
ratios between 50 and 60 per cent.; these fall among the next i per cent, of the
population, and perhaps may best be treated', when they leave, as supervision
cases; (3) Children with mental ratios between 60 and' 70 per cent.; these fall
among the remaining ^ per cent, of the defective population; and, in an average
environment, and apart from temperamental defects, will manage quite
satisfactorily to provide for themselves. One ' mentally defective ' boy in the
provinces is now, at the age of 19, earning ,<?300 a year?a far higher income
than that of the teacher who taught him. Whether this third group should not
be termed, even during school years, 4 educationally defective ' rather than
' mentally defective,' and whether they should not be taught in backward classes
in an ordinary or ' intermediate ' school (when such classes or such schools are
provided) rather than be associated with those whose life must lie forever in an
institution, is an obvious question; but, it is an issue which we need! not here
discuss.

CRUCIAL TESTS FOR ADULTS.
-----------------------With the lower line of demarcation, thus recommended for adults, the
crucial tests in the Binet-Simon scale are those allotted to the ages of 8 and
9. If a person over 16 can repeat the months of the year, and1 give the date
with approximate exactness, name correctly all the commoner coins of the realm
(including a half-crown and a two-shilling piece) and give correct change for a
twopenny article out of a shilling, repeat six numbers and count backwards from
20 to 1, read Binet's newspaper extract and recall six items from what he has
read, then he is, in my view, hardly to be judged an institution case, unless
special circumstances in his home environment, in his physical condition, or in his
temperament and character are present in addition to disabilities in intelligence.*

SUPPLEMENTARY SOURCES OF EVIDENCE.
----------------------------------These reservations, however, are all-important. No adult should be classed
as mentally defective solely on the results of mental tests. If the patient's
condition were so gross that the findings of the Binet scale were alone conclusive,
then probably the application of the Binet scale would in this instance be
superfluous: the diagnosis could be reached at a glance. If, 011 the other hand,
* It is but just to add that the six tests, selected by Binet as crucial, are somewhat harder :
namely, arranging weights, answering his ' difficult ' questions, building a sentence to
contain 3 words, interpreting his pictures, and finding rhymes. No patients from institutions
tested by him and Dr Simon, could pass more than three of these six. In one of the bestknown English institutions for the mental defective, however, I have found a girl ot only sixteen
who could pass all these tests. She gave as rhymes to ' obey,' such words as ' decay,' ' delay,'
hurray and her sentence ran as follows : " The Houses of Parliament in London stand by
the River Thames, and cost a lot of money to build." There were no complaints against her
conduct or character. Certainly, she was happier and more helpful in the colony than she
would have been outside. But, considering the number of low-grade cases awaiting admission
to institutions of this kind, such an instance points urgently to the need of some uniform
standard, generally accepted, and, for the present, not too lofty.

The patient were so near the borderline that a methodical examination of
intelligence seemed indispensable, then other fields of enquiry should be explored
and other sources of information searched. These sources of evidence fall under
half-dozen separate and familiar heads; and should be kept distinct. Among
them, the psychological examination?conducted chiefly by means of standardised
tests for intelligence, for special abilities, for school knowledge, and for practical
knowledge and general information?is undoubtedly the most helpful source,
but it is by no means the only source. And with adults psychological tests are
even less conclusive than with children. In addition to:

1. the psychological tests,
2. the physical examination (which may include, beside the usual medical examination, anthropometric measurements, inspection for stigmata, laboratory tests of the sense-organs and of the nervous system),
3. the family history (including particularly, of course, such details as may shed light on the child's Physical and mental heredity), 
4. the personal history, pre-natal and post-natal (including the conditions of gestation and' birth, the date of sitting up, of walking, of talking, of dentition and of pubescence, the general course of the child's development, and the incidence and after-effects of his childish illnesses),
5. the report of school attendance, progress and conduct, 
6. of moral and social behaviour,
7. of economic and vocational efficiency, and, finally, 
8. of the material and moral environment to be faced in and out of the home, 

These all contribute data which should be weighed and collated! before the diagnosis is
made, before the patient's ability to manage himself and his affairs, or his need!
for permanent care and control, can be satisfactorily determined. The various
sources of information possess a very different value. The physical examination
usually has a negative value, since ill-health or sensory defects are sometimes
sufficient to explain an appearance of deficiency. The family history is often
too uncertain to be helpful. The developmental history, where reliable, may be
suggestive or confirmatory in a positive diagnosis, or explanatory in negative
diagnosis. Moral and vocational failure is too frequently influenced by environmental conditions to have more than a suggestive worth. Hence, positive evidence
from two or three of these vaguer sources may, even when unanimous, yet be
inconclusive; but, combined with positive evidence from the psychological tests,
additional evidence from one other source alone may be final. Seldom is it
possible, or even necessary, to obtain satisfactory evidence from every source;
but evidence from all the sources that may be available, will, in the majority of
typical cases of general deficiency, be found affirmative.
