Report of the Pennsylvania Hospital for the Insane, Philadelphia
=================================================================

340 REVIEWS.

Through the kindness of Dr Kirkbride, the Medical Superin-
tendent, we have received the last Report of this hospital.
This hospital is now in its thirty-seventh year, having been
founded in 1841.

During this period 7,427 persons of unsound mind have
been received into it.
During last year the total number of patients in the
hospital was 679, the highest number at a time being 451,
and the lowest 397 ; whilst the average number under treatment
during the whole of this period amounts to 210 males and 218
females.

Careful statistical tables are given, relating to the number
of cases since the foundation of the hospital.

The form of Insanity mostly prevalent is Mania, the num-
ber being 3,359. There are 20 patients registered as havinfy
suffered from delirium ; but we do not recognise this as a
variety of Insanity, and cannot separate it from the form of
madness it usually accompanies.

Everything appears to be here done for the care and treat-
ment of those mentally afflicted.

Much stress in the Report is laid upon the usefulness
to which all who are employed in an asylum can devote them-
selves in their various avocations.

The Repoit before us enters into the various expenditures
during the year, and concludes with a number of well-drawn-
up and arranged principles for the guidance of " those who
are labouring to improve the condition of the insane."
We heartily endorse all these recommendations and thank
the Medical Superintendent for his valuable Report.
