The Late Samuel Warren, Q.C., D.C.L., P.R.S., Master In Lunacy
===============================================================

329

Ix is our melancholy task to record the death of this
distinguished lawyer and author. He has been the^ subject of
so much unfair criticism, that we consider it an imperative
duty to do justice to his undoubtedly remarkable talents and
merit; at the same time, we are ready to admit that he was
not exempt from the ordinary share of human frailty, and that
he was somewhat elated by his literary success.

Master Warren was before the public for many years, not
only as a lawyer of great eminence, but also as a most popular
novelist. He was the son of a Wesleyan minister, and was born
at Denbigh in 1807. We will speak of him first in his pro-
fessional capacity. At the University of Edinburgh he studied
for the medical profession, but he changed his mind and subse-
quently entered at the Temple as a law student. He was
called to the Bar in 1837, having previously published a
valuable work entitled " Introduction to Law Studies. He
afterwards wrote on the Law of Court Martial and the Practice
of Election Committees. He was appointed a Queen s Ctaunse
in 1851, and was made Kecorder of Hull in 1852. He was
returned to Parliament, as member for Midhurst in the on-
servative interest, in 1856, and continued to represent that
borough till 1859, when he retired on Lord Chelmsford s con-
ferring on him the dignified and responsible office of Master m
Lunacy, which he held till his death on the> 24th July last.
For this judicial post he was eminently qualified, not only by is
legal attainments, but also by his profound knowledge of
human nature, which is so conspicuous throughout his works
of fiction, and by his having devoted especial attention to
psychological studies.

From having frequently attended Commissions in Lunacy
over which he presided, we can bear ample testimony to his
courtesy, to the extreme care with which he sifted evidence,
and to the conscientious zeal, truthfulness, and discrimination
with which he conducted the inquiiies.

As a writer of fiction there cannot be a question as to his
very high merits. Two of his works," The Diary of a Late Phy-
sician," and "Ten Thousand a Year," which were published in
parts in Blackwood's Magazine, held the public in almost breath-
less interest from month to month. In spite of many exagge-
rations and medical mistakes, easily forgiven in a very young
man?for he was no more than 23 years of age when he wrote
" The Diary of a Late Physician "?this work evinces a remark-
able knowledge of human nature, manifests his early taste for
psychological study, and shows a marvellous insight into the
workings of the human mind. The mental struggles of a power-
ful mind are admirably pourtrayed in the story of " The States-
man." Again, the description of a young lady who became cata-
leptic from the effects of a clap of thunder?which, we learnt
from the author, was founded on fact?shows his power of
describing the influence of the mind on the body. But the most
striking feature in his novels is the high moral tone and religious
tendency which is maintained throughout, without the slightest
suspicion of cant. Neither was he tainted by the materialistic
philosophy of the present day. It is but just a year since we
received a letter from him, in which he says: "You and I are
at one on the subject [Materialism]. His [Tyndall's] design was
not only to unsettle, but destroy belief. . . Let me quote a
sentence from the great Pascal. . . There is light enough for
those whose sincere desire is to see, and little enough to con-
found those of an opposite disposition." With these words we
conclude our notice of Samuel Warren.
