The Functions of the, Brain
============================



:Type:REVIEWS
:author:David Ferrier, M.D., F.R.S.

London Smith, Elder, & Co.

Dr Ferrier is well known as an indefatigable and painstaking
cerebral physiologist, and in his recent work we have a detailed
and comprehensive account of all that is known relating to the
functions of the nervous system. He also furnishes us with the
particulars of the experiments which he has recently made,
with the view of elucidating some of the most difficult problems
in physiology. He has moreover, in common with other physiological psychologists, had the presumption to suppose that
the recent researches and conflicting experiments made both in
this country and on the Continent, with regard to the precise
centres of sensation and motion, warrant us in inferring that the
mental faculties are but functions of the brain. Whilst fully
admitting the credit due to Dr Ferrier for his unwearied
industry, we are at a loss to understand the exaggerated and
unqualified praise which has been accorded to him by the
medical press. One recent reviewer in the Lancet asserts that
Dr Ferrier "has thrown a flood of light" on his subject. He
fail to see this, and fear that the flood of light existed only in
the imagination of the writer. We are glad to find, howevei,
that Dr Ferrier himself does not speak in so confident a man-
ner, for he modestly and candidly observes, in referring, in his
introductory chapter, to recent researches, that " W e are still
only on the threshold of the inquiry; and it may be questioned
whether the time has even yet arrived for an attempt to ex-
plain the mechanism of the brain and its functions. There
have been no great discoveries since those of Sir Charles
Bell and Marshall Hall. Modern observers have only followed
in the wake of Sir Charles Bell; they have done little more
than trace the nervous tracts of sensation and motion which he
discovered, somewhat nearer to the periphery of the brain.

Moreover, the conclusions drawn by Dr terrier from his
numerous experiments rest on insufficient grounds. In electri-
fying different parts of the cerebral substance, it is very possi-
ble that the currents do not excite the cells, but the contiguous
nervous fibres. It must also be remembered that if a cineritious
portion of the brain be cut away, movements may be caused by
electrifying the white texture of the convolutions. If, then, the
centres of motion and sensation cannot be determined, what
right have Dr Ferrier and other physiological psychologists to
assume that they can locate the higher faculties of the mind in
the grey cortex of the brain ? One of the highest authorities, Dr.
Brown-Sequard, has concluded, after years of patient research,
that the brain acts as a whole and not in parts. It does seem
most illogical to suppose that a substance like the grey cortex
of the brain, which is of a uniform structure throughout, can be
portioned out into different organs ; and yet we are expected to
believe that one portion is the seat of what is named ideation
f a manufactory of ideas) another of memory, and so on. This
is a revival of Grail's system, and the diagram of a skull, mapped
out in divisions, given in Dr Ferrier's book, reminds us of the
phrenological busts which were so conspicuous many years ago
in Deville's shop in the Strand.

Before concluding, we cannot refrain from noticing a useless
and inconclusive experiment which Dr Ferrier made on a
monkey. After removing the whole of the occipital lobes of its
brain, he gravely tells us that it impaired the animal's appetite.
The wonder is that poor Jacko, after such a shock to his nervous
system, had any appetite left.
