Psychological Retrospect
==========================

A Committee of the House is at the present time sitting, with
the intention of repealing the Lunacy Laws. It was granted on
the application of Mr. Dillwyn. At this early period of the
sitting we cannot possibly give an idea of what evidence will be
heard, or what conclusion they will arrive at, but in our next
number we shall go fully into the matter.

Homicidal Insanity has been much discussed of late, in the
public as well as medical papers, and several cases, interesting
from a psychological point of view, have occurred. We want
to call special attention to the cases of Drant and Treadaway.

These two murderers were sentenced to death, but reprieved
in consequence of their liability to epileptic seizures.

Drant, at the time of the murder, was suffering from
maniacal excitement with violence, whilst under an epileptic
paroxysm, and he should have never been convicted in the
first instance ; but, admitting the doctrine of the prisoner's
ignorance of the difference between right and wrong, he was,
according to our law, entitled to an acquittal on the ground of
insanity.

The attacks under which Drant laboured were unmistakably
of an epileptic character and were not disputed for a moment.
He made a violent attack upon several people without motive
or reason, and succeeded in killing one person. The Lancet,
in ably discussing the case, says : " It would be as reasonable to
punish an epileptic for biting a bystander during these con-
vulsions as to treat any act he may commit as a crime.

In the case of Treadaway, opinions differed as to the
nature of the fits. We give the excellent account of Dr.
Hughes Bennett, published in the Lancet. He writes as
follows :?

On Feb. 8th, 1877, at the Old Bailey, Frederick Treadaway was
sentenced to execution for the wilful murder of John Collins, and was
found guilty of an attempt to take the life of Mrs. Collins. As the
defence was in great part of a medical character, and the case a very
peculiar one, it may be interesting to your readers to learn the medical
facts of the trial. This appears to be all the more necessary, as the
reports of the evidence, as given in the daily newspapers, were very
imperfect and inaccurate, and in some of the leading articles even
strictures were passed on the nature of the defence. It is not my
intention to enter into legal questions, to discuss the general evidence,
or to question the decision of the jury; I propose only to record the
medical history and condition of Treadaway and the professional evi-
dence given in his defence.

On Dec. 23rd, 1876, I was requested by the prisoner's solicitor to
investigate his bodily and mental condition, and after five prolonged
interviews with him, the following are the results of my inquiries:?
Frederick Treadaway, aged twenty, a hosier s assistant.

Family history.?According to the report handed to me by the
solicitor and to inquiries made by myself, Treadaway is the eldest son
of nine children. His eldest sister suffered from " brain fever " when
a child, had delirium and convulsions, and was subsequently paralysed
for six months. His father is a man of depressed and melancholic
temperament. His aunt died during an epileptic fit at the age of twenty-
two, having suffered from this disease all her life. Both his grand-
parents were persons of depressed and nervous habit, his grandmother
being described as incompetent and requiring a companion to be always
with her. One granduncle died imbecile ; a second granduncle com-
mitted suicide; and a third granduncle died in a " fit." A grandaunt
is described as a woman of " strange behaviour." His great-grand-
mother was imbecile. One great-granduncle was imbecile; another
was an inmate of St. Luke's Asylum. The daughter of a great-grand-
aunt was an inmate of Hanwell Asylum. On the mother's side two
granduncles were insane.

Personal history.?Treadaway states that he was quite healthy till
about two years ago. For twelve months prior to this he had indulged
in great sexual and alcoholic excesses. With this exception he had
before and has since led a steady and temperate life. Shortly after
this he became very subject to frequent and severe headaches of a stab-
bing and throbbing character, which symptom has lasted to the present
time. During the last two years he has had six or eight seizures of
unconsciousness, or, as he calls them, " fainting fits." All these have
been of similar character, some of them, however, being more pro-
longed and severe than others. He described them as follows:?

"While in ordinary good health, without apparent cause, he suddenly
experienced a severe shooting pain and throbbing in his head, followed
by a giddy sensation, in which everything seemed to turn round. He
staggered and had to lay hold of something for support. He had the
sensation of a " black cloud " coming over him, and then he lost con-
sciousness. On recovering his senses (he thinks in a few minutes) he
suffered from headache and felt confused in his ideas. In a short time
this latter passed off, and he was able to walk on; in an hour or so he
was again quite well. During the last two years, and only since then,
he has been subject to occasional involuntary micturition during sleep.
This occurred every month or two, and without apparent cause. He
has ever since then complained of various (nervous) pains, sometimes
in the branches of the fifth nerve, but more especially in the cardiac
region, where he describes a severe pain and a sensation as if a cord
was being tightly pulled round his chest. About the middle of
August last he was out of employment, and had in consequence to live
at home. Although he was supported by his family and received every
kindness at their hands, he gradually became depressed and despondent.
He brooded over his " misery," and finally became so melancholic (ap-
parently without cause) that he several times contemplated putting an
end to himself by suicide. Several methods suggested themselves to
his mind, such as drowning, but he finally decided to shoot himself,
as being, he thought, the most expeditious method. Hence the purchase
of a revolver.

On the morning of December 15th (the day of the crime) Treada-
way says he awoke with a severe headache, and felt generally unwell.
While sitting talking with Collins on indifferent subjects he experienced
a throbbing in his head, followed by giddiness, and the sensation of a
black cloud and darkness coming over him. From that moment he
remembers nothing till he found himself in the street. For the re-
mainder of the day he felt dazed and confused, and it was not till the
following morning that he thoroughly realised his position.
With the above exception he has always considered himself a
perfectly healthy person.

Present condition.?Treadaway is a youth of fair complexion,
somewhat short stature, well built, and healthy-looking. His forehead
is low, and his head small. There is nothing abnormal about his
appearance; on the contrary, his countenance is frank, open, and
decidedly pleasing. His statements are perfectly consistent. He makes
no attempt to conceal anything connected with himself or the crime of
which he is accused, but explained it as above mentioned, and ex-
pressed the greatest sorrow and horror at its results. Altogether his
conduct and conversation impressed me favourably. On physical exami-
nation all his organs were found healthy.

Commentary.?In my report to the solicitor I concluded the exami-
nation of the above statement by saying: " If the preceding assertions
can be established the following conclusions might be deduced.
" 1. That, as insanity or some form of nervous disease has existed in
the family of both the parents of Treadaway for several generations, to
a large extent on the male and to an appreciable degree on the female
side, there is a strong presumption that Treadaway inherited a pre-
disposition to nervous disease.

" 2. That, although the health of Treadaway is apparently normal
at the present date, still, from the description that is given of the
various symptoms from which he has suffered during the last two
years, there is a strong probability that he has been affected with
epilepsy.

" 3. That, although since August last he has been in bad circum-
stances, and has had certain vexations and troubles, he has greatly
exaggerated their importance, has been unusually depressed in mind,
and has several times contemplated suicide. These are indications of
mental weakness.

" 4. That Treadaway committed the crime of which he is accused
during an epileptic seizure. In such a condition an individual is
unconscious, and not responsible for any act which he may perpetrate.
" 5. That considering the consistent statement of Treadaway, and
his accurate description of a complaint which is little known to the
public, there is every probability that his assertions are in the main
truthful.

" 6. That, looking to his naturally kind and amiable disposition,
his temperate habits, his making no attempt at concealment, his
apparent want of motive to commit any crime, his inability to re-
member the details of his act and all the general circumstances of the
case, the homicide would appear to be rather the result of disease
than of malice or intended robbery."

Proofs.?During his first examination at the Westminster Police-
court the prisoner had two " fits." No medical man was present, so
that their nature remains uncertain.

During the trial at the Old Bailey the prisoner had a " fit." He sud-
denly uttered a smothered cry and fell down. When I reached the
dock, perhaps a minute later, I found him lying on his side, held down
by two or three warders, his body writhing, and his limbs being moved
about in every direction. The lace was slightly flushed, the eyes were
widely open and staring, but the conjunctivae were sensitive to the
touch. The prisoner was immediately removed to the cell below the
court. His condition then?that is, perhaps two or three minutes after
the seizure commenced?was as follows:?He was lying on his back
on the floor. At intervals there was powerful convulsive movement
of all the muscles. The whole body, and especially the limbs, were
thrown into such violent movements that it required two or three men
to keep him from injuring himself or others. The head was thrown
somewhat backwards, and there was slight tendency to arching of the
back. The muscles of the jaw were contracted, although the counte-
nance was not actually distorted. There was no evidence of the tongue
having been bitten. Some of the movements seemed to be of a tonic,
and others of a clonic, character. The movement of the muscles was
such that the body was pushed hither and thither as it lay on the floor.
The face was paler than at first. The eyelids, when opened, remained
so, leaving the eyes partially exposed. The eyes were fixed and staring.
The conjunctive were perfectly insensible to even the roughest touch ;
the pupils were widely dilated and insensible to the stimulus of light;
the patient was perfectly insensible. I placed a large pinch of snuff in
a quill which I had in my pocket, and blew it up his nostrils. There
was no sign of sneezing or reflex action. The lips were covered with
frothy saliva, but no appearance of blood. The respiration was
impeded, and at intervals a quick inspiration was taken. The pulse
was small, weak, and rapid ; the arteries of the neck throbbed strongly.
In what appeared to be about five minutes Treadaway drew a long
sighing inspiration, after which the movements of the body almost
stopped, and he at once began to sneeze. The conjunctiva} were then
found to be sensitive to touch, and the pupils had contracted and acted
on the stimulus of light. He remained in a drowsy and soporose con-
dition, and did not speak. When asked repeatedly if he felt any pain,
he never took any notice, but once he put his hand to his head. This
condition remained for perhaps fifteen minutes longer, when it was seen
that he would not be able to appear in court again that day. Half
an hour later, when I saw him at Newgate, he had somewhat recovered,
but was still in the same soporose condition. His muscles were relaxed,
interrupted only by occasional slight tvvitchings of the limbs. He would
not speak; but on one occasion, when asked if he had pain, pointed to
his head, and said " knife." He also placed his hand over his heart, as
if there was pain there. In this condition I left him. Next morning,
when I saw him before the trial, he was quite well, and had passed a
fair night, but had not his accustomed appetite for breakfast. Mr.
Gibson informed me that he had this morning given the prisoner a
pinch of the same snuff that had been used without effect on the pre-
ceding day; now it caused him to sneeze with great violence.

At the trial the following facts were established by witnesses:
(1) The hereditary history of insanity and epilepsy in the family; (2)
the headaches; (3) having had at least ten fits some two years ago,
and one last year; (4) the wetting of his bed during sleep; (5) his
great depression and melancholia since August last; (6) his having
suggested, before more than one person, ideas of suicide; (i) his
appearing unwell the morning of the crime; (8) the epileptic seizure
of the preceding day; and (9) the naturally amiable and affectionate
disposition of the prisoner.

Medical evidence.?In the public newspapers this was imperfect, in
many points erroneous. I now endeavour to give the evidence in
extenso. It was to the following effect:? Dr Hughes Bennett:
Although sane at the present time, it does not follow that the prisoner
was conscious of his actions at the committal of the crime of which
he is accused. According to all the circumstances of the case, the
facts proved?and if the statements of the prisoner are correct there is
every probability?that he is an epileptic. There are several forms of
epilepsy. The popular idea of the fit is that which is. accompanied
with convulsions. There need not necessarily be convulsions, but
only loss of consciousness. This latter has been called epileptic
vertigo. These two forms may alternate with one another. Owing
chiefly to the writings of Hughlings Jackson, Maudsley, Russell
Reynolds, Hammond, Trousseau, Falret, Esquirol, and others, epileptic
vertigo is a recognised disease. There is abundant testimony to show
that during such seizures persons may perform actions and even
speak and answer questions automatically. There are numerous
examples in the works of the above authors proving that in an un-
conscious condition persons can progress from odd or eccentric actions
to deeds of violence, suicide, or murder?being unable to remember
the circumstances afterwards, and therefore irresponsible for their
actions. Quoted instances in his own experience, more especially two
cases. The first was that of a gentleman of the highest education and
integrity. He was an officer in a Peninsular and Oriental steamship,
in which he (Dr Bennett) happened to be travelling. Various state-
ments were from time to time made and amply witnessed of odd things
this gentleman had done, and of which he had always denied any
knowledge. During Dr Bennett's personal knowledge of him, lie had
several times attempted to commit suicide in different ways. lie was
prevented from doing so by others, and a few ^ minutes afterwards,
when he came to himself, he was totally unconscious of having made
any such attempt. He fancied he was being made the subject of a
hoax. He several times tried to throw himself overboard. He on one
occasion attempted to poison himself, but drank by mistake an in-
nocuous fluid. These attacks came on about once a month. During
the intervals he was perfectly sensible and intelligent, and could not
imagine what induced him to do what he did. Finally, one day Dr.
Bennett found him looking ill. He was asked what was the matter.

He replied that he felt very unwell, but did not know why. Opium
poisoning was suspected, and subsequently about a pint of laudanum
was extracted from his stomach with a stomach-pump. He had taken
it out of the surgery, and was afterwards quite ignorant of the fact.
On account of these seizures he was dismissed from the service, which
ruined his career in life. Another case was cited, where a respectable
married man had sudden temporary fits of unconsciousness ; while they
lasted he assaulted his wife, children, the other patients in the ward,
or anyone who was beside him, although when in his senses he was
a most affectionate husband and father. He was perfectly ignorant
of what he was doing, and Avas deeply distressed at the results of his
violence. A person might suffer from the epileptic vertigo without
knowing it. Epilepsy in all its forms is hereditary. There is a
certain affinity between insanity and epilepsy, in so far that insane
parents may beget epileptic children, and vice versa. The
prisoner's family was strongly tainted with insanity and epi-
lepsy, and therefore it is probable that he inherits a predisposi-
tion to nervous disease. Dr Bennett stated in detail the symptoms
described to him by the prisoner. Sexual and alcoholic excesses
are considered by many to be an exciting cause of epilepsy.

This occurring shortly after puberty, with a predisposition to disease,
might cause nervous affections to manifest themselves. The description
the prisoner gives of his fainting fits is quite consistent with attacks of
epileptic vertigo. Frequent throbbing in the head without apparent
cause, in a young healthy man, is consistent with epilepsy, and is a
common symptom of this disease. Involuntary micturition during
sleep, without cause, was also met with in such cases, indicating an
attack during the night. The neuralgic pains, especially the angina
pectoris, sometimes accompany epilepsy. The attacks the prisoner
describes must be one of two things, either epilepsy or ordinary faint-
ing, From any single attack it would be difficult, from his description,
to distinguish between the two. Assuming the statement of the
prisoner to be correct, and taking the family history and the other ner-
vous symptoms into consideration, the evidence appears to be in favour
of epilepsy. It is quite possible that a crime might be done during an
epileptic seizure. The fact that the prisoner was depressed and melan-
cholic without sufficient cause, and his constant statements that he
was miserable and anxious to " put an end to himself," indicated, in
Dr Bennett's opinion, an abnormal mental condition. The fit the
prisoner had in court yesterday was, in Dr Bennett's opinion,
somewhat an anomalous one, but was of an epileptic character,
indicated chiefly by the total unconsciousness and the dilated and
insensible pupils.? Cross-examined: In the ordinary acceptation of
the term the prisoner could not be said to be insane. While in a state
of epileptic unconsciousness a person might commit almost any act
without knowing it. The attack itself did not generally last more than
three or four minutes, but the effect of it might last several hours.
Taking the attack which occurred last July alone, there is nothing from
the description inconsistent with an ordinary fainting fit. Epilepsy is
a disease of the brain.

Dr Rhys Williams, Superintendent of the Royal (Bethlem) Hospital,
had seen many cases of epileptic vertigo, and he corroborated the evi-
dence of the last witness that this was an acknowledged form of disease.
He described a case in which a gentleman, while sitting at breakfast,
had assaulted his wife with a table-knife, and afterwards was not able
to give any explanation of his conduct. He was subsequently under
medical treatment for fourteen months for epileptic vertigo. Every-
thing done by a person while suffering under an attack of epileptic ver-
tigo was automatic; they were then mere machines, and would after-
wards have no knowledge of anything that occurred during the attack.
When he recovered, a patient might feel that he had done something,
but he would not know what. The longest instance of unconsciousness
of this kind that he was acquainted with was one hour. The witness
stated that all the symptoms that had been described in this case with
regard to the prisoner were consistent with the idea that he was suffer-
ing from epileptic vertigo. He had seen the prisoner on the previous
day in the cell below the court, and he found him perfectly unconscious,
and the pupils of his eyes were dilated. He had no doubt that it was
an epileptic fit, with hysterical symptoms. He regarded epileptic lunatics
as the most dangerous of all those afflicted with insanity, and such
persons are most likely to commit sudden acts of violence.
Mr. Richards, Superintendent of Hanwell Asylum, had great ex-
perience in epilepsy, himself treating on an average 315 cases per
annum. He had seen several cases of epileptic vertigo. He agreed in
the opinions expressed by the last witnesses with regard to the nature
of this disease. He had been several times attacked by patients suffer-
ing from epileptic vertigo. On one occasion an epileptic patient was
talking pleasantly to him, when suddenly her eyes became vacant, and
she hit out at him. She appeared to recover immediately, and he
asked her why she had struck out at him, and she said she did not
know that she had done so, and appeared quite unconscious of what had
taken place. A few days later this patient had a violent attack of
epilepsy. He saw the prisoner yesterday when he was unconscious, and
he was of opinion that it was an epileptic fit with some modified
symptoms.

Dr Smiles, Surgeon to the House of Detention, said prisoner was
under his care from December 18th to January 15th. During that
time he was in good health, and never on any occasion exhibited any
appearance of epilepsy. With regard to the attack of the previous day,
he was of opinion that there was a good deal of hysteria mixed up with
it. He heard a young woman who had been examined as a witness
utter an exclamation which evidently affected the prisoner and brought
on the attack. He had no opportunity of seeing the prisoner except
from the court, and he did not go into the gaol. (It is to be observed
that this witness was on the bench. The prisoner's attack took place on
the floor of the dock, and chiefly in the cell below the court.)
Dr Gibson, Surgeon to Newgate, said prisoner had been under his
charge since the loth of January. While under his observation he had
been perfectly healthy. Although the chief symptoms of yesterday's
attack were those referring to an hysterical condition, the graver of them
were of an epileptic character. There might be a distinct convulsive
attack in those cases without any premonitory symptoms. Strong
efforts had been made to restore him after he was taken from the dock,
and a quantity of snuff was blown up his nose, but was not followed
by any effect. This morning he had given the prisoner a pinch of the
same snuff, and it caused him to sneeze violently.

The jury were asked to decide whether at the time the prisoner fired
the revolver he was conscious and knew the nature of his act. They
answered in the affirmative, and found him " guilty." He was accord-
ingly sentenced to death.

Such are the medical facts and evidence in this remarkable case.
The jury have found Treadaway guilty; nor am I prepared in any way
to question their decision. There was no defence whatever except the
question as to whether, as the prisoner stated, he was unconscious of
his act. The judge admitted that no proof whatever could be obtained
of any motive for the crime. In the interests of justice and humanity
it was therefore incumbent on those entrusted with the task to care-
fully collect all the statements and facts concerning the prisoner's health,
and in laying them before the authorities it was their duty conscien-
tiously to draw from them such inferences concerning the prisoner's
condition as would assist the jury in the performance of their most
responsible duty.

Dr Risdon Bennett, President of the Eoyal College of
Physicians, and Dr Crichton Browne, the eminent Psycho-
logist, were requested by the Home Secretary to examine
the prisoner and inquire into the nature of the fits. Their
decision has never been published; but we may assume, from
the decision of the Home Secretary and the subsequent reprieve,
that it was favourable to the insanity.

Dr W. A. F. Browne, of Dumfries, published, in 1865, an
excellent treatise on " Epileptics and their Mental Condition,"
published by Adlard, Bartholomew Close, to which we refer
our readers. The conclusions arrived at are that Epileptics
should not be hanged or subjected to any kind of punishment
except the detention necessary for their own protection and
that of society. They are liable to sudden and violent irra-
tional impulses, over which all control and power is lost accord-
ing to the duration and intensity of the disease ; and where the
' explosive seizures' or convulsions occur there is invariably
mental confusion and loss of memory. This was apparent in the
case of Treadaway, though doubted by some.

Both Drant and Treadaway are now under sentence of
hard labour for life. We cannot for one moment admit the
legality of this; either guilty, or not guilty on the ground of
insanity, should be the verdict. If the latter, the prisoners should
be sent to Broadmoor, and not punished as ordinary criminals,
as if they were acquitted in consequence of strong extenuating
circumstances.
