Diseases of the Nervous System
===============================

270
Art. IX.?
T
No. IV?Mania.
:Author: ROBERT BOYD, M.D. Edix., F.R.C.P. Loot.
Medico-Psychological Association, 1870; Late Physician and Superintendent County
Somerset Lunatic Asylum; Formerly Resident Physician St. Marylebone Infirmary, and
Lecturer on Medicine.

From the annual^ reports of the Somerset County Asylum for
twenty years, mania, recurrent mania, monomania, and puerperal
mania included nearly 53^ per cent, of the admissions of mental
disorders; previously distinguished in the Journal, as belonging
to the second class of cases of insanity.

The actual numbers under the above forms of mania were
595 males and 712 females; from ordinary mania, first attack,
there weie 374 males and 418 females ; from recurrent or periodic
mania, second and more frequent attacks, 174 males and 206
females; the numbers from monomania were 47 males and 41
females, and from puerperal mania 47.

The cases were distributed unequally over the different years
as regards numbers. In the first year, 1848, upwards of 200
were transferred from licensed houses, in which they had been
maintained, to the asylum, and 81 were sent directly from their
unions and homes ; so a larger number were admitted in the
first ten months than in any succeeding year. In the second
year there was a diminution of a third, and in the following
seven years the cases of mania averaged only a half, being about
1 instead of 3 in the week. In the following years the average
numbers increased about one-fifth, mainly due to the reception
of W elsh patients pievious to the opening of the Glamorgan
County Asylum in 1865. & b

As regards age at the time of admission, the youngest (682)
was a boy of 10 % years, who worked in a silk factory at Taunton.
Two months pieviously he received a blow over the left parietal
bone, and suffered fiom fever; there was a slight swelling at the
part, no pain on pressure. Sometimes he was furious and
violent towards his family, also incoherent. He turned out to
be a very intelligent lad, and at the end of fifteen months left
the asylum quite recovered.

A second boy (1013), aged 14, was also admitted in a similar
state; his mother was at the time a maniac in the asylum ; the
boy was very violent and destructive. His attack came on
suddenly; he worked in a coal pit. He had an eruption and
incrustations on the scalp. He also recovered, and was discharged
in fifteen months after his admission.

A girl aged 16 became suddenly insane after the death of
her mother, who had been a violent character; her father was
transported, and subsequently her brother, for sheepstealing.
The girl was so violent and so destructive, she became unman-
ageable in the workhouse. Her disposition stubborn; sometimes
she required to be fed, at other times she was orderly and
assisted in the laundry. At the end of 4^ years she was still a
patient, in declining bodily health.

The following shows, in decennial periods, the ages of the
cases of mania at the time of admission:?
Males Females
Under 20 years .... 27 24
From 20 to 30 . . . . 87 92
30 to 40 .
40 to 50 .
50 to 60 .
60 to 70 .
70 to 80 .
80 upwards
Total .
. 92 115
. 78 94
. 44 53
. 31 33
. 14 6
? 1 1
. ^74 418
These figures indicate the comparative frequency of mania
in male and female patients, that it occurs most frequently at
the age when the brain and mental faculties are developed, and
at the earlier periods in females than in males. In advanced
age, the males are more susceptible than the females.

With respect to the civil condition in cases of mania, the
numbers were?of married males 196, of females 213; single
males 173, females 204; widowed males 32, females 55. In
recurrent mania?married males 93, females 80 ; single males
71, females 91. Civil state not ascertained in 30 males and 69
females. The married were in excess in the males, and the
single only slightly so in the females. The widows considerably
exceeded the widowers, being in about the proportion of five
to three.

The bodily health of the majority of both males and females
was indifferent on their admission, and some were brought into
the asylum in a very unfit state?in the last stage of disease?
in a moribund condition.

The causes in cases of mania admitted were as follows:?

Males Females
Hereditary predisposition . . 85 95
Intemperance in drink
Religious enthusiasm
Grief, deaths in family, &c.
Pecuniary losses &c.
54 15
24 23
17 25
9 5

Disappointment in love .
Jealousy-
Anxiety, excitement
Remorse.
From belief in witchcraft
Hysteria, pride
Previous bodily illness and after fever
Accidents, and injuries to head &c.
Sunstroke and heat in bakehouse
Critical period and overwork .
Found wandering, poverty and illness
Causes not ascertained .

Males Females
4 15
4 6
5 2
1 8
1 3
5 10
48 75
13 2
3 2
8 3
18 12
75 127
374 418
Total

So many were chronic cases transferred from other in-
stitutions, that the causes and previous history were not to be
obtained. In the others?299 male and 291 female cases?in
whom the causes are above enumerated, hereditary predisposi-
tion was the principal one ; next in frequency came intemper-
ance in males. These causes cannot strictly be classed either
as moral or physical. In females, bodily illness occupied the
second place, and the physical causes prevailed in them; the
moral causes rather predominated in males.

One man (1546), aged 27, with hereditary predisposition on
the father's side, and of intemperate habits in drinking, violent
to others, and destructive, fancies he sees witches and the devil.
He assaulted a magistrate, and broke the cell at the police
station. A fortnight after his attack he was brought to the
asylum in a state of mania. At the end of six weeks he was
discharged on probation, but was brought back in a few days
very excited, having been riding about on his neighbours'
horses. At the end of five months he was discharged recovered,
having been previously for two months employed at agricultural
work.
A man (1010), aged 41, an albino, fancied that spirits
visited him at night; his conversation was about spirits; his
disposition was to wander from home. He also inherited the
disorder. His mother died in the asylum; his sister was also
a patient in the asylum, and recovered. At the end of seven
months he was discharged recovered, having been for four
months employed at agricultural work, and for the last month
in a convalescent state.

A male (530), aged 20, was admitted in a restless state of
one month's duration, with suicidal propensities. He fancied
that he had an interview with our Saviour, who told him that
he was to die the following Thursday; that his soul was lost.
After the first week he worked at his trade in the tailors' shop,
and at the end of five months was discharged recovered.
A mason and railway sub-contractor (483), aged 41, became
insane from loss of money, and dangerous to others. He fancied
he had written the clergyman's sermon, and accused him of
committing errors in the delivery of it, and went up to lay hold
of him in the pulpit. His expression was wild ; he looked up
and talked to the clouds, and heard voices in the wind. He
worked with the mason attendant, and after six months was
recommended for discharge on probation, but behaved so oddly
before the visitors that they deferred then allowing his dis-
charge. He told them that he still found the spirits within,
but that he had secured them by a couple of handkerchiefs
tied round his waist. In another month he returned home to
work.

A schoolmaster (1,109), aged 24, whose disorder was attri-
buted to mental overwork, had been under treatment at home
for three years previous to his admission to the asylum. He was
excited and suspicious, and fancied that he was Prince Albert.
He remained in the asylum six months, and was discharged not
improved, by his father's desire, to be removed to an asylum in
France, where, being a Roman Catholic, he could attend to
his religious duties.

A railway labourer (785), aged 32, who fancied himself a
king, was admitted in a state of mania, violent and destructive.
He recovered after six months, and was discharged, having been
out at work in a convalescent state for two months.

Agent for Morrison's pills (448), aged 60, in bad health, of
intemperate habits, ill two weeks, rather dangerous, his conver-
sation unconnected, about paying off the National Debt and the
electric telegraph. Had a pustule on his upper lip, and asked
permission to wear a moustache, observing that as he was going
to practise as a quack doctor, a moustache was as necessary to
him as a diploma to me. He talked of the British College of
Health, where there were neither fellows nor students, but about
a dozen great strapping fellows making pills in the back, in
the front handsome rooms and good cheer for friends and agents.
He had known, from New York, one order for ?5,000 worth of
pills. When hygeist at Exeter he was consulted respecting a
patient then in the asylum, and he had undertaken to cure him
in three weeks for ?10, no cure, no pay. Not being a pauper,
and having property, he was removed in six weeks, not im-
proved, to be placed under care, which was not done, and he
subsequently cut his throat.

A female (786), aged 25, a servant, became maniacal from
disappointed love; she had religious delusions, and her con-
versation was varied, about spirits, devils, and witches. She
soon became tranquil and industrious, discharged recovered
three months after admission.

One female (1503), aged 39, in bad health, had religious
delusions, and held similar views to those of the Princeites. Her
condition remained unchanged.

A female (295), aged 27, described as always being a
nervous person, but no disposition to insanity in her family.
She dreamt that the world was about to come to an end ; next
day there was a thunder storm ; she believed her dream was
about being fulfilled, and she became at once insane and
violent; said her soul was lost, and prayed fervently. She
recovered in eighteen months, but after seven years had a
relapse, and remained nine years without any mental improve-
ment.

A man (868), aged 39, found wandering, incoherent, and in
indifferent health; was a patient for six years, and died suddenly
of rupture of an aneurism of the aorta. The following extra-
vagant description of himself is from an advertisement in the
New York Sun of January 16, 1855 :

William Ber, currier, late of the City of Dublin, the Poet of
Nature, can be seen in the City of New York by the following persons
namely: Victoria or Albert; the Duke or Duchess of Sutherland, so
called; or the Duke of Wellington, so called; or the Earl Elles-
?e?e' S0T galled; or Col. James Sibthorp, M.P.; James Whiteside,
M-?.-! '^Napier, M.P; the Eight Hon. Henry Goulbaum, MP.
or Sir Moses Montifiore, banker of London, England; or by William
Bergan, cock-fighter of the liberty of the City of Dublin, who reared
the said William Ber, the Poet of Nature, he being the supposed only
heir of Charies Stuart, of Scotland, and the supposed heir, legitimate
born, of the so-called George the Fourth, of England, by Caroline
Charlotte, consort to said George the Fourth of England, so called, by
marriage, lives; and a challenge to Victoria and Albert,*and to the
rest of the family, to disapprove the statement. So help me God, to
wit: being born the 24th of May 1819. William Ber.

A female (793), aged 32, a vagrant, abusive and quarrelsome,
transferred from a licensed house; was very troublesome, but
soon improved and was industrious, in good bodily health, and
was to have been discharged on probation; meanwhile she made
her escape.

An Escaped Lunatic. During the very boisterous weather on
Saturday evening, while in the Channel, the attention of the passengers
on board the Avon, plying between this city and Newport, was
attracted to a person apparently in great distress of mind, lying upon
the deck, despairingly clinging to the side of the vessel, and praying
earnestly in broken English, " 0 God preserve me only this once, and
I'll never ask'ee any more," and frantically inquiring if they should
not all be drowned. By the coarse dress worn he appeared to be a
navvy. Hearing his Welsh accent, a young man addressed him in
that language, and endeavoured to consule him, but he refused to be
comforted, saying he had been very wicked. To the surprise of the
passengers, when asked rather abruptly for his name, he (or rather
she) said it was Sarah Evans. It was further elicited that she had
escaped the previous day from Wells Asylum through a small window,
and had possessed herself of the man's apparel she then wore, and was
then making her way to Carmarthen, of which place she was a native.
On arrival at Newport, Captain Howe judiciously handed her over to
the care of Sergeant Curtis, of the Newport police, until inquiries
could be made respecting her.?Bristol Daily Post, February 12,1861.
The previous history could rarely be obtained of any
patients who had been transferred from other institutions.
Of the more recent cases it was reported that the conduct of
93 males and 108 females was violent; of 81 males and 54
females, dangerous ; in 33 males and 36 females, suicidal; 1
male and 1 female, homicidal; in 29 males and 26 females,
destructive in various ways; restless and excited in 15 males
and 28 females; of filthy habits, 6 males and 19 females;
noisy, 34 males and 48 females ; obscene and indecent, 4 males
and 20 females ; obstinate and irritable, 5 males and 6 females ;
idle, 11 males and 11 females.

Moral Treatment.?As soon as possible after their admis-
sion, 97 males and 158 females of these cases of acute mania,
first attack, were usefully employed at their trades, assisting
the attendants inside, on the farm garden, in quarrying, attend-
ing masons &c. out of doors, and the females in the laundry,
at needlework, and in the dining ball. Employment was found
to be most conducive to quietude and mental restoration, and
as a test of the fitness for discharge. Every inducement and
encouragement was therefore given to accomplish this most
desirable object.

It was found that the cultivation of the land afforded a
healthful occupation to the patients, and a most important assis-
tance to the recovery of the curable cases ; it had also a tran-
quillising effect on many of the noisy and incurable cases, by
producing natural sleep. The employment of the insane cannot
be too strongly enforced, whether regarded with reference to
their disorder or as a means of reducing the cost of main-
tenance, and thereby extending the benefits of the institution
to a greater number of poor lunatics, the expense too frequently
operating as an objection to the removal of patients to the
asylum. Besides those occupied on the land, several were em-
ployed in the workshops. All the shoes were made and repaired
on the premises, and much of the clothing and bedding; also
assistance was afforded to painters, carpenters, blacksmiths, and
engineer. Many of ^the female patients were regularly engaged
in the laundry, kitclien, dairy, and in house work. Although
so many of them had the unrestricted use of the various imple-
ments necessary for their employment, not the slightest accident
occurred.

Recreations, too, may certainly be included as an important
part of the moral treatment. How frequently has it happened
that a patient, when first introduced to the weekly dance or the
theatricals in the large hall, has been divested of the dread of
the asylum and its inmates, and has at once entered into the
present enjoyment. On other occasions there were frequent
musical performances of the band in the hall, and excursions
occasionally in the neighbourhood in summer; all of which
had a most salutary tendency, and were heartily and grate-
fully acknowledged. The meeting of both sexes at meal times
in the dining hall relieved the monotony of their lives, and
was a healthful measure; and the assembling of them daily in
the chapel for morning prayers, and selected parties attending
the parish church on Sundays, exercised a most beneficial moral
control.

Medical Treatment.?Upon the generally acknowledged
principle that mental disorder, if not dependent on, is at least
aggravated by bodily disease, symptoms have invariably been
attended to in chronic as well as in recent cases, and the general
health improved and maintained as much as possible.

In cases of ordinary mania, characterised by habitual rest-
lessness and a constipated habit of body, belladonna and cam-
phor have been employed, after purgatives, and followed in some
instances by marked benefit. In a few patients, who beat their
heads continually, belladonna, veratria, or aconite, applied ender-
mically after a blister, procured a temporary cessation of the
violence. Purgatives were freely administered, and in violent
fits of mania the shower-bath was found useful, and also tartrate
of antimony, digitalis, and sedatives, iodide and bromide of
potas., tonics, nitric and sulphuric acids, stimulants, cod liver
oil, astringents, the exhausting apparatus to the lower extremi-
ties, all these have been used when circumstances seemed to
require them. In a few cases, where patients had obstinately re-
fused food, the stomach tube was employed; other patients were
constantly obliged to be fed by attendants, some required a more
generous diet than others; all under medical treatment had
their meals regulated from day to day.

Restraint and Seclusion.?The use of mechanical restraint
was sometimes required for surgical reasons, to prevent patients
from injuring themselves, as from removing bandages or dress-
ing, or from picking sores on their skin, by means of gloves,
securely fastened at the wrists, or by a handkerchief.
Coercion was sometimes required in cases of continued obsti-
nacy in refusing food or medicine, to be dressed or undressed,
or to go into a bath. . . .

Seclusion, which is the improved substitute tor restraint,
inasmuch as it does not subject patients to the same degree of
mortification and exposure, and is therefore much less likely
to keep alive angry and vindictive feelings, was found necessary.
Noisy, destructive patients, and those with disgusting habits,
were removed from the others, as well as the violent ones, and
placed in seclusion, occasionally in their own single, or in
padded rooms.

Many patients were brought to the asylum m strait waist-
coats, and it was stated that of those transferred from other
institutions at the opening of the asylum, about twenty males
and forty females had been subjected to personal restraint;
it should be remembered, however, that some of these were
epileptics, whom it was the custom formerly to fasten to their
beds at night. All these were at once freed from mechanical
restraint. Results were:

Males. Females.
Recovered . ? ? .175 199
Not recovered . ? .36 56
Died 105 87
Remaining . ? ? .58 76
Total 374 418

The recoveries in mania were therefore nearly 47 per cent, in
males, and 47'6 in females; the mortality 28 per cent, in males,
and 20-8 per cent, in females. The much greater mortality in
the male sex in insanity has been generally observed.
Post-mortem examinations were made in 110 males and
99 females.* Of these 12 males and 8 females were from 20 to
30 years of age; 9 males and 4 females were single ; 3 males
and 3 females "single ; and 1 widow. Duration of illness varied
in the males from one month to four years, and in the females
from three months to six years. The assigned cause of death
in the males : meningitis, 1 ; spinal arachnitis, 1 ; pulmonary
phthisis, 4; gangrene of lungs, 2 ; pleuro-pneumonia, 1 ; peri-
tonitis,'l ; ulcer of stomach, 1 ; dysentery, 1. In females:
arachnitis, 1 ; cerebral apoplexy, 1 ; pulmonary phthisis, 4 ;
pneumonia, 2.

Circumference of the skull varied in the males from 2Of
to 23 inches, the average being 22*3, and in the females 20*6
inches; the antero-posterior measurements varied in the males
from 101 to 141, the average 13-2, and in the females 12*3
* The examinations in cases of monomania are included in these numbers.
inches. The transverse measurement varied in the males from
10? to 14|, average 13, and in the females 12*2 inches.
Condition of the Brain and Membranes.?The dura mater
preternaturally adherent in 1 male and 1 female; opacity of
arachnoid in 1 male, and 2 ounces of fluid in arachnoid in 1
female ; congestion of blood in cerebral veins in 4 males and 1
female ; the brain appeared natural in 4 males and 4 females ;
brain soft in 1 male, pale in 1, and firm in 1 female.
Weight.?The right cerebral hemisphere varied in weight
from 12i to in males, and from 13| to 23f ounces ; average,
21 in males and 18 in females; the left cerebral hemisphere
varied in males from 17^ to 25^, and in females from 13? to
23f; the average weight in the male was 21-4, and 18*1 in
females. The encephalon varied in males from 45 to 58?
ounces, and in females from 31 to 53^- ounces, average weight
48*8 in males, and 41*1 ounces in females. Spinal Cord,?
there was more fluid than natural in the spinal canal in 3
males, and the veins were turgid in 1 male and 1 female,
soft at centre m 1 female, natural in the remainder. Average
weight 1*1 ounce in males, and I ounce in females.
Lungs natural and healthy in 4 males and 1 female ; tubercles
in 4, and cavities in 1 male, and tubercles in 3 females; pneu-
monia in 1 male, and 1 female, pleuro-pneumonia in 2 males,
gangrene in right lung in 1, pleuritic adhesions in 3 females!
Weight of right lung varied in males from 13? to 411, and in
females from 10 to 28^-, average in males 28, and in females 20
ounces ; left lung varied in weight in the males from llf to 42,
and in females from 6 to 26? ounces ; average weight in males
22*2, and in females 18 ounces. Heart small in 2 males and
2 females. Much fluid in the pericardium, in 1 male it varied
in weight from 6 to llf, and in females from 5 to 9f ounces;
average in males 8*2, and in females 7 ounces.

Intestines natural in 6 males and in 2 females, peritonitis
in 1 male, tubercular peritoneum in 1 female, enteritis in
1 male, fatty omentum in 1 female, ulceration in 4 males
and in 3 females, mesenteric glands enlarged in 1 female;
average weight of the stomach 5*8 in males, and 4*4 in females.
Liver, peritoneal adhesions in 2 males, average weight 51*8,
fatty in two females, varied in weight from 31 to 75 ounces.
Spleen varied in weight in females from 3f to 12 ounces, average
weight 5*1. Pancreas in males, average weight 3*3, in females
2*6 ounces. Right kidney 5*4 in males, 3*7 in females; left
kidney 5 in males, and 4 ounces in females; renal capsules *7
in males, *6 in females ; uterus 1*3. Average height in males
5 feet 6^ inches, in females 5 feet 3-*- inches. Average weight
of the body 94 pounds in males, and 74 pounds in females.
At the decennial period, from 30 to 40, there were 24 males,
16 married and 8 single, and 19 females, 10 married and 9
single, examined. It seems unnecessary here again to go so fully
into detail respecting each of the organs. The assigned causes
of death were meningitis in 3 males and 3 females, apoplexy in
one of each sex, cerebritis 1 male, cerebral softening in 2
females; pulmonary disease in 14 males, 5 of these tubercular,
and in 10 females, 6 of these from phthisis; abdominal diseases
in 5 males and 3 females. Average circumference of skull 22*2
in males, and 21 in females; antero-posterior measurement 12*6
in males, and 12-3 in females; transverse measurement
12*1 in males, and 11*9 in females; brain appeared natural
in 8 males and 4 females, soft in 1 of each sex, firm in 1 male
and 2 females. The right cerebral hemisphere varied in weight
in males from 18? to 24^ ounces, average 21 ounces; in females
from 16 to 23 ounces, average 18*6; the left cerebral hemi-
sphere varied in males from 16 to 24|, average 20'8 ; in females
15f to 23, average 18*7; the average weight of the cerebellum
in males 5'5, medulla and pons 1*1 ; in females 4-8, medulla
and pons *9; the average weight of the encephalon in males
48*4, in females 43 ounces.

From 40 to 50 years there were 27 males and 18 females.
Assigned causes of death were from meningitis in 2 males, from
arachnitis in 2 males and 4 females, from cerebral congestion
in 1 male, cerebritis in 2 males and 1 female ; from pulmonary
diseases in 15 males, including 5 of phthisis, and in 7 females
including 2 of phthisis ; from gastritis in 1 male, dysentery in 2 ;
cancer in 3 females, purpura in 1, and fever in 1.
Males. Females.

Average circumference of skull . 22*3 21*2
Antero-posterior measurement . 12*9 12*2
Transverse ditto . . 12'4 11*2

The right cerebral hemisphere varied in weight from 16^ to
25f ounces, and in females from 16|- to 21 ounces, average 21*1
in males, and 18*7 in females; the left cerebral hemisphere
varied in weight from 17-fr to 25?, and in females from 161 to
21^ ounces, average weight in males 21-3, in females 18*8
ounces; the encephalon varied in weight from 39f to 57f
ounces in males, and from 38f to 48^ ounces in females, the
average weight in the males was 48-3, in females 42*7 ounces.
The spinal cord appeared to be natural in 15 males and 11
females ; there was more fluid than natural in the spinal canal
in 2 males and 2 females; blood effused in the canal in 2 males
and 1 female, soft in 4 males and 3 females, firmer than usual
in 2 males and 1 female, large in 2 males. Heart was hyper-
trophied, over 10 ounces in weight in 13 males, varying from
10? to 16^ ounces, and below 10 ounces, varying from 7^ to
9 ounces in 11 males. In 7 females the heart was above the
average, varying from 8^ to 11 ounces, and in 7 below the
average, varying from 6^- to 5^ ounces.

In the next period, from 50 to 60 years, there were 18 males
and 20 females : the assigned cause of death was from menin-
gitis in 4 males and 2 females, cerebritis in 2 males and 3
females, and fluid in ventricles in 1, tumour in brain in 1 male,
and hypertrophy of brain in 1 male. Pulmonary diseases in
7 males, phthisis in 3 of them, and in 8 females., and phthisis
in 3; peritonitis in 1 male, enteritis in 1 female, dysentery
in 1 male and 2 females, renal disease in 1 male, cancer of breast
in 1 female. The average circumference of the skull was 22*6
in males, and 21 *2 in females; the average antero-posterior
measurement 12 6 in males and 12*3 in females; the average
transverse measurement 12-8 in males and 11-7 in females. The
right cerebral hemisphere varied in weight from 18|- to 23? in
males, and fiom 15-2 to 21-^- in females; the average weight in
males was 20*9 and 18*4 in females; the left cerebral ^hemi-
sphere varied in weight from 18| to 23 ounces in males, and
from 15^ to 2If in females; the average weight in males was
20-9 and 18*9 in females ; the average weight of the cerebellum
in males 5-3, and the pons and medulla oblongata 1*1 ounces.
The encephalon varied in weight in females "from 36 to 505'
ounces; the average weight of the encephalon in males was
48-2, and in females 43*5 ounces. The spinal cord was natural
in 10 males and 17 females, fluid in canal in 1 male, spots of
softening in 6 males and 2 females, firm in 1 male and 1 female.
The heart enlarged in 6 males, varying from 10^- to 19 ounces,
small in 4 males, varying from 6 to 10 ounces, and small in 6
females, varying in weight from 5^ to 8 ounces.

From 60 to 70 the numbers were 13 males and 22 females.
The assigned cause of death was from meningitis in 4 males,
from cerebral disease in 5 females, including arachnitis in 1,
fluid in ventricles in 2, and cerebritis in 1 ; pulmonary diseases
in 7 males and 13 females, including 6 cases of phthisis ; cardiac
dropsy in 1 male; enteritis in 1 male and 2 females ; gastritis
in 1 female; abscess in peiinseum in 1 female, and carcinoma
in 1 male. The average circumference of the skull was 22-3
inches in males and 21*2 in females; the antero-posterior
measurement was 13*1 in males and 12*4 in females; and the
transverse measurement 12*9 in males and 11 inches in females;
the dura mater was preternaturally adherent to the skull in 8
males and 7 females, fluid in arachnoid in 1 male, and in ven-
tricles in 5 females ; congestion of blood in cerebral veins in 3
males and 1 female; cerebritis in 1 female, and atrophy of
brain in 1. The right cerebral hemisphere varied in weight
from 17-t to 25? in males, and from 15^ to 20? in females;
average weight in males 21*4 and in females 18*8 ounces; the left
hemisphere varied from 181 to 26 in males, and from 16| to 21?
in females; average in males 21-5, in females 19 ; average weight
of the cerebellum 5*2 in males and 4*9 in females, and of the
pons and medulla, 1*1 in males and 1 ounce in females; the
encephalon varied in weight in males from 41? to 58f ounces,
and in females from 35 ? to 48f ; average weight in males
49-3 and in females 43*7 ounces; the spinal cord disintegrated
at the lower part in 1 male, rather soft in 3 males and 4
females; firm in 1 male and 2 females, pale in 1 male and 1
female; fluid in canal in 1 female, and natural in 4 males and
14 females; the spinal cord varied from f to 1 bounce, average
weight 1 ounce, in each sex. Heart enlarged in 8 males and
3 females, small in 2 males and 3 females, fluid in pericardium
in 1 male, valves thickened in 1 male, pericardium adherent in
1 male, fat in 1 female, flabby in 1 male and pale in 1; the
weight of the heart varied in the males from 6^ to 19 ounces,
and?in the females from 6 to 14 ounces; average weight in the
males 13*3, and in the females 7*9 ounces. The amount of
disease and size of the heart in males compared with females
at this age is very remarkable.

From 70 to 80 there were 14 males and 9 females examined.
Assigned cause of death, meningitis in 3 males and 3 females;
cerebritis in 2 males and 1 female; pulmonary disease in 5 males
and 3 females, phthisis in 2 of them; endocarditis, sudden death,
1 male; enlarged heart, 1 female; aneurism, 1 male; peritonitis,
1 female; Bright's disease, 1 male; and 2 males suicide by
hanging. Circumference of skull, 22-4 in males and 21-6 in
females ; antero-posterior measurement 12*8 in males and 12*4
in females ; transverse, 11-8 in males, 11 in females; the right
cerebral hemisphere varied in weight in males from 18 to 24
ounces, and in females from 16? to 20 ounces? the average
weight in males was 20-9, and in females 17*8 ; the left
cerebral hemisphere varied in weight from 18^ to 24, and in
females from 15| to 20? ounces?the average weight in males
21 and in females 17*9 ounces; the cerebellum varied in
weight from 4^ to 6 ounces in males, and from 4^ to 5 ounces
in females?average weight in males, 5*2, and in females, 4*5 ;
the pons and medulla varied in males from 1 to H, and in fe-
males from | to 1?the average weight in males 1*2, and in
females *9; the encephalon varied in weight from 42? to 55
ounces in males, and from 37 ? to 46 ounces in females?the
average weight in the males was 48*4, and 41*2 in females.
In the spinal canal there was more fluid than natural in 1
male, the cord soft in 1 male and 1 female, and natural in the
remainder of both sexes; average weight, 1*1 in both sexes.
Heart enlarged in 7 males and 4 females; endocarditis, 1 ;
aneurism, 1 ; ossific deposits in 1 and flabby in 1 male; fatty
in 1 female; the weight varied from 8 to 13f ounces, and in
females from 7 to 12?; average weight in males 11-6, and in
females 9*4 ounces. ?

From 80 upwards, 1 male aged 88, and 3 females, 2 of
80 and 1 of 82 years of age. The cause of death in the
male was softening of the brain, hydrothorax, and Bright's
disease; and m the females, hydrothorax in 1, meningitis
and the cerebral ventricles distended with fluid in the other 2
The right cerebral was the heaviest in the male (which is
unusual) weighing 211 the left 20f ounces, the cerebellum
6, medulla and pons 12, encephalon 49f ounces, which is l1
ounce above the average. The average circumference of the
skull in the females was 21-8, antero-posterior measurement 12-3,
and the transverse 12 inches; average weight of right and left
cerebral hemispheres the same, 19-3, and encephalon 45 ounces ;
spinal cord rather soft m 1, and the heart small (6 ounces)
m 1. The average weight of the body in the females
88 pounds, and the height 5 feet 2 inches very nearly.
? Te?Thi uG hl f V?6 remarkable fact may be observed,
viz., that the left cerebral hemisphere preponderated in weight
at the various ages in both sexes. &
REcuRRENr Mania.

The analysis of cases under this head includes 174 males and
206 females. It is so difficult to draw an exact line, that most
probably amongst these are included cases of what is defined as
intermittent mama, attended with lucid intervals, which mav
continue for weeks, and during which time patients might be
discharged as recovered and capable of making a will or other-
wise disposing of property; such cases probably have led to
litigation. They have no delusions, but are subject to
paroxysms of raving madness, often of uncertain duration.
The ages at the time of admission of the cases of recurrent
mania were as follows :?

? , Males. Females.
Under 20 years 7 g
From 20 to 30
26 57
3? ? 40 38 48
40 ? 50 . . # 43 43
50 ? 60 . . # 32 29
60 ? 70 . . . 18 14
70 ? 80 ... 5 7
80 upwards ? . . 0 0
Total 174 20G
At the earlier ages, up to 40 years, the females exceeded the
males in number, after 40 the males predominated; the
greatest number of females before their thirtieth year, and of
males after their fortieth year.

With respect to their civil state, there were 86 males and
90 females married, 76 males and 97 females single, and 12
males and 19 females widowed.

The number of the attack on their first admission to the
asylum is here shown ; but many of these patients were admitted
on several occasions afterwards, which is not shown. There
were admitted from a second attack,86 males and 111 females;
from a third, 48 males and 53 females ; from- a fourth, 17
males and 21 females; from a fifth or more frequent attack,
5 males and 11 females; and in 18 males and 10 females no
particulars as to number could be ascertained.

The causes so far as ascertained were, hereditary in 38 males
and 39 females, from intemperance in drink in 22 males and
3 females, from previous bodily illness in 16 males and 25
females, from injuries in 7 males and i female, religious en-
thusiasm in 8 males and 8 females, grief in 6 males and 18
females, from poverty in 3 males and 6 females, over-exertion
in 2 males and 3 females, fright in 1 male and 4 females, super-
stition in 2 males and 3 females, jealousy in 1 male and 3
females, love in 1 male and 8 females, causes not ascertained in
65 males and 88 females.

The duration of illness previous to admission varied from
a few days to many years, so many chronic cases were trans-
ferred from other establishments.

The prominent symptoms of the patients as reported on
admission were violence in 30 males and 31 females, irritability
in 6 males and 9 females, dangerous in 30 males and 35 females
stubborn in 7 males and 8 females, suicidal in 15 males and'
20 females, destructive in 20 males and 20 females, noisy in
6 males and 21 females, filthy in 10 males and 15 females, idle
abusive, and troublesome in 20 males and 31 females; 30males
and 15 females were ill and generally quiet.

Of these cases 56 males and 77 females were working
patients, employed in various ways in the establishment.
A male (216), aged 34, was admitted, having had three
previous attacks within six years ; was ten months in recovering
from the last attack; the present one was of two weeks duration!
Hereditary predisposition (his father died insane); a mason by
trade ; violent and dangerous to others; general health good ;
sullen in his manner; when taken out would sometimes lie
down and ask the working men to wheel a barrow over him.

At the end of three months he had improved so much that he
worked at his trade with the masons, and continued to do so
regularly for six months, at the end of which time he one day
left his work and went a short distance up the hill on the turn-
pike road and precipitated himself in front of the wheels of a
coal wagon containing four tons of coal, the front wheel of
which went over the left side, breaking the clavicle and all the
ribs on that side. There was some ecchymosis of the skin,
and emphysema behind, at the upper part of the chest; his pulse
was very feeble; he was conscious, but did not speak. He
tried to loosen the bandages which were applied to chest, over
soap plaster; his wrists were fastened. He required an anodyne
first night, afterwards antimonial mixture and digitalis, and was
once bled to 12 ounces. He recovered from the accident and
worked for years at his trade, although his mind never recovered.
A man (588), aged 39, furious from drink, was admitted
twice; he fancied he saw the devil; he was a powerful man,
and in his fuiy would destroy everything he could lay his
hands on. He lecoveied, and was discharged in five months.
After his second admission he soon became well, but was very
reluctant to leave the asylum, where he made himself very
useful assisting the attendants.

Another mason (647), aged 48, very violent; hereditary
predisposition from his mother. He fancied he had property,
that he was the Saviour of mankind. This was the third or
fourth attack. In about six weeks he went out and worked at
his trade, and in four months was discharged recovered.
A bookbinder (717), aged 42, had two previous attacks,
violent sometimes; the first attack seventeen years before the
present one; his idea, that lie was Jesus Christ's vicegerent on
earth, and in order to prove himself so and to fulfil the prophecy,
" that a bone of Him should not be broken," he jumped out of
the express train from Exeter and escaped with only a bruise
on his shoulder. He was very excited, broke the reading desk
in the chapel; he wished to occupy the Chaplain's place, and
had to be expelled by force. He was subsequently transferred
to his proper asylum, being a native of Devonshire.

A male (731), aged 55 ; in bad health from hepatic and renal
disorder; suicidal, attempted to drown himself, and was also
dangerous towards his wife and family. In about five months
he was mentally recovered. Four years afterwards the same
symptoms of self-distraction and dangerous propensities re-
turned. In six months he was again discharged recovered.
A third attack occurred after seven years, which lasted five
months, when his miud appeared to be restored, and he was
discharged recovered.

A farmer (1422), aged 44, was reported as dangerous to
others only ; hereditary predisposition on mother's side. He
threatened to kill his wife. Health indifferent; three months
ill previous to admission. At the end of three months he was
quiet, and was taken home by his friends. Within two years
he was readmitted low-spirited, but became excited soon after
admission, and had to be moved from the infirmary. He
remained in indifferent health, irritable and excitable for nearly
eleven months, when he committed suicide by hanging himself
with his stockings to a gas pipe in a large dormitory during
breakfast time. There was congestion of blood in the cerebral
vessels, also in the lungs.

A dairy-woman (499), aged 59, hereditary predisposition;
second admission of two weeks duration; health bad; first
attack eight years before, not so violent as in the present one.
She attempted suicide by hanging, and the mark of the cord
remained. Noisy at night; she very soon improved ; had ano-
dynes to procure sleep. She assisted in the laundry, and was
discharged recovered in five and a half months. Nearly seven
years afterwards she had a third attack of mania, having again
attempted to destroy life by tying cords tightly round her neck ;
she refused food, and required forcible feeding by the stomach
tube; black under the eyes from knocking her head against
the wall; she required anodynes to procure sleep. In five
months she was again discharged recovered.

A female (514), aged 44, the third attack, was in an
asylum for eighteen months ten years before, caused from a
fright in a railway, seeing a child fall down an embankment in
front of train; she attempted suicide by hanging in the work-
house, and was just cut down in time to save her life. She was
incoherent at first and quiet; she soon became rational, and
was discharged at the expiration of three months recovered.
A mason's wife (605), aged 54, was in an asylum for sixteen
years for first attack, which came on after a fever; she was
violent and incoherent, noisy at night; she became rational,
but had frequent relapses ; was very industrious, working occa-
sionally in the laundry and in the kitchens; she remained
under treatment in the asylum thirteen years.

A dressmaker (1390), aged 38, second attack, of three
months' duration; seven years before she received a blow on the
head, which was the supposed cause. She was violent in her
conduct and incoherent in conversation ; occasionally noisy and
excited. Bromide of potassium, and half-grain solution of mor-
phia injected endermically had a tranquillising effect; at the
expiration of eighteen months she was discharged fro.m the
sylum recovered.

The results in recurrent mania, in males, were recoveries in
93, in females 106; not recovered, males 28, females 23 ; died,
males 27, females 35 ; remaining-, 26 males, 42 females. The
assigned causes of death were, from cerebral meningitis, arach-
nitis, cerebritis, and fluid in ventricles, 9 males and 6 females;
from pulmonary diseases 12 males, including 6 of phthisis, and
14 females, including 9 of phthisis; cardiac diseases in 2
males, and cardiac dropsy in 1 female, and aneurism of the
aorta in 1 female; abdominal diseases, 4 in males, viz. 1 of
peritonitis, 2 of enteritis, and 1 of jaundice, and 13 abdominal,
including 7 of enteritis, including 2 from obstruction, 3 from
ulceration and dysentery, 2 from cancer, and 1 from dropsy.
Post-mortem examinations were made in 17 males and 22
females, second attack; and in 5 males and 12 females, third
attack and upwards. The circumference of skull in the males
who died in the second attack varied from 21 to 23^ inches,
and in temales from 2L to 231 inches, the average in the males
being 22*4 and in the females 21*6; the average anteropos-
terior measurement was in the males 12*8 and in females 12-5
inches; the average transverse measurement in males 12-2 and
in females 11*7 inches. These measurements are at all ages,
varying from 23 to 56 years in males, and from 23 to 56 years
(the same) in females.

The cerebral membranes and brain varied more or less from
the natural state in 13 males and 13 females, the dura mater
was unusually adherent in 4 males and 2 females, the arachnoid
opaque in 4 males and 1 female, and containing fluid in 2 males,
congestion of blood in the vessels in 3 males and 2 females, cen-
tral softening of brain in 1 male, the brain unusually pale and
firm in 2 males and 3 females, tough in 1 male, fluid in ven-
tricles in 4 females, the biain appeared natural in 4 males and
9 females.

The right cerebral hemisphere varied in weight from ] 6f to
24 ounces in males and from 16^ to 22 ounces in females; the
average weight in males was 21*1 and in females 19*2. The left
cerebral hemisphere varied from 14 to 24 ounces in males, and
from 17^to22 in females; the average weight in males was 21*2,
in females 19'8 ; the average weight of the cerebellum in males
was 5*4 and in females 4*7 ounces, and of the pons and medulla
1*1 in males and 1 in females; the average weight of the ence-
phalon was 49 in males and 44*8 ounces in females. The spinalcord
was soft in 2 males and 1 female ; pale and firm in 1 male and 1
female, blood in the canal in 2 males and 2 females, and fluid
in 2 of each sex ; the average weight in males was 1*2 and in
females 1*1 ounce. There was pericarditis in 1 male, the heart
flabby in 1 male, enlarged in 5 males and 3 females, small in 3
males and in 7 females; it varied in weight in males from 5f to
19^ ounces, and in females from 5? to 13? ounces; the average
weight in males was 10*2 and in iemales 8 ounces.

In the 5 cases examined in males of recurrent mania, third
attack and upwards, and in the 12 females, the ages varied in
the males from 54 to 79 years, and in the females from 48 to
74 years. The assigned causes of death in the males were from
meningitis and jaundice in 1, broncho-pneumonia in 2, phthisis 1,
and valvular disease of heart in 1 male; in females from menin-
gitis in 2, pleurisy and phthisis in 4, cardiac dropsy 1, enteritis
3, cancer of uterus 1, and dysentery 1. The average circum-
ference of the head was 22*4 in males and 21-2 in females, the
antero-posterior measurement 12*3 in males and 12*2 in females,
the transverse 12*2 in males and 11 -5 in females. The average
weight of the right cerebral hemisphere was 21*5 in males ana
20*4 in females, and the left cerebral hemisphere 21-8 in males
and 20*5 in females; the average weight of the cerebellum was
5*3 in males and 4'9 in females, and of the pons and medulla *9
in both sexes ; encephalon 49*6 in males and 46*8 in females.
The spinal cord was disintegrated in 1 male, softened at lower
part in 1 male and 3 females, fluid in the canal in 2 females;
average weight in males 1*2 and in females 1*1 ounce. The
heart was enlarged in 2 males and 4 females, and small, below
the average size, in 1 male and in 6 females ; the average weight
in males was 11*2 and in females 9*2 ounces.
Monomania.

In this form of insanity, in which the understanding is only
partially deranged, the numbers were as follows:?
Males. Females.

From 20 to 30 years of age .11 5
? 30 to 40 ? . 11 10
? 40 to 50 ? . . 10 14
? 50 to 60 ? 8 7
? 60 to 70 ? 6 3
? 70 to 80 ? 1 2
Total 47 41

Of these, 16 males and 17 females were married, 18 males and
13 females single, 8 males and 11 females widowed, and in
5 males the civil state was unknown.

The supposed causes were?from hereditary predisposition
in 3 males and 4 females, from drink in 2 males, from religious
enthusiasm in 4 males and 4 females, previous illness in 4 males
and 6 females, belief in witchcraft in 3 males and 5 females,
love in 4 males and 4 females, exalted ideas about riches &c.
9 males and 3 females, grief and poverty in 4 males and
7 females, conspiracy to injure in 1 male and 2 females, fright
in 1 male, injury in 1, and reading in 1 ; unknown causes, 10
males and 5 females.

The conduct at the time of admission was reported as being
dangerous in 4 males and 2 females, violent in 4 males and
2 females, suicidal in 4 males and 2 females, irritable and
stubborn in 2 females, noisy in 1, excited and mischievous in
4 males, absurd in 2, quiet in 4 males and 4 females, indus-
trious in 12 males and 15 females, destructive in 2 males and
3 females, wandering in 2 males and 2 females, idle and listless
in the remainder of both sexes.

The results in cases of monomania were :?
Males. Females.
Recovered . . .19 12
Not recovered . . .14 12
Died .... 7 12
Remaining ... 7 5
Total 47 41

Mental dejection is so frequent an accompaniment, that
those cases were not formerly distinguished from those of
melancholia; and the varieties of hallucinations are so great,
that an endless subdivision might be made of the different
forms of monomania. Amongst the males admitted several
considered themselves the highest personages. One was King
Solomon ; one the Prince of Wales ; another, a second Duke of
Wellington ; another, a friend, in the habit of conversing with
Her Majesty; some have fancied that they possessed immense
riches, others that they had been deprived of property; some
had religious hallucinations; some were bewitched, others
visited by spirits; one was a descendant of the great Locke,
from his name, and fancied he inherited his powers of
mind. Of the females, one fancied herself Queen Elizabeth ;
there were more than one representative of Her Majesty Queen
Victoria; one fancied she held conversations with Captain Speke ;
one fancies she has killed a number of children; others had
religious despondency and misgivings, visitations from spirits;
some from jealousy, and delusions about male admirers in more
than one instance.

Puerperal Insanity.

This form of disorder has shown itself immediately on
women becoming pregnant; more generally it comes on soon
after delivery, and for this reason women ought to be kept
quiet for two or three weeks. In some cases it has come on
when the breasts have been inflamed, or an abscess has been
formed at the time of the first suckling, or at the weaning of
the child seven or eight months after delivery. There are in
sucli cases the general symptoms of fever; the skin has often
a yellow tinge.

Of 63 cases in the Somerset County Asylum, 6 came on a
week after parturition, 11 before the fifteenth day, 28 before
the sixtieth, and 15 within twelve months, and 3 upwards of
fifteen months, transferred from other asylums. In only 2 cases
did the mental derangement come on previous to childbirth ;
in 22 within a few days after, in 34 at various periods later, the
greater number being during lactation. There was a sinking
feeling, great prostration, vertigo, headache, antemia, loss of
appetite, restlessness, sleeplessness, and despondency after
protracted lactation. In 14 of the 34 cases attempts at suicide
had been made by hanging, drowning, poison, or precipitation
from heights; 2 were violent to the infant, 7 had taken a
dislike to their children and husband, 12 were dangerous to
their family and others, 1 was suspicious, 1 fancied she was
bewitched, 1 was hysterical, and 2 epileptic.

Causes.?Hereditary predisposition was found on the father's
side in 4, on the mother's side in 5, and it existed in the
family of 4 patients, but on which side was not ascertained.
There were other predisposing causes in addition to the heredi-
tary taint; in 2 previous attacks of insanity, in 1 epilepsy, in 1
hysteria, in 5 excessive irritability of temper, in 2 stubborn-
ness, and in 1 fretfulness. Apart from these, the moral
causes only include 2 instances of remorse, 2 of fright, 2 of
poverty and desertion, and 8 of intemperance. The 'physical
causes were nearly equal in number to all the foregoing, includ-
ing 15 cases of bodily illness, 8 of milk-fever, and 5 of debility
and prostration from suckling.

Of the forms of puerperal insanity, mania was the most
frequent, being 3 to 1 of the cases of melancholia; but they
frequently alternated after the maniacal paroxysms; great de-
pression and despondency succeeded and continued for some
time. There were 7 of the 60 demented. In 10 cases insanity
occurred after the birth of the first child; in 42 there were
previous births, varying in number from 10 downwards; in 11
the number of previous confinements was not ascertained.
There were 19 infants of each sex, two instances of twins, 2
miscarriages, and 2 in which the sex of the infant born is not
stated. The greater number of cases were admitted in spring,
in the second quarter of the year.

Any serious disturbance in the uterine functions speedily
affects the brain?a fright during pregnancy has produced
insanity. Sometimes the offspring is rendered idiotic by a
mental shock to the mother, and I have known malformation
to be attributed to the same cause, although the mother herself
escaped insanity.

Cases have occurred in which the maniacal symptoms have
subsided, and the patient become comparatively tranquil during'
utero-gestation, and after parturition a relapse into the previous
state has taken place. In three instances in which both parents
were insane, one infant died in a few months ; a second, unusually
quick, died of acute disease and convulsions in childhood, and
the third, which survived, was quick, active, and as capable of
learning as any boy of his age at school, and with a fully
developed head.

There is no end of the variety of symptoms in puerperal
insanity. The symptoms gradually become exaggerated, the
talking becomes incessant, and generally on a particular subject;
she is dissatisfied with herself and full of anxiety, has a strong
aversion to her infant and husband, displays explosions of anger,
violent gesticulations, and obscene language. Illusions quickly
succeed one another, or fixed monomania supervenes, often
commencing with religion. Fear of poison, or of murder, hear-
ing voices, and a suicidal tendency are common. 21 of the 63
cases were suicidal. The maniacal symptoms in some cases come
on suddenly.

The physical symptoms were not always alike; the secretion
of milk was not always diminished ; headache and constipation
have taken place. The state of the tongue varied ; of the
63 cases it was white in 18, red in 4, clean in 23, not noted
in 18. The skin was sometimes hot, with feverish symptoms and
accelerated pulse. If the pulse was quick and feeble, above
100, combined with dark offensive dejections, offensive breath,
sordes on lips and teeth, excitement and emaciation, danger of
life was near. Of the 63 cases, on admission the pulse was from
64 to 70 and feeble in 5, from 70 to 80 in 16, from 80 to 90
in 19, from 90 to 100 in 8, upwards of 100 to 180 in 13, not
noted in 2. The bodily health was good in 8 only, feeble and
indifferent in 25, and bad in 30.

The age in quinquennial periods, number of cases, and the
results in the 63 cases were : ?

Age
20 to 25
25 to 30
30 to 35
35 to 40
40 to 45
Total
No. in each
period
10
18
12
11
12
63
Results
Recovered
9
15
10
6
45
Not
recovered
Died
Remaining

As generally the case, the proportion of recoveries was
greatest in the earlier periods of life, being 82 per cent, under
30 years ; the mortality 11 per cent. Recoveries in the whole
number at all ages, 70 per cent.

Mortality.?7 cases; 2 of these were attended with uterine
haemorrhage. In 1 case (810), aged 22, mental derangement
appeared two weeks after confinement. She had been under
medical treatment in the Union workhouse; had uterine
haemorrhage, health bad, pulse 66, tongue clean, skin warm,
appetite bad, wild expression, violent, incoherent, wandering,
memory lost. After admission noisy and destructive; her appetite
improved. She was treated in the Infirmary for three months;
no mental improvement took place; her knees became contracted;
and she died emaciated, her appetite remaining good to the last.
The body only weighed 52 lbs. ; circumference of skull
20 inches, antero-posterior 12, and transverse measurement 12^
inches. The brain was unusually pale, 41^ ounces; the left cere-
bral hemisphere was 1^ ounce heavier than the right. The spinal
cord was paler and softer than natural, f ounce ; the lungs
natural; heart small, only 5^ ounces ; liver dark coloured, 38
ounces ; the mucous membrane of the intestines thickened and
red ; uterus If ounce. Cause of death, enteritis.

In a second case (319), attended with flooding after miscar-
riage, the wife of a policeman, aged 37 ; was transferred from a
licensed house, and the flooding occurred five weeks previous
to her admission. She attempted strangulation, refused food,
was violent occasionally and inclined to strike persons, memory
good and conversation connected, fretful and obstinate, health
indifferent, pulse 90, tongue clean, weight 105 lbs., height 5
feet 2 inches. She continued in the asylum for eight years
without any mental change, when she tell a victim to pulmonary
phthisis, which, according to my experience, is the usual termi-
nation of old residents in large institutions of the kind. The
body was examined 23 hours after death. The circumference
of the head 22 inches, antero-posterior 13 inches, and trans-
verse measurement 14 inches ; brain large, 48^ ounces, in other
respects it appeared natural, as did the spinal cord. Tubercles
and cavities in the upper lobes of both lungs?the right weighed
261, and the left 21 ounces ; heart large, and cavities dilated,
12 ounces ; about one quart of serum in the abdomen; liver
large, 60 ; kidneys large, right 5%, left 6^- ounces ; uterus 2^
ounces.

The third fatal case (869) occurred in a farmer's wife, aged
27. She was admitted in a state of delirium, having attempted
to injure her children and also herself; skin hot; pulse 120.
The attack was of one week's duration previous to admission,
and four months after childbirth. Her health bad ; she had a
carbuncle on her back ; mind wandering and incoherent;
memory lost; destructive propensities. For the first week she
refused food, and was fed by the stomach tube ; pulse fell to 80.
She continued without mental improvement, and was restless.
Her death occurred four weeks after admission. Weight of the
body 91 lbs. ; circumference of head 21 inches, antero-posterior
13^, transverse measurement 14 inches ; dura mater adherent;
right cerebral hemisphere 19, left 19-| ounces ; encephalon 44 ;
cord natural; bronchitis ; spleen soft and large, 14-^ ounces ;
uterus 2^ ounces.

Fourth case (344). The wife of a blacksmith, aged 38, was
confined of her fourth child seven months before admission.
She attempted to drown herself, and disowned her children.
She was under the delusion that she had seen the Queen in
Bath the previous day. She subsequently refused to take food,
and wished to stay in bed to avoid her meals. She sank from
dysentery and enteritis, about six months after admission.
Body emaciated, 64 lbs.; circumference of head 20, antero-
posterior 12, transvei se 12-2 inches. ihe cerebral vessels were
congested with blood; about f ounce of clear fluid in the
lateral ventricles ; the right cerebral hemisphere 17f, left 18,
encephalon 41 ? ounces ; lungs natural; heart small, 6f ounces;
mucous membrane of the intestines red, thickened, and coated
with lymph.

1* iffch case (668), aged 38, second attack, duration one
month, infant 9 weeks old ; reported as violent; in bad health;
pulse 84, tongue white, skin moist, appetite bad, dejected,
noisy at night, and destiuctive. She had a cough, lost flesh,
and after a few weeks required to be fed by stomach tube. She
died in six months after her admission. Weight 72 lbs.; cir-
cumference of head 21^, antero-posterior 13-|-, transverse
measurement 13 inches; cerebral vessels congested with blood ;
brain of a pink colour, and unusually firm; the right cerebral
hemisphere 19, the left 19encephalon 44-^ ounces; spinal
cord natural; old pleuritic adhesions of lungs, and numerous
tubercles in right lung, 20 ounces; an abscess in the left lung,
in lower lobe, and gangrene in parts around it; heart small,
6^ ounces ; abdominal organs natural.

Sixth case (551), aged 40, epileptic; suckling her baby eight
months old. Maniacal in workhouse, duration two weeks;
health indifferent, pulse 84, tongue clean, skin cool,
appetite good, silly; for many years subject to epileptic
fits, which were most frequent by day, 48, and 15 by night in
a year; violent when fits occur, at other times industrious. She
was ten years in the asylum, and died of pulmonary phthisis.
For the last two and a half years her health declined, and fits
more frequent; she had a cough, but no expectoration. Body
85 lbs.; circumference of head 21?, antero-posterior 12^,
transverse measurement, 11 inches. The brain pale and
unusually firm, each cerebral hemisphere 2H; encephalon large,
48 ounces; spinal cord natural, 1^ ounce; pleuritic adhesions
and tuberculous cavities in both lungs, the right 30, the left
lung 36 ounces; heart 8 ounces, semilunar valves thickened ;
abdominal organs natural.

Seventh case (964), aged 45, mother of ten children ; second
attack ; in an asylum fourteen years before. The present attack
of fourteen months' duration, and came on a month after her
confinement; disposed to be suicidal; noisy, occasionally
violent; her bodily health improved at first, and she assisted
the attendants. Three weeks before her death she became
feverish ; there was dulness on the left side of the chest on
percussion; breathing short and laboured ; she gradually sank.
Weight of body 85 lbs.; height five feet three inches; circum-
ference of head 20 inches, antero-posterior 12, transverve 11
inches ; brain pale, 44 ounces; spinal cord natural, 1 ounce ;
two pints of fluid in the chest; a thick covering of recent lymph
on left lung, which was compressed; heart small, 6 ounces ;
abdominal organs natural.

Of these seven fatal cases, the cerebral membranes were
adherent, with fluid in the ventricles, in one ; in a case of pul-
monary phthisis the brain was of a pink colour, firm, and above
the average weight. In one a great difference in weight
between the cerebral hemispheres in favour of the left, which
is generally slightly heavier than the right. The spinal cord
was softened in one, and the knees were contracted. In a
similar case of contraction the softening was from disintegra-
tion in the spinal cord, which is different from the inflammatory
softening of the cord, first noticed in the earliest annual reports
of the County Somerset Asylum, for 1849 and subsequently, as
a chief cause, and constantly to be found in general paralysis of
the insane. There were three deaths from pulmonary phthisis,
one from hydrothorax, and two from enteritis.

With respect to treatment, the success mainly depends on
the patients being submitted to us without delay, which was not
the case, as fifty-one of the women were ill, on an average, nine
weeks before being brought to the asylum. Exhaustion is the
principal source of danger, often from sleeplessness ; opium in
any shape in such cases often only aggravates the restlessness.
After the bowels have been freely opened by a suitable aperient,
hyoscyamus, chloral hydrate, combined with bromide of
potas. or ammonia, or with a stimulant, as ammonia or camphor,
in full doses rather than small ones repeated, may be given.
Chloroform vapour and the inhalation of sulphuric ether failed
to procure sleep. The subcutaneous injection of morphia has
been effectual; also packing in the wet sheet had a very tran-
quillising effect. Tonics, as cod-liver oil, iron, bark, and
quinine, were all found necessary in many of the cases.
Forced alimentation was often required, especially in the
suicidal cases, the refusal to take food being a very common
occurrence ; this was most effectually done by means of an
elastic tube passed down the mouth, or in some by a small one
down the nostril where the teeth were perfect and firmly
clenched, a half-pint feeding bowl being attached to the tube.
Where the skin and extremities were cold, the portal system con-
gested, and the liver torpid, warm stimulating aperients were
given. The Turkish bath was often found very beneficial in
such cases.

The great difference in the weights of the body is worthy of
remark. In the first case (810) it was only 52 lbs., although
the appetite for three months previous to death remained good
to the last. Judging from the weight alone, it might have been
set down as a case of starvation.
