Report of the Board of State Charities of Massachusetts
========================================================

Through the courtesy and kindness of Dr Nathan Allen we
have received the thirteenth Annual Eeport of the Massa-
chusetts State Charity.

The Eeport is most admirably drawn up, and contains a
careful description of the various Lunatic Hospitals, with
remarks upon the condition of Lunacy in the State. We read
on page 64 : " It is in the highest degree desirable that the
hospitals and asylums in which the insane are maintained
(whether for cure or restraint, or simply for support at the
public expense), should enjoy the confidence of the public.
Within the memory of persons now living, the American
asylums did receive this confidence much more fully than was
true of the English asylums. Since the establishment of the
English Commission of Lunacy (in consequence of the fragrant
abuses there) the English asylums have greatly improved, and
now are viewed with less suspicion and distrust by the general
public. Even in Massachusetts, where our asylums have been
generally well managed, a feeling of distrust has sometimes
existed, and this cannot fail to be increased by such abuses as
those described at Tewksbury. Why should American asylums
have been losing the public confidence, while those in England
and Scotland, once inferior to ours, have been gaining it ? In
the opinion of one of the most experienced and successful of the
American superintendents (W. Butler, of Hartford), it is partly
because our asylums have been overcrowded, and have not been
subjected to the strict supervision long required by the law of
Great Britain. In Massachusetts, and we believe everywhere
else, the hospitals and asylums which have had the most vigilant
supervision are now the best, and stand highest in the public
esteem."

We cannot for one moment admit the fact that the American
asylums have been losing public confidence. From what we
have heard and read of their management, we wish to express
our decided opinion that the American asylums are quite as well
managed as those in our o<vn country, and there is no reason
why they should be condemned on the report of one individual.
The United States contain many eminent psychologists who
have made a world-renowned reputation by their writings ; and
we state authoritatively that everything is done by kindness and
skilful treatment to promote the welfare and humane manage-
ment of the insane.
