Notes on a visit to the Asylum of St. Anne, At Paris
======================================================

Art. XIII.?
:Author:  HENRY SUTHERLAND, M.D.

The Asylum of St. Anne is situated in the south of Paris,
within the fortifications. It may be easily reached from the
Palais de Justice, by omnibuses labelled " La Glaciere," and it
is only a quarter of an hour's drive from the Luxembourg
Gallery. The tourist should apply to Dr Lucas beforehand,
by letter, either from England or from Paris, for permission to
view the asylum.

It is worth mentioning that the Hopital de Lourcine, or
Female Lock Hospital, is passed on the road to the asylum,
which the tourist might also visit; but a special order for this is
necessary, which may be obtained on application to the Minister
of the Interior.

The Asylum of St. Anne consists of a series of extremely
handsome stone buildings, the roofs of which are of tiles,
arranged in classical form, and of a peculiarly cheerful orange-
red colour.
The asylum was built in 1867. It contains 600 patients?
300 males and 300 females.

The two sides of the asylum correspond in every minute
particular. The visiting-room is handsome and spacious. It
contains about a dozen little round tables, surrounded by
chairs, and arranged at such a distance from each other that
the different groups of friends can converse with their patient,
without being overheard by other visitors. The visiting days
are limited to two during the week, Wednesday and Sunday,
between the hours of one and three.

Eestraint is but little used. The camisole and sleeves are
occasionally resorted to in dangerous cases. W e observed one
epileptic confined in one of these strait waistcoats. They
resemble ours in every respect, except that there is a strong
band passing over the crossed arms from below the waist up-
wards to the neck, which prevents the patient striking out in
front with both arms together.

There are six wards on each side of the asylum. No. 1 is
for the more quiet patients. The airing court of this quartier
was profusely ornamented with beds of flowers. The dining-
rooms have one side, next the airing court, glazed. By opening
the large windows on this side, the whole can be thrown open,
so that the patients can walk about and enjoy the air without
exposure to the rain in wet weather.

The bathing accommodation was very complete. Outside the
bath-rooms there was stationed an elaborate gymnastic appa-
ratus, consisting of ropes, pulleys, and weights, which could be
used by the patients after taking the bath.

The baths were tepid, and were usually given at a tempera-
ture of 50? C. Their duration is about one hour or less for the
mere object of cleansing, and usually two hours for therapeutical
purposes, but they are in exceptional cases prolonged to six
hours. We noticed a particularly well-arranged needle-bath,
with a rectum douche, over which the patient stood astride.
Another sitz-bath was well worthy of attention. Over it the
patient stooped in a squatting position, and a powerful jet of
water attacked him in front, whilst a series of jets operated
Upon him from behind.

It Was found to be very serviceable in all diseases of those
parts requiring cleansing by a strong stream of water. The
vapour-bath was also comfortable and well arranged. It was
taken at a temperature of 60? C.
This asylum is under the control of the Minister of the
Interior. It is not a charity, but those who are able, pay 2fr.
50c. a-day towards their maintenance. There is no other scale
of charges.

The bed of the chief attendant of each ward is placed close
to a barred window, which enables him to see at any moment
into the ward from his room outside. Should there be any dis-
turbance, he can ring a bell and call the other attendants; there
are three attendants attached to each ward, and each ward con-
tains fifty patients. In the more dangerous wards there are
four attendants.

M. Lucas makes his visit of the wards at nine o'clock every
morning. There is only one regular medical visit during the
day.

There are fifty Sisters of Mercy in the asylum (whom, by
the way, it is proper to address as " ma sceur," and not as
" madame"), who belong to the order of the Soeurs de St.
Joseph. One sister and two female attendants are attached
to each ward.

The chapel is built in the form of a cross. On one side sit
the men, on the other the women. One recess is set apart for
the officials of the asylum, and the one opposite contains a
magnificent organ.

The Asylum of St. Anne is perfect in every way, and will
well repay the trouble of a visit*
