Sensational Science
=====================

242
Art. V.?
:Author: J. M. WINN, M.D., M.R.C.P., ETC.

Last year the meeting of the British Association, under the
presidency of Dr Edwards, at Glasgow, formed an agreeable
contrast to that at Belfast in 1874, when the public mind was
startled and alarmed by the announcement of sensational
doctrines, alike false and dangerous. We regret to find that,
at the recent meeting at Plymouth, some of the members again
came forward and read sensational papers of a similar character,
which, to judge from the reports, were rapturously received, and
which seemed to derive their piquancy chiefly from the fact
that the views they contained were calculated to place science
in antagonism to the Bible.

Professor Allen Thomson stood forth as the champion of the
doctrine of evolution. He advocated the Darwinian hypothesis
in its utmost extravagance, and repeated what has been so often
told respecting the origin of species. If the supporters of this
theory reiterate their old arguments in its favour, their oppo-
nents must be excused for again bringing forward, on their
side, the strong facts which have never been refuted.
In 1875 I wrote as follows in the Journal of Psychological
Medicine. After remarking that Darwin's hypothesis was not
an immutable law, but only an unverified theory, I observed:
" Lamarck had previously shadowed it forth, and his views on
the development of species out of changes of habit and external
conditions were fully set before the public by the author of
4 Vestiges of Creation.' I can remember when that book
appeared and the furor it occasioned, an excitement equal
to that caused by Darwin's ' Descent of Man.' But it was
a nine days' wonder, and would have sunk into utter oblivion
had it not been revived by the publication of Darwin's work.
The chief argument in favour of the theory, and that on which
so much stress is laid, is nothing more than a common fact,
well known to all breeders of animals and to every gardener,
that an endless variety of animals and plants can be produced
by careful selection, crossing, etc. No one, however, has suc-
ceeded in producing a new genus, or a decidedly new species.
Can Darwin give a wiser reason for the barrenness of mules
than the one commonly received, that the Deity has willed
that there should be no confusion of species? If the facts
are pressed on the evolutionist that the forms and features
of men and animals are the same now as they were thousands
of years ago, as depicted on the Egyptian monuments, or as
still traceable in tlie mummies of the pyramids, and that the
intellect of man has never been developed in a higher degree
than it was in the days of the Hebrew prophets and Greek
poets, the stereotyped answer is, that evolution requires not
only thousands, but billions upon billions of years for the
development of a new species. This is dreaming, not sober
reasoning. The palaeontologist can read the records of the
past stamped on the crust of the earth, but who can read the
future of a million years to come? The mind of man has
not only a limited field of observation, but has also limits to its
own power, and it is not a healthy exercise for the mind to
indulge over much in the pleasures of the imagination. So far,
however, as we can judge from observation of the past, we see
but little prospect of ever bridging over the gulf which
separates man from the brute creation. It would be an endless
task to discuss all the difficulties that beset the theory of
evolution. It is impossible for Darwin to answer the ques-
tions that are incessantly cropping up, such as: Through what
channel does the nightingale derive her song ? Are the wings of
birds derived from the quills of the porcupine ? Whence did
the beaver gain her constructive power ? How did the spider
learn to spin her geometric web, or the carrier pigeon acquire
her wonderful instinct? Is the beauty of flowers, which are the
grace and ornament of the earth, due to natural selection ?
Questions like these might be asked ad infinitum, and in vain.
" All naturalists have observed the gradation of organisation,
from the lowest of beings up to man, on which Darwin and his
followers lay such stress, as well as the similarity of their bodily
functions and conformation, showing the archetypal unity which
is found throughout nature; but this does not exclude the
probability of each species or genus being a separate act of
creation."

The power of bioplasm to develop various forms of life is un-
questioned, but can the evolutionist explain how it is that in
one instance it will develop a bee, and in another a badger ?
As zealous supporters of the Darwinian hypothesis, Huxley
and Herbert Spencer were spoken of by Br: Allen Thomson
with unbounded admiration. He thinks that they are revolu-
tionising British thought; and it is to be deplored that many?
only half-educated persons?who gain their knowledge second-
hand from the daily journals without labour, readily adopt
opinions which they have no means of verifying, but which lead
them to suppose that they are taking profound and unprejudiced
views of difficult and abstract questions. There is, however, a
host of great and earnest thinkers, including Thomas Carlyle,
who do not subscribe to the notion that man is of bestial origin.
Darwin and Huxley in their special field of research hold the
first rank; it is when they step out of their own track, and
speculate on the mysteries of creation, that they show their
weakness. Common sense recoils from their erroneous deductions.
When they can demonstrate that evolution is a great and unde-
viating law, it will be the proper time to announce it. We are
indebted to Darwin for most fascinating descriptions of animal
and vegetable life, but what has Herbert Spencer really done for
science or philosophy that he should be held up as a shining light ?
As a writer he is obscure and pedantic, and his style forms a
striking contrast to the simplicity and perspicuity of our greatest
writers. This is what he says of evolution: " Evolution is a
change from indefinite incoherent homogeneity to a definite
coherent heterogeneity, through continuous differentiations and
integrations." This is little short of nonsense. Here again is
his indefinite definition of life : he says it is " a continuous
adjustment of internal relations to external relations." Can
such expressions as these be considered indications of a master
mind, and is such a teacher to be looked up to as a guiding star ?
The most sensational paper read at the meeting, and the one
which seems to have attracted the largest audience, was that
by Mr. Pengelly, F.R.S., on the " Caverns of Devon." Mr.
Pengelly is well known as a most enthusiastic and painstaking
geologist, and the public are much indebted to him for the
untiring energy with which he has devoted himself for many
years to cave-hunting. He was one of those who were selected
by the Royal Society to examine the contents of the Brixham
Cavern. It is therefore to be regretted that, on insufficient evi-
dence, he should have availed himself of the influence of his
position to imbue the public mind with the notion that the facts
revealed by the exploration of the Brixham Cavern proved the
existence of man in Devon during the pre-glacial, or at least
inter-glacial period. The chief evidence is derived from the
discovery of what he terms flint implements and a stone hammer
in the cavern. It is fair that the public should know what has
been said on the other side of the question.

Mr. Whitley, whose talent, enthusiasm, and geological attain-
ments are not inferior to those of Mr. Pengelly, has made most
careful examinations of the Brixham Cavern, and his deductions
are diametrically opposed to those of the former gentleman.
In several papers which he read before the " Victoria Institute,
or Philosophical Society of Grreat Britain," Mr. Whitley con-
tended that the supposed flint implements are not of human
manufacture, and are nothing more than pieces of rubble flint
and fragmentary flakes that had drifted into the cavern, and
he adduced good evidence to prove that they had a geological,
not ail antiquarian origin. He stated that, if a nodule of flint
be crushed by a heavy blow, it will shiver into flakes precisely
similar to those found in the cavern, and, moreover, that change
of temperature will split silicious minerals into flakes resem-
bling knives and scrapers.

With regard to the so-called stone hammer, Mr. Prestwich
is of opinion that it is a Budleigh-Salterton pebble; and Mr.
Whitley observes that it was imbedded in drifted gravel similar
to that of the neighbouring raised beaches. He believes that
it was introduced into the cavern by natural causes, and that
the indentations on its surface, which have been regarded as
signs of its having been used as a hammer, are due to its having
been " battered by a thousand storms."

Southall, the eminent American geologist, in his work on
the " Eecent Origin of Man,"* gives it as his opinion that the
earliest inhabitants of western Europe were intelligent savages,
like the Esquimaux or Indians, and that neither archaeology nor
geology have detected any earlier form. We may therefore
hesitate to believe that the aborigines of Devon were no better
than beasts, who herded with wild animals in dens and caves.
He mentions a curious fact, which shows how cautious observers
who have pet theories should be, not to jump to hasty conclu-
sions. A skull said to have been found in a cave was pronounced
by Huxley to be a most brutal human skull. It was afterwards
discovered, on careful examination, to be an average skull.
Moreover, it was not associated with extinct animals, and was
discovered under five feet of mud ! In the face of these facts,
the Illustrated London News for the 25th of August last, in
the report of Mr. Pengelly's paper, confidently assures us that
the " discovery and systematic exploration of a comparatively
small virgin cavern on Windmill Hill, at Brixham [in 1858],
led to a sudden and complete revolution, for it was seen that,
whatever were the facts elsewhere, there had undoubtedly been
found at Brixham flint implements, commingled with remains
of the mammoth and its companions, and in such a way as to
render it impossible to doubt that man occupied Devonshire
before the extinction of the cave mammoth."

This confident tone is in marked contrast to that of Mr. J.
Evans, F.E.S. (President of the Geological Society). At the
Conference which met on the 22nd May 1877 to discuss the
question of the Antiquity of Man, he said that this point was
still far from being settled, and that the greatest care was
necessary in dealing with the subject. After referring to the
recent explorations in France, Spain, and Switzerland, he con-
sidered that there were so many sources of doubt and error,
associated with isolated discoveries, that the watchword for the
present must be " Caution?Caution?Caution." These remarks
come with the greater force from Mr. Evans, as he was formerly
a believer in the authenticity of the flint implements found in
the Brixham Cavern. With all this evidence to the contrary, it
is not so certain, in spite of all Mr. Pengelly says, that this
Orson?this wild man of the caves? this palaeolithic monster?
ever inhabited the caverns of Devon.

Another subject of intellectual excitement at the meeting
was the suggestion of Sir William Thomson that living organism
might exist in a crevice of a meteoric stone at the time of its fall-
ing on the earth, and that in this manner a Colorado Beetle might
have made its first appearance among us. As meteoric stones
are supposed to be in a state of ignition before they fall, it is
impossible that any form of life could survive the high tem-
perature to which it must have been exposed. Grranting a
supreme intelligence, combined with boundless power?and it
is impossible to ignore these when we consider how the vast
wheels of the universe have revolved, with chronometer-like
precision, for millions of years?granting this, it is much easier
to conceive that the beetle, or its germ, was created on the
earth than that it was conveyed here in the roundabout way
suggested by Sir William Thomson.

The candid inquirer must admit that the most recent dis-
coveries in biology and palaeontology have failed to overthrow
the time-honoured belief that man was the last product of
creative power, and that science and Scripture are not at
variance on the point. The wonderful revelations of modern
science, when looked at from the right point of view, afford
additional evidence of design. As the author of " More Worlds
than One " observes?" Science has ever been, and ever must be,
the safeguard of religion; the grandeur of its truths may
transcend our failing reason, but those who cherish and lean on
truths equally grand, but certainly more incomprehensible,
ought to see in the marvels of the natural world the best
defences and illustrations of the mysteries of our faith.*
In taking exception to some of the addresses delivered at
the meeting at Plymouth, it is not implied that they were all
of the same sensational character. Several of them were
generally admitted to be of great practical value.

The British Association was established for the advancement
of science, and not for the diffusion of extravagant speculations.
If the Association is to become little more than a gigantic pic-
nic, enlivened by sensational addresses, the sooner it comes to
an end the better.

" . * Quoted by Dominick McCausland, in his Sermons in Stones. Tenth
edition. Richard Bentloy, New Burlington Street, London.
