Laws Of Hereditary Descent
===========================

152
Art. XII.?
:Author:  Nathan Allen, M.D.,
Lowell, Massachusetts, Commissioner in Lunacy to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
When Jeliovah issued His commands in the Decalogue, not
only to the Israelites, but to His creatures in all coming- time,
saying ; ? I, the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation," it was intended that there should be some
meaning in that visitation. When the laws of the human
system are correctly and fully understood, it will be seen that
this ordinance is not all a dead letter.

The term " iniquity," as here used, has a broad significa-
tion, including the consequences or penalties of each and every
violated law, whether that law be expressed in the revealed
command of God, or stamped by the same Almighty power
upon the human constitution. In the fulfilment of this com-
mand or decree, whatever divine influences or agencies may
be brought into operation in other respects, it is positively
certain that by the fixed laws of hereditary descent, the
iniquities of the fathers, in a variety of forms, are visited upon
the children, even to the fourth generation. We might speak
of the effects of a bad example, of evil instruction, and a
train of corrupt influences in a great variety of ways, whereby
the iniquity of the parents comes upon their children* but
there is another channel in which the effects of this visitation
are more direct, positive, and powerful than these outward agen-
cies. The former may be more easily overcome or corrected
but the latter are far more difficult to change, at least for the'
better.

While we have had instructions on this subject for thou-
sands of years, and still have from the pulpit, from the press,
and in many other ways, but little, comparatively, is said or
written on the direct 'physical relation of parent and child.
When the laws of physiology are fully and correctly under-
stood in this respect, they will throw new light upon the duties
and responsibilities of the parental relation. In fact it is
impossible to realise or conceive at present the value or the
amount of knowledge which will yet be brought from this
source to bear practically upon all the relations&of life. Only
a few suggestions can be made in a short article?that,
too, bearing simply on one relation. No language can express
the importance of transmitting a sound healthy body. It is
the Lest capital which any human body can possess. It can
be used or turned to more valuable account than any other
possession. A large proportion of the weaknesses and diseases
of the body are transmitted?that is, the liabilities, the pre-
dispositions, the seeds of disease. What multitudes go through
life racked with pains and sufferings, crippled and disabled in
all their efforts by reason of inherited weaknesses! Many, too,
on this account, sink down into an early grave ; while to others
is allotted, perhaps, a long life of feebleness and suffering !
The more thoroughly the primary causes of disease, toge-
ther with the laws of birth and life, are understood, the more
are the starting-points, the original sources, the mainsprings
of disease, found to exist in the body itself. As pathology is
comparatively a new science, it is difficult to determine with
exactness what proportion of disease thus originates, but it
would not be surprising if one-tliird or one-halt can be traced
directly or indirectly to this source. 1 

So well established is this fact, that there is a large class of
disease called hereditary, and one of the first inquiries made
by a physician called to a new patient is what were the com-
plaints or diseases of his parents or ancestois. e ac should
be stated, too, that these hereditary diseases aie very difficult
to cure, and when apparently cured they frequently return,
having their seat or originating source m the constitution
itself. In one direction these transmitted effects are most
striking as well as afflicting-viz. in mental derangement.

The fact is well established that in one quarter or one third of
all cases of insanity there may be found instances or traces of
the disease among the ancestors of the patient. And if the
exact truth could be ascertained, we believe that, m a much
larger proportion than that, there would be found some abnor-
malities-predisposing causes or strong proclivities that way.
There is another direction where these transmitted qualities
become very striking, viz. in propensities bent on crime. In
jails and penitentiaries it has been known for a 0?8" time that
desperate criminals had, generally speaking, a bad parental or
ancestral record; that the seeds of vice and crime were trans-
mitted from one generation to another. So well understood is
this fact that the saying has become proverbial that the children
of such-and-such pal'ents will become bad chaiacteis, criminals,
go to jail, or be hung. A noted fact of this kind has lately
been going the newspaper rounds, headed ]\Iaigaret, the
Mother of Criminals." The facts were these: An agent of the
New York Prison Association, in visiting a certain jail in that
state, found six persons bearing so striking a resemblance, it
led him to inquire who they were. After spending much time
in tracing back their history and genealogy for several genera-
tions, he found they originated from a woman of bad character,
and that in all the families originating from the same source
there had been 120 criminals, who had received 140 years'
imprisonment. Besides these criminals there had been connected
with these families several hundred paupers and offenders of
law, all of whom had cost the public near a million of dollars !
If a careful inquiry were made into the history and genealogy
of all the inmates of our prisons, jails, houses of correction, and
almshouses, we should find a vast amount of poverty, vice, and
crime which can be traced back, directly or indirectly, to in-
herited sources. In fact, the researches of modern physiology
are showing every day, more and more, what a powerful
influence inherited qualities have upon these classes. The
question is beginning to be raised, if we are ever to check the
increase of vice and crime, must we not go back to their
primary sources?dry up the springs, purify the fountain ; or,
in other words, as a means of protection and prevention, make
a proper application of the laws of inheritance.

It may be said that criminals and the insane compose so
small a portion of the community, that the subject is not
deserving much attention; but, if the law of inheritance
applies to abnormal developments of character, to flagrant
wrongs and outrages, it applies equally to all the minor follies,
vices, evils, and wrongs. Not a single parental relation takes
place but that the seeds of good or evil tendencies are sown.
If the animal nature is predominant and most active, or the
intellectual or the moral, such will be the prevailing type of
character in the offspring.

Not only the form of the body, the general features of the
countenance, and the temperament, or the particular kind of
organisation are communicated; but the leading elements or
groundwork of character. If certain propensities are very
predominant and active, inclined strongly to sensuality and
licentiousness, if an ungovernable temper, or bad disposition,
morose, irritable, sullen, exist, the inherited effects will surely
be seen. If naturally there is a strong inclination to idleness,
to waste and extravagance, or, on the other hand, to acquisi-
tiveness, penuriousness, and meanness, these qualities will be
more or less communicated.

If the blood has been poisoned or constitution impaired by
the use of alcohol, tobacco, or any other narcotic or stimulant,
the effects will surely be transmitted. There is no question but
much of the dissipation and intemperance so prevalent at the
present day may be traced back to this source.

In canvassing this whole subject it should be borne in mind
that it is the real nature, the inner life of the individual,
where the law of transmission particularly applies?not to the
profession oue makes, or to the outward character, or even
what one always thinks of himself. If we are here misled by
ignorance or deceive ourselves, the relation between parent and
child still exists, and the penalties or effects of violated law
must necessarily be transmitted. If we mistake not there are
responsibilities and obligations connected with this relation
which parents do not begin to realise, and for a better under-
standing and more enlightenment there is need of gathering
up all the lights possible from science and experience. Neither
should the pulpit or the press be silent in a matter which so
vitally affects human welfare.
