"Abnormally Intelligent" Pupils
================================
.. role:: persons

SOME STUDIES ON SO-CALLED "ABNORMALLY
INTELLIGENT" PUPILS.1

A. On "Abnormally Intelligent" Pupils.

:Author: Yasusaburo Sasaki,

Imperial Education Department, and Professor of Psychiatry at
the Imperial University, Tokyo, Japan

By "abnormally intelligent" pupils, those pupils are meant
who are distinctly in advance of the rest of their class, as regards
both mentality and personal characteristics. They are above the
average and must therefore be regarded as abnormal children. In
using this term we do not wish to imply that the children are
necessarily pathological. Some of these abnormally advanced
children maintain their high level throughout development, but
others drop down to the average, or even below it, later on.
The causes of this advanced mentality differ greatly and may
be classified as follows:

.. hlist::

- Group I. The actual genius, gifted with an innate and early matured intelligence of a high order, this superiority being stable throughout life.

- Group II. Children of a less abnormal intelligence, but gifted with a good memory and the power of concentration; indus- trious and persevering by nature; healthy in body and not easily fatigued. This may be taken to be the true abnormally intelligent type.

- Group III. Children who correspond to Group II in all respects but bodily health. In this respect they more nearly resemble the "nervous" type of child.

Group IV. Children whose intelligence is in no degree
above the normal standard, but who are stimulated to mental exertion by environmental influences.
Group V. Children of the "precocious" type.
Group VI. So-called "nervous" children. These are easily
stimulated by the spirit of competition and are readily intimidated
by teachers or parents, being very sensitive to adverse criticism.
This group is usually pathological, and the children generally
have a "nervous" family history. They are frequently weak and
anaemic.
1 Translated from Int. Archiv fur Schulhygiene, by William A. Stecher, Director of Physical
Education, Philadelphia, Pa.

Group VII. Children who are not well-balanced mentally
and psychically. They sometimes show moral deficiency combined with a high degree of mental intelligence.
This classification is quite arbitrary, but it has often struck
me that the study of pedagogy has never taken sufficient count of
this large class of hyper-intelligent children, while the literature
dealing with defective children is so ample as almost to be
exhaustive.

Considering now in detail the above seven groups, we will
first refer to the "young genius". It is very difficult to define a
genius, but we may say that the famous geniuses of the world's
history are, as a rule, individuals who have accomplished some
original and inventive work. The claims of genius are, however,
nQt recognized before manhood is attained, and sometimes not
during life at all, so that one may not rightly call any child a
genius. Many geniuses have not been conspicuous for unusual
gifts during childhood, for example, :persons: `Newton, Helmholtz`, and
many others; but other great men have shown unusual gifts at an
early age, including Mozart and Raphael. Some very promising
children, however, do not carry out their early promise of great
mental gifts. Some geniuses, again, have some extraordinary
gifts and faculties for which the age in which they live has
apparently no use, and they are therefore unappreciated by society.

There seems to be some very intimate connection between
genius and mental disease. According to Lowenfeld, geniuses
come within two categories, the true genius and the pathological
genius. Those in the former are healthy and their gifts may be
termed "heaven-sent," as for instance, Washington, Confucius,
Titian and Rubens. But the second order of genius is the more
common and many examples could be quoted, Rousseau, De
Quincey, who was an opium-eater, and Nietzsche, who died of
mental disease. Napoleon, Mirabeau, Alexander the Great, Csesar
and St. Paul were all said to have been epileptics, and Goethe and
Shakespeare to have suffered from some form of mental disease.
Hereditary insanity and mental degeneracy can frequently be
discovered in the family histories of geniuses. They themselves
may escape any taint of this order, but their descendants are not
always equally fortunate.

It would be superfluous to suggest any special method of
education for prospective geniuses, as they are difficult to differentiate at an early stage of growth, and their number must
Necessarily be very limited. Precocious childen have certain
points in common with geniuses during childhood, indeed many
geniuses have been precocious children. On the other hand,
many precocious children fall back as they grow older and some
become nervous or psychopathic during adolescence, while at best
few of them maintain a place above the average.

Precocity may be either inborn or acquired, general or
specialized. Inborn precocity is generally due to hereditary
influences. Such subjects are frequently descended from families
displaying nervous instability. Subjects showing acquired precocity vary according to environmental influences. Where the
influences are harmful the effects of such precocity are very difficult to eradicate, particularly when it takes the form of sexual
precocity. The term specialized precocity we apply to children
of the "Wunder-kinder" type?musical infant prodigies, marvelous budding poets and painters, etc. Such children frequently
run themselves out during childhood and sink back into mediocrity
on attaining maturity. It is not infrequent to find cases of early
suicide among this class. They are mostly of a melancholy, introspective and unsociable type. If mental disease attacks them it
generally takes the form of dementia praecox with its manifold
range of symptoms. Others suffer from a high degree of neurasthenia or hysteria.
All the above groups of abnormally intelligent children except
Group II and Group IV show more or less strong hereditary
influences, the most pronounced being the "nervous" children.
Strictly speaking, it is only the second group which may be
regarded as absolutely free from nervous instability. It is therefore of great importance that all abnormally intelligent children
should receive as careful attention and be as closely studied as
mentally deficient ones.

The question arises whether all the children, normal and
abnormal, should be educated together, or whether each class
should be educated separately. But the abnormally intelligent
children differ among themselves so greatly in type that to educate
them all together by one special method would be highly inappropriate.
The most critical cases from a pathological point of view are
the precocious children, and they likewise constitute a danger to
their normal classmates, who may be drawn to imitate them and
to expend undue mental power on hopeless tasks. Among the
nervous children are often to be found hysterical subjects and
children suffering from constitutional debility calling for curative measures. Moral perverts should be weeded out and sent to
suitable institutions. Those children who respond to external
stimulation may safely consort with the normal pupils, while
those belonging to Group II are likely to have a very good influence on the rest of the class and contribute to raise its standard of
mental attainment.

B. Some Results of Experimental Research Dealing with
the So-called Abnormally Intelligent Pupils.
By Y. Sasaki, Professor of Psychiatry at the Imperial
University, Tokyo, Japan, and T. Tomono, Teacher
at the Fukuolca Normal School.

For purposes of research 79 pupils showing a quality of intelligence and deportment markedly above the average class level
were selected out of 332 pupils who were distributed in 7 classes,
(the entrants being excluded as unsuitable for experimental purposes). In conjunction with the teachers a very careful selection
was made, special attention being paid to the individual data and
domiciliary conditions.

The following pupils were the selected subjects:
High School 2nd year 7 girls
1st " 6 "
Elementary School 5th & 6th years 13 boys
4th year 14 girls
4th " 13 pupils
3rd " 16 "
2nd " 10 "

The tests applied were as follows:
1. Memory test
2. Test of synthetical power
3. Pilling in blanks
4. Addition method
5. Proof-correcting
6. Observation

Further information secured was as follows:
Pupil's Schedule.
Address:
Class: Age:
Domiciliary data:
Parents: if living, age and occupation:
if dead, cause of death:
Character and relation with pupil:
22 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Bodily and mental condition:
Alcoholic:
Brothers and sisters:
Bodily and mental condition:
Social status:
Other members, grandparents, etc.:
Servants:
Locality of home and character of neighborhood:
Physical development:
Age at closure of fontanelle:
Age when teeth appeared:
Age when speech began:
Age when walking began:
Amount and nature of sleep:
State of nutrition:
Physical examination: date:
Height: Weight: Chest measurement, ordinary:
deep inspiration:
forcible expiration:
Muscular development:
Spine:
Eyes:
Ears:
Teeth:
Past diseases or injuries, date, duration, effect, etc.:
Temperament:

Conclusions:
-----------Our experiments have convinced us that so-called abnormally
intelligent pupils vary considerably in degrees of attainment and
development, and that their training urgently calls for distinctive
treatment on the part of the teaching body.
It is only by careful examination that the children can be
correctly diagnosed and classified:

Treatment:
--------Our researches have led us to the conclusion that each group
requires different handling, and that the appropriate method can
be arrived at only after intimate knowledge of the typical characteristics of each class. We have found the following qualities
to be fairly typical of each respective group:?
Group II. The children are remarkable for their sound
mental development, their good physique, and their low degree of
fatigue. They possess aptitude for learning, keen intuitions and
good memories. They delight in active games and are of a bright
temperament. They are often favorites with their classmates and
loved and respected by their teachers. Unfortunately, too much
success of an easy kind sometimes acts deleteriously and they
become arrogant and easily contented with the results of their
efforts. This is partly the outcome of the pernicious system of
class teaching, which makes it difficult for teachers to individualize the characters and aptitudes of their pupils. Present-day
textbooks also leave much to be desired as they presuppose a rigid
standard of attainment for all the children in one class.
Another type of child in this group is less lovable. He is
apt to be aggressive and to take nothing on trust. He adopts a
critical and unbending attitude towards his masters and teachers
and a repellent and unsociable one towards his classmates. This
type of child is exceedingly difficult to manage, and the excellent
material that is in him will have no chance of developing in the
hands of a weak or irritable teacher. It means everything to
such a pupil that the teacher should succeed in gaining his respect
and confidence, and in establishing friendly personal relations
with him.

Group III. These are children who have better mental
than physical development. Such children require judicious handling both from parents and teachers owing to the want of harmony
in their development.

They have an active mental capacity and are often ambitious
and keenly interested in their studies. Their physical disability
is therefore apt to prey on their minds, entailing in many cases
serious, if not fatal, consequences. They should not be overstimulated and over-driven or spurred on to increased exertions
by unheeding teachers, but rather retarded in their studies while
everything should be done to improve their general health. They
are often anaemic and undersized and languid in their movements. They are generally gentle of disposition and popular with
their teachers and their classmates.

Group IV. These children are essentially normal children,
but re-act to urging and stimulating on the part of parents and
teachers. They cannot, however, long maintain the higher level
due to the stimulus applied. It is a very grave mistake to adopt
forcing methods of education for such children, as such methods
are likely to be productive of morbid results both to body and
mind. Unfortunately, this mistake is very often committed both
by parents and teachers who little realize the harm they are doing.
Group V. These are the precocious children. The precocity may be either innate or the result of environment. It may
be general or directed into some special channel. It appears to
us that precocity in the majority of cases is the result of early
social environment. Generally speaking, precocious children have
their reasoning faculty and their will prematurely developed.
They are advanced in action, speech and thought and are not
childlike in manner. Frequently, the cause lies in early association with adults and in the lack of playfellows of their own age.
Precocity is to be deplored and by no means to be fostered.
Unfortunately there is a tendency to encourage it, both in the
home and in the school. Such children are often brought into
prominent notice and shown off with pride to neighbors and
acquaintances as miniature men and women. The contrast
between the child who enters the school straight from home and
the child who comes to the school from the kindergarten is often
very marked. When precocity is discovered every effort should
be made to counteract it, particularly when the children approach
the age of puberty.

Group VI. This group includes, in addition to the pathologically "nervous" child, the constitutionally timid child, and
those of wild and daring temperaments. All these exhibit a strain
of mental disease, either inborn or acquired. With such children
environmental conditions are of profound importance, and no
class stands in greater need of discriminative handling and teaching if their degree of morbidness is to be diminished instead of
augmented.

Group VII. Children with unequal mental and physical
development are often well-developed from the purely scholastic
point of view but are deficient in feeling and in will. They are
often of a cruel, heartless disposition, quarrelsome and tricky.
They have been known to steal for the love of stealing, and,
though not deliberately wicked, to commit sins on the impulse of
the moment, regretting the action immediately but employing
falsehood in order to escape unpleasant consequences. Such children should be very carefully and gently dealt with, but it is not
wise to allow them to associate with other children, to whom their
example may be a source of danger.

From all the foregoing it would appear that urgent necessity
exists for the study of the characters and mental qualities of the
individual children comprising a school class. It is only by
individualization that the best in each child can be brought out,
the evil tendencies repressed, and the weaknesses counteracted;
and to do the best for each individual child, taking all factors
into consideration, is the aim of all true education.
Summary:

While much has been written about the physically defective
and the mentally deficient school child, the abnormally intelligent
child has had little attention devoted to his special education. I
have endeavored to arrive at some trustworthy data as to the
causes and varieties of abnormal intelligence in children and to
draw from these data some conclusions as to the treatment appropriate to each type. With this purpose in view, I examined all
the children in the large normal school at Fukuoka in Japan, in
which work I was assisted by Mr. Tomoziro Tomono, who is
attached to the school in question. All the children showing an
advanced degree of intelligence were set apart for special investigation. We found their number to be 79 out of 332. These
selected children were classified according to definite types into
seven groups and were made the subjects of a series of tests for
mental capacity, and the results were tabulated. The normal
children were also tested in the same manner and the results
compared with those derived from the abnormal children. We
found that only one class of abnormally intelligent children was
perfectly free from any pathological taint, and that these were
the only children who possessed stability of nerve-power and who
exhibited a uniformly progressive mental and physical development. These we have called the true cases of abnormal intelligence, the others being children of the "nervous" type, precocious children, children mentally advanced but deficient in
physique, children who can be spurred to mental attainments
above the average through external stimulation, but who are not
able to maintain this level for any length of time, and, finally
children with remarkably good mental capacity who are lacking
in feeling and in will. Our experiments and their results served
to convince us that there is urgent need for reform in the present
system of class-making, for this system renders it difficult to
differentiate individual children and consequently those who
stand most in need of judicious and expert handling are neither
recognized as such nor likely to receive the training and education adapted to their special requirements.
