The Borderland Between Feeblemindednesses and Insanity
=======================================================

:Author: Clara Harbison Town, Ph.D.,
Director of the Department of Clinical Psychology, Lincoln State
School and Colony, Lincoln, Illinois.

In discussions concerning the various types of insanity frequent mention is made of borderland cases. Such borderland
cases are individuals in whom some psychosis seems to be potentially present though not completely evolved, individuals who on
the one hand are not quite normal, and who on the other hand
are not quite insane. In discussions concerning the feebleminded
conditions mention is also frequently made of borderland cases.
These borderland cases are individuals who just miss normality,
individuals who are able to read and write and do much work
with ability and dexterity but who never reach the intellectual
level of their social class, who are always at a disadvantage in
their dealings with others.

Cases of insanity occurring in feebleminded individuals are
also often reported; but in these cases the insanity is a discrete
condition added to the feeblemindedness.

Feeblemindedness and insanity are by definition absolutely
distinct conditions, feeblemindedness being the result of defective
mental development, and insanity depending upon aberrant mental
functioning occurring in an individual of any degree of mental
development.

This absolute division between insanity and feeblemindedness
is at the present time being carried even into the field of heredity.

We have become accustomed to the thought that the neurotic
diathesis is the inherited feature, and that extraneous conditions
determine what form of neurosis, psychosis, or defectiveness manifests itself. Another possibility has been suggested, however, by
the recently published pedigrees of feebleminded children, epileptics, and insane.1 These pedigrees strongly suggest that similar
defects run not only through fraternities, but also through succeoding generations of such families. Epilepsy and feebleminded?C. B. Davenport and David F. Weeks, M.D.: A First Study of Inheritance in
Epilepsy. Eugenics Record Ofllce Bulletin No. 4.

Henry II. Goddard, Ph.D.: Heredity of Feeblemindedness. Eugenics Record
Office Bulletin No. 1.

Ilenry A. Cotton, M.D.: Some Problems In the Study of Heredity in Mental
Diseases. Eugenics Record Office Bulletin No. 8.
A. J. Rosanoff, M.D., and Florence I. Orr, B.S.: A Study of Heredity of
Insanity in the Light of the Mendelian Theory. Eugenics Record Office Bunetin
No. 5. '
ness occur frequently in the same families, but insanity is comparatively rare in the families where feeblemindedness predominates.
In the light of the Mendelian principles feeblemindedness and
epilepsy seem to behave similarly as hereditary factors, and
insanity to follow a different course. Dr David F. Weeks2 writes:
"It will be seen from the present evidence that epilepsy cannot be
considered as a Mendelian factor when considered by itself, but
that epilepsy and feeblemindedness are Mendelian factors of the
recessive type, in that their germ cells lack the determiner for
normality, or are nulliplex in character, while the tainted individuals, such as neurotics, criminals, sex offenders, etc., are
simplex, and the normal duplex or simplex in character." Mr.
C. B. Davenport and Dr Weeks3 write: "Three matings (insane
with feebleminded or epileptic) yielded 19 offspring of which 15
grew up and are known, of these 9 were normal, 1 epileptic, 4
feebleminded, and 1 neurotic. Here apparently insanity and
feeblemindedness are not due to the same missing factors, and so
some normal children result."

In spite of the chasm which is daily growing wider between
the scientific conception of feeblemindedness and insanity, there is
a group of cases, which it is the aim of this paper to define and
which may be considered as occupying the borderland, not between
insanity and normality, nor between feeblemindedness and
normality, but between insanity and feeblemindedness.

A typical example of this group is a little boy, nine years of
age, who was brought some years ago to Professor Witmer for
special training. It was my privilege to carry on the training for
several months and my opportunities for observation were of the
best.

He was a delicate, supersensitive boy, much too childish for
his years, and of a confiding, loving nature. He was a marked
contrast to that type of feebleminded child whose reactions are
prompt and dependable up to a certain level and then cease,?that
type whose abilities can be accurately guaged. He on the contrary
impressed one as having much more mental ability than he could
command. Though quiet and inert most of the time, he would
occasionally surprise one by a remark indicating a high degree of
intelligence. Though his speech was marred by an infantile
stammer of a severe type, he formed complicated sentences and
used the longest words without hesitancy. His most striking char2 David Fairchild Weeks, M.D. The Inheritance of Epilepsy. Problems in
Eugenics, page 78.

3 C. B. Davenport and David P. Weeks, M.D. A First Study of Inheritance in
Epilepsy. Eugenics Record Office Bulletin No. 4, page 10.

acteristic, perhaps, was lack of volitional ability. Left on the porch
to play, he was found ten minutes later standing in the identical
attitude; on another occasion he was standing with a group ot
people on a country road, as an experiment the others walked on
without the usual "come on Johnny," and the hoy stood just where
he was, until some one went back for him. He would also sit at
table without eating until started by a word of suggestion. The
least suggestion was sufficient, but it was absolutely necessary. In
regard to some other acts, suggestion did not have so desirable an
effect, producing on the contrary marked negativism. Asked to
touch his eyes and mouth he would do so; asked to touch his nose
his hand would start in the right direction but reach perhaps the
cheek or chin, never the nose. When questioned the boy would say
that he had been asked to touch his nose, would agree that he had
not done so, tears would fill his eyes, but the negativism would
persist. When asked to lie down on his back, he would lie on
his face. Even the promise of candy did not help him to stand
on his toes at command; instead he stood on his heels. When told
to touch with his tongue a stick of candy held a little to the right
of his mouth, the perverse tongue would twist around toward the
left. The child showed real distress, but seemed utterly unable to
cope with the situation. This negativism varied from time to
time and did not apply to all movements alike.

When directed to make unaccustomed movements, if negative
movements did not occur, there was usually an inability to produce
the movement from direction or imitation, an apparent lack of
volitional motor control. The idea of the movement did not seem
to be directly associated with the movement. Each new movement
had to be passively performed for him daily, in some instances
for weeks, before the volitional control was finally established.
That this condition was not the result of mere lack of power of
coordination was shown by the fact that very complicated movements were made quite easily at times when the child lost selfconsciousness in action. Though he failed to stand on his toes at
command, he was a sure footed climber over rocky hills, and was
one day seen carrying, quite successfully, a large rocking chair up
a long flight of porch steps because he thought that one of his
teachers would like to sit in it.

There was clearly a defect in volition, showing itself in a
lack of initiative, negativism, and poor volitional control. An
allied condition was a marked echolalia. This was not the echolalia
normal to an early stage of language development, that echolalia
which occurs on account of the poverty of ideas and vocabulary
and which aids in the amassing of both. In language development the boy had long passed the echolalia stage, his vocabulary
was large and possible associations were many. His was the
echolalia which occurs when the attention span is limited to a very
narrow, chiefly sensory sphere, when in consequence, the incoming
impressions arouse no apperceptive mass and lead to no reaction
other than a verbal expression of themselves,?the mental condition which obtains in the hyper-suggestible state.
There was in addition emotional instability. The child would
at times become excitable, emotional and cry easily. At all times
he was intensely sensitive, but there were periods when this would
be greatly increased. He was of a very loving disposition and
much more constant that most children. A long separation made
no difference, he did not forget one individual for another.
Left to himself in a class room with a couple of other children
he absorbed much of their instruction; he memorized many little
verses by listening to the others recite them. At such times there
was no negativism to overcome and achievement was easy.

The inertia, the negativism, the lack of volitional control, the
echolalia, and the emotionalism all increased under any excitement, any conditions producing self-consciousness or demanding
increased attention. At the close of a summer's training when
the symptoms were much less pronounced, an unusual excitement
brought them all back in full force. At such times the initial
confusion led to a distinct narrowing of the attention span; the
higher apperceptive processes and with them of course volitional
control were for the time in abeyance and a state of hyper-suggestibility induced, in which all reactions were either positive or
negative responses to sensory impressions, unmodified by apperceptive activity. Echolalia and either negativism or stupid helplessness reasserted themselves.
This group of symptoms, inertia coupled with a suggestibility
expressing itself in both echolalia and negativism, is of course
familiar enough in dementia praecox. It is by no means a complete picture of dementia praecox; and is, moreover, accompanied
by such distinctly feebleminded symptoms as extremely defective
articulation and infantilism. Children like the one described are
in practice included in the feebleminded, not the dementia praecox
group.

The symptoms described are, however, clearly dependent upon
an aberrant functioning of the will and the emotions, or in other
terminology, of the processes of apperception and emotion, which
processes at time function normally, and therefore they can scarcely
be differentiated from insane symptoms. As they manifest themselves so very early in the child's life and interfere so gravely with
its mental development they are considered developmental defects.
Are they developmental defects, or are they insane traits appearing
so early as to interfere with the normal progress of the the intellectual life ? In either case they point out the complexity and
diversity of the feebleminded condition, and suggest that the study
of feeblemindedness from the Mendelian standpoint may prove to
require the conception of many unit characters instead of one.
Such children do not form a very large percentage of the
children at the Lincoln State School and Colony. Among 450 I
have found but seven. One of these is a girl of seventeen who has
never developed beyond the high grade idiot type, with a mental
age of two. She talks much, distinctly, and in well formed sentences, but never in the first person unless much annoyed, when
she swears a little. She never speaks to express a desire or a
thought and never in response to any environmental condition.
Her talk consists entirely of the repetition of sentences which
have been addressed to her or spoken in her presence at some time
in the past. At times two persons take part in this repeated conversation, the tone of voice and emotional expression of each being
reproduced as accurately as are the words. No remark of her own
is ever contributed. When addressed she makes no reply, but if
one lingers near for a little while, he will hear his words repeated
perhaps with a change of a word or two. "There goes a car down
the road" was reproduced "There goes a cake down the road"; the
command "Say,?1, 2, 3, 4, 5," was later repeated in full?"Say,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5." Her thought is altogether autonomous, and is auditory and kinaesthetic in character.
None of these seven cases has developed intellectually beyond
the age of six years. Such children are little understood in institutions ; they are the despair of their teachers who find it quite impossible to train them by the usual methods. The attempt to do so is
soon abandoned and the children placed in a custodial ward where
they give little trouble, being allowed to sink into the coveted
apathy and inertia.

These cases do not present the usual picture of feeblemindedness, nor do they present such a picture with a later grafting of
insanity, neither do they typify the insane child; they present the
picture of defective, incomplete development, complicated from
the very beginning by an aberrant functioning of certain mental
processes still in course of development, which aberrant functioning
doubtless interferes greatly with the developmental process.
