The Training of the School Dietitian
======================================

:Author: Mary Schwartz Rose, Ph.D.,
Department of Nutrition, Teachers' College, Columbia
University, N. Y.

Only a few years ago the term dietitian suggested a person
who prepared special dishes for the sick in a hospital kitchen, or
a managing housekeeper in some type of institution, who often
held her position with 110 professional equipment except practical
experience in her own home. With the rapid development of education in the household arts in schools and colleges, accompanying
a period of great activity in the biological and social sciences, there
has come to be at least partial recognition of the fact that providing food for human beings is a science as well as an art, and that
the welfare of individuals or groups is, to a high degree, dependent
upon the conditions under which they eat their food. If a school
child has 110 regular meals, but boils coffee and takes it with bread
whenever he happens to feel like it, it is no longer considered a
mysterious dispensation of Providence that .lie turns out a dull
pupil or a bad citizen. The small army of little folks who start
to school every day without breakfast, are generally feeble and
inattentive. Foreign children whose parents are ignorant of American food materials and how to use them, and who are in consequence fed corn and peas and beans cold from the can, have
been discovered. Investigations into such conditions have not only
raised the cry, "Bread with Education," but have shown that
undernutrition is due quite as much to ignorance as to poverty,
and have helped to amend the slogan to "Bread as a Means of
Education." All this agitation has created a demand for trained
women who know the full meaning of Bread and who are able
to develop the educational features of school feeding, inculcating
mot, only a respect for food as the builder and maintainor of the
body, but also an appreciation of the beauty of neatness and order
in eating, and a sense of the social value of partaking of food
in company with others.

Lunch-rooms are being established in elementary and high
schools. Jo carry 011 the work thus begun, suitable persons should
be placed in charge of the rapidly increasing number of college
dormitories, so that throughout the whole period of growth, some
twenty-five years, students may have suitable food to keep tliem
strong and well, and be led to form eating habits which will help
to conserve their energies in later life and promote their social
welfare. This again means a demand for trained women, with
a large capacity for responsibility and the altruistic spirit of the
true educator. The dietitian has a business which demands social
aptitude, good judgment, initiative, executive ability, a liberal
education supplemented by technical training in the household
sciences and their application to the institution, and sound business sense. Such training implies maturity and practical experience as qualifications for success.
Miss Alice Bougliton, of the Home and School League of
Philadelphia, estimates that the school children of that city spend
annually not less than $170,000 for food away from home. The
establishment of penny lunches and three-cent mid-day dinners
in a very few schools, has already brought $5000 of that sum
under the control of wise administration, so that some children
are getting a true nutritive and educational return on their investment. The location of the lunch-room or dining-room, the character and cost of the equipment, the choice of food and control
of service, must be within the dietitian's jurisdiction if she is
to do her best work. Planning menus is futile, if it be impossible
to get foods properly cooked and attractively and promptly served,
or if one have no authority in case of the inevitable emergencies
in purchase, preparation or serving of food; the careful calculation of fuel values is of no avail if the cook feels at liberty
to water the soup because the dietitian has no direct authority
over her.

The time required for technical training depends very much
upon previous education and experience. With a college education
including physics, biology, physiology, general and organic chemistry, psychology and economics, one or two years will serve to
equip a woman for this kind of work, depending on her practical
experience in household matters and the thoroughness of her preparation. Instruction in institutional management is still in its
infancy, and provision of adequate practical training in this subject for the student is difficult. It is obvious that a course for
any dietitian must include very thorough training in the nature
of food materials, i.e. their source, manufacture and chemical
composition; the nature of cooking processes and their effects on
food materials ; the technique of cookery, including special applications to institutional problems. The difference of proportions
in large and small quantity cookery, the necessity for serving a
meal to several hundred with lightning-like rapidity, or the keeping of food hot for several hours at each meal arc all factors
?
which make institutional cookery a branch by itself, and cause
lunch-room cookery to differ from other kinds of institutional
cookery.

The choice of food requires definite knowledge of the quantitative and qualitative requirements for food in the group to be
fed, and this implies acquaintance with the laws of biology, and
of the chemical processes of digestion and metabolism, in addition to the chemistry of food. It is necessary to study the food
requirement in each stage of development?infancy, childhood,
adult life, and old age?and under various conditions of activity,
health, season and climate, with a clear realization that every
individual is to some extent a new problem, for whom the general
principles of nutrition must be applied in a particular way, especially on the qualitative side. On the quantitative side nutrition
is fast becoming an exact science, and a working knowledge of
the energy values of many kinds of food will enable the trained
dietitian to select a wholesome diet adequate in fuel (the first
requirement) without illegitimate cost; and a watchfulness over
the tastes and individual needs of her group will enable her to
secure one which is also well-balanced.

This problem of the menu is much complicated by problems
of service; it is harder to present attractive variety in the diet
if the price bo low, because many minor variations, which arc
possible in the home where service it not so closely reckoned,
are impossible for a large number on account of the labor involved.
It seems a small task to roll bananas in chopped nuts for a salad
for a family of two, but the labor is almost prohibitive for a
group of two hundred. Ilence the study of food requirements
from the scientific standpoint must be supplemented by special
attention to institutional dietaries and instruction in the general
principles of institutional management.

One of the most difficult things for the dietitian to learn is
how to buy in the market. Courses in marketing are given, but
markets fluctuate with season and locality, so that practical experience with rigorous scrutiny of the results, is necessary to success.
In connection with this the student may learn how to keep her
accounts in a business-like way and to use them as a criterion of
success. She is responsible for the sanitary condition of the food
she supplies, and training in bacteriology is the onlv effective
means of making lier understand what sanitation really means.
She must appreciate tlie dangers of dirty milk, uninspected cold
storage plants, badly kept refrigerators, and unsterilized dislies
passing among children to spread communicable diseases, especially of the skin. Besides sanitary cleanliness, it is desirable also
to maintain an esthetic cleanliness for the sake of its psychological value.
There are many indications that the school dietitian is destined to become an important factor in education in boarding institutions and in- the public schools of our large cities. Evidence is
accumulating as to the beneficial effects of her work and she
should bo encouraged to acquire the best possible scientific training, with the prospect of recognition as one of the important
agents in the betterment of the race, on a par with those who
teach in more conventional ways. Teaching a little Irishman to
like macaroni or a little Russian to like hominy, may be as great
an educational triumph as inculcating the laws of Latin prosody,
and is a more potent factor in strengthening in the children that
spirit of toleration which will make them all American citizens.
