In the Diageosis
=================

:Author: C. J. C. Earl, F.R.C.P.I., D.P.M.,
First Assistant Medical Officer, Caterham Mental Hospital

Modern psychology has laid stress upon die importance of the instinctive
and emotional factors in human life, and it is now universally recognised
that a normal emotional equipment is at least as important a determinant of
success in life as is a normal degree of intelligence. Certain failures on the
other hand, both of social adjustment and of specific ability, can be demon-
strated as having their origin in the emotional sphere. It is justifiable to argue
that emotional disturbance may produce behaviour reactions which closely
simulate Mental Deficiency, especially when they occur in children of the
lower grade of normal intelligence. Not only that, but we must hypothecate
a certain low level of intellect, or conversely a high degree of emotional in-
stability, at which the emotional factor may fairly be said to determine mental
deficiency; whilst lastly, in the true intellectual defective, emotional factors
may complicate the deficiency.

Consider first emotional reactions simulating mental defect. The be-
haviour patterns of the child are more primitive, less firmly established, and
more responsive to environmental influences than are those of the adult; and
his emotional disturbances usually find expression, not in the fixed and highly
symbolised psychoneuroses, but in the less definable form of behaviour disorders.
There is a tendency to a similar reaction to physical illness. The naughtiness
of the tired or sick child is proverbial, and the sequelae of Encephalitis Leth-
argica in childhood include every variety of abnormal behaviour.

Broadly speaking, the causes of abnormal emotional reaction in children
are, firstly the inherent instability of the child, and secondly stresses imposed
by the environment; the final result depending upon the inter-relation of
the two factors. Thus the inherently normal child may survive in a very
difficult environment, whilst the inherently abnormal child may break down
in a perfectly normal environment.

The normal unit of human society, the best environment in which to
raise a child, is the family. The importance for the child from his first day
of life, of the various emotional relationships within the family, cannot be
over-estimated. And only if the parents are themselves normal can these
emotional ties develop along normal lines. If the emotional adjustments of
the parents are abnormal, their attitudes toward the child are abnormal, and
the child becomes, as Kenworthy says, a pawn on the board of their unsatisfied
instinctive and emotional strivings. Maladjustments between the parents,
quarrels, parental separations, the introduction of a tactless step-parent; all
these are fraught with psychological danger for the child.

Apart from purely psychological factors, an important though uncom-
mon cause of trouble is physical defect in the child himself. Bodily deformity,
speech difficulties, defects of special senses and so forth may cause difficulty in
adaptation and set up emotional disturbance in a sensitive child.

To the possible variations in behaviour resulting from these disturbances
there is of course no end, but those with which we are concerned can all be
grouped under two heads?Regression Reactions and Insecurity Reactions.
The regression reaction represents an attempt to escape from an intolerable
situation, and to obtain satisfaction by the fixation upon, or reinstatement, of
an infantile level of emotional reaction and of behaviour pattern. Such a child
is babyish and dependent; he may become cnurctic, and may even insist upon
infantile diet. He demands constant attention, and cannot join in games, or
work with other children. He is emotionally barred from learning and
is a school failure. He may appear emotionally apathetic but is more com-
monly given to stormy weeping; and he is quite unable to face a difficulty.
The insecurity reaction represents a failure to obtain complete emotional
satisfaction, either normally or by regression; the result being constant
emotional tension.

The insecure child is usually active and excitable, and a liar. He may
be timid or by over-compensation he may be a bully; whichever he is, lie
retreats from real difficulties lest his failure should increase his insecurity;
unlike the regressed child who retreats to avoid advancing.
Very briefly, these are the classical types; but it should be remembered
that they rarely occur in their entirety and alone, and that sub-variants and
mixed reactions arc the rule; regression tending to preponderate in younger
and less intelligent children, whilst insecurity is commoner in the older
and more intelligent.

We must next consider the differentiation between the behaviour dis-
orders arising from true mental deficiency, and those arising from emotional
disturbance. Quite obviously the diagnosis is exceedingly important; both for
the child and for the community.

The first essential is careful case-taking, with special attention to develop-
mental data, talking, walking, and the like; and above all a detailed investiga-
tion of the home background. Descriptions of the child's behaviour as obtained
from parents or teachers should be evaluated with great discretion, inasmuch
as the witness may herself play a part in the child's disorder. It happens not
infrequently that the parent's story throws more light on her own maladjust-
ments than on those of the child.

Physical condition is also important and it is not too much to say that
the diagnosis of mental deficiency in childhood should never be made without
complete physical examination. Such examination is compulsory in many
American states. Really skilled mental testing is the best diagnostic weapon
we have. Firstly of course everything must be done to ease any emotional
strain ensuing from the test itself and to set the child completely at his ease.
Testing should not be started until the examiner has to some degree made
friends with the child, and parents and guardians should be rigidly excluded.
Testing children in the Courthouse or in custody is manifestly unfair.
Emotional strains removed, the mere difference between test results and outside
behaviour may make the diagnosis clear. The following case illustrates this
point well : ?

Tommy was brought to the London Child Guidance Clinic in custody
following his second conviction for housebreaking at the age of 11. He was
seen for a few minutes in the presence of the officer who brought him. He
shook hands with his left hand, he identified a clockwork model of the racing
car Blue Bird as " The Golden Arrow he was unable to tell the time by
the clock, and his drawing of a man barely scored 5 years on the Goodenough
scale. His general manner was strongly suggestive of defect. Mental testing
the same afternoon but without the presence of the officer showed an obvious
insecurity reaction but an intelligence quotient of 118. Full investigation related
his misconduct closely to his emotional disturbance.

Such cases as this are relatively rare. The numerical result of the tests
is usually of value chiefly in so far as irregularity of distribution of success and
failure constitutes evidence of instability, and for this reason testing should be
as wide as possible in range. The Binet scale alone is insufficient, while the
practice of " asking just a few questions " out of this or any other scale is
simply criminal.

Goodenough's " drawing a man " test, and in older children Binet's 6o
word test, or the Kent Rosanoff word association test, are partly dependent
upon emotional factors and give valuable evidence.

More important than any of these is the observation of the child's be-
haviour under test. His attitude to his mother or whoever brings him in, his
attitude to the examiner, to the situation as a whole, to the test material, to
success and failure, his economy or extravagance of movement, his ability to
attend, to stick to his work, to correct errors?a hundred and one tiny details
combine to give a picture of his mind. That a child fails in a test means
little; how he fails may mean everything. Two children fail at a memory
test; one may have grasped the sense of it and the other not. Billy and Jack
both fail at a block design test; Billy a defective may be amused and unaware
of his failure, Jack a regressed child may cry and say " I can't do it," whilst
Tommy with an insecurity reaction may do splendidly till he makes his first
error, and then promptly becomes upset, makes wild moves and shows signs of
panic. Insecure children may refuse a test lest they should fail at it. Regression
cases may refuse to try, because they never try anything. Defective children may
refuse because they cannot understand or attend to the instructions. Only
close observation and extensive experience will enable the distinction to be
made.

Sammy, aged 8|, was said to be violent, excitable and unteachable. His
father was dead. During life he had been very excitable and violent in temper.
The father's mother was insane. Sammy had had meningitis in infancy. He
had been sent to a strict private school where drastic discipline had been tried
without result.

On interview he was friendly, excitable, and very childish. He drew a
very crude attempt at a man. He counted on his fingers. He jabbered on so
fast as to suggest a manic type. He was unable to concentrate at all.

On test his mental age on Terman was 6 years 2 months, I.Q. 73. On
the Merrill Palmer scale of performance he scored only 5 years.
He was handicapped by (1) The visual defect, (2) The fear of failure
which made him refuse tests altogether or give them up without trying, (3) He
was unable to concentrate.

His behaviour showed gross insecurity and he was rated as dull normal.
Phychiatric treatment and careful handling justified the diagnosis and he
improved very markedly.

Dickie, aged 5, was sent from school. He was violent tempered and stupid,
and could not keep up in work or play. He was enuretic by night and day
and at times was dirty.

On interview he spoke little and was judged defective. On test he showed
an intelligence quotient of 67 in the Merrill Palmer scale. The Binet could not
be applied.

Motor control was poor, and his answers to questions were largely
unintelligible.

Investigation of the home showed that he was grossly over-protected, and
treated like a baby. He was far more babyish at home than in school and
was a finger sucker. With alteration of the home he improved, but in school
was still restless and difficult and showed signs of insecurity.

Re-examined a year later his intelligence quotient had risen one point only
but he was now measurable in the Binet scale, showing an intelligence quotient
equal to his Merrill Palmer I.Q. His random answering was now obviously an
attempt to retreat from difficulties, and his whole reaction suggested emotional
rather than intellectual failure. He was graded as dull normal and eventually
made a good adjustment at home and in school.

Consider next, emotion as a determinant of defect. There is a fairly
large group of high grade defectives whose purely cognitive ability is enough
to allow them to earn a living, but whose emotional disabilities render survival
in other than a protected atmosphere impossible. If the least strain is put
upon these people their emotional instability combines with their low intelli-
gence to cause some folly or delinquency bringing them swiftly to the work-
house or the court. It is fair to say of such cases that it is the emotional factor
which determines their defect.

Apart from cases of this type is a group?fortunately not large?who
are far more difficult. The condition cannot be defined as a clinical entity
but amongst the border-line psychotics, psychopathic personalities, recidivists
and social ineffectives, one finds cases displaying very severe emotional abnorm-
ality rather of the childish type, in that it finds expression in behaviour dis-
orders, usually markedly anti-social; and showing on test as subnormal, dull
normal, occasionally normal, and in quite exceptional cases high normal
intelligence. These people are definitely unable to adapt to normal society,
or to manage their affairs with ordinary prudence; their disorder appears in
adolescence?in that it resists any known treatment it seems to be permanently
installed. For all these reasons they are said?and quite rightly from the
social standpoint?to be mentally deficient. Whether they are so in fact is
more than doubtful?probably many of them are not. The distinction is im-
portant because it seems likely that a number of these people represent severe
types of emotional disturbance, complicated by the chronic failure, by the adult
physiological make-up, and in the great majority of cases by rather low intelli-
gence. If this is so, whilst little or nothing can be done for the present genera-
tion, it seems certain that with the increasing interest in psychology and the
establishment of Child Guidance Clinics, the evidence obtained from the mal-
adjusted child of to-day will throw light upon the origin, treatment, and even
the prevention of the so-called moral defective of to-morrow. This can per-
haps be best illustrated by quoting the case of a boy not a typical moral defective
but whose true allocation is still uncertain.

Peter started stealing at the age of six. When he was nine he was sent
to a Home Office School as " unmanageable." After his discharge eighteen
months later, he was ranked as impossible at home and in school, and was
finally excluded from the latter after organising a mutiny. He tried his hand
at every form of crime from shooting his enemies with an air-gun to stealing a
cur and pocket-picking. He tried to commit suicide, and planned to commit
murder. House-breaking was his favourite sport, and for this he was arrested
at the age of fourteen.

Investigation showed that he was illegitimate, and had a poorly repressed
knowledge of the fact. His father, who had deserted, was a blackguard, and
his mother was markedly psychopathic. His emotional environment must
have been simply appalling from the day of his birth.

Mental testing showed an intelligence quotient of 98. He was negativistic
and showed signs of severe emotional disturbance. A word association test
showed a worse result than the writer has seen outside a mental hospital.

After some psychotherapy Peter was sent to a reformatory school managed
by a genius. The immediate improvement was amazing and a year later he
was still doing very well, had had a fortnight's home leave and had behaved
admirably.

How are we to classify such a boy? On first sight, despite his normal
intellect, he is as typical a moral defective as one could wish, yet with skilled
handling he improves beyond belief. What the end result will be no one
can tell.
Cases even more difficult are not wanting; whether the condition is a
form of defect, whether it is mainly congenital or mainly acquired, whether it
can be cured or modified by treatment are the questions for the future. For
the present, the law deals with these people as best it can, as moral defectives,
criminals and the rest. The psychiatrist can do no more than label them
" pathological delinquents."

So much for diagnosis. A brief reference to treatment of emotional
factors complicating defect can now be made. The defective, like the child,
is very responsive to his environment?moreover he is often very unstable.
The defective boy or girl admitted to an institution fresh from the troubles
and failures in society is frequently violent, excitable, resentful, and a nuisance
to himself and to everybody else. Yet in a few months with wise handling
in the protection of an institution, the same boy or girl may settle down com-
pletely, becoming quiet, happy, docile and trustworthy, and may improve
not only in stability, but in apparent intelligence. The degree of improve-
ment of course depends largely upon the institution. Unfortunately in this
country the legal and custodial views tend to prevail over the psychological;
and custodial institutions are apt to be too mechanical, whereby the affective
psychology of the individual patient is only too frequently crushed in the
administrative machine.

In some of the American states where the psychiatrist has a free hand,
and where plenty of skilled assistance is available, far better results are
obtained; and those of us in England who have had an opportunity of working
in circumstances in any way comparable to such standards, can vouch for
their value.

Here is a case which will illustrate the point:?
John was in a large institution from his tenth to his nineteenth year. After
a year on licence he stole some money from his employer and was re-committed
to an institution of a fairly strict type and under lay management. There he
was at first violent, obscene and abusive, but settled down in a year or so to the
ordinary routine of the place. Interviewed for rough testing in the presence
of the superintendent he did badly at simple block design tests, and appeared
to be below the trainable standard. His manner was a little anxious, but very
civil, and it was obvious that he hated his superintendent?to whom he was
almost nauseatingly polite.

He was re-tested after two weeks' handling by up-to-date methods. His
Binet age was then one year higher than that obtained on committal and his
block design ability was two years above that obtained in the presence of the
recent overlord.

He is now reported as a good worker and exceedingly well-behaved, though
emotionally somewhat unstable.

The case illustrates the essential fact that the proper person to handle a
defective is not a lawyer, not a reformatory master, not a kindly old lady (of
either sex) but a skilled psychiatrist. The proper person to train him is not
a nurse, not a tradesman, but a trainer: the training should be selected and
supervised by some person with expert knowledge of amentia, and its aim
should be not merely the production of goods, nor even merely the teaching
of a trade, but the stabilisation of emotion and the attainment of a condition as
near to normality as possible.

The writer is indebted to Dr Wm. Moodie, Medical Director of the London
Child Guidance Clinic, for permission to publish particulars of cases attending this
Clinic.
