News and Notes
================

The Board of Control
--------------------

Pursuant to the provisions of Section n of the Mental Treatment Act,
1930, the Board, with the approval of the Minister of Health, have appointed
Mr. G. W. Mackay, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.M., and Miss F. H. M. Calder, M.A.,
M.D., D.P.M., to be Commissioners, on the retirement of Mr. S. E. Gill,
M.D., D.P.H., and Surgeon Rear Admiral E. T. Meagher, R.N. (ret.).

British Social Hygiene Council
----------------------------------

The annual Summer School organised by the British Social Hygiene
Council will be held this year at Westminster College, Cambridge, from Tues-
day, July 30th to August 6th. The main theme of the discussions and lectures
will be " Emotional Training and Sex Education." It is hoped that this
School will be of real help to all those who are in any way concerned with
young people, especially those who have to deal with young people in Clubs
and in Institutions.

Particulars of the School and an Application Form are enclosed with
this issue. They may also be obtained from The Secretary, British Social
Hygiene Council, Carteret House, Carteret Street, London, S.W.i.
National Special Schools Union Biennial Conference
The Sixteenth Biennial Conference of the National Special Schools
Union will be held in Edinburgh on Thursday, Friday and Saturday, June
20th, 21 st and 22nd, 1935.

The Conference will open with a Civic Reception and this will be
followed on the Friday by discussions on " Organisation in Scotland," and
" Special Schools v. Special Classes." Amongst further subjects of discussion
are " The Special Problems of the Borderline Case," " The Relationship of
Mental Defect to Juvenile Delinquency," and sessions on Speech Defect and
Physical Training.

Full particulars of the Conference may be obtained from the Hon. Secre-
tary, Special Schools Union Conference, City Education Department, Castle
Terrace, Edinburgh, 1.

New Education Fellowship
-------------------------

The first regional British Isles Conference of the New Education Fellow-
ship will be held at St. Andrew's University, Scotland, from Tuesday evening,
August 13th, to Thursday evening, August 22nd, 1935.

The theme of the Conference is to be " Education and Leisure; how to
create a democratic culture." It has been planned to consider not only the
question of education for leisure at school but also to discuss the provision
of facilities and training to enable adolescents and adults to make a creative
and cultural use of their leisure after school life.

Dr A. D. Lindsay, Master of Balliol College, Oxford, will preside over
the Conference and the speakers include Mr. Salter Davies of Kent, Mrs. Clara
Rackham of Cambridge, and Dr William Boyd of the Education Department,
Glasgow University.

Full particulars may be obtained from the New Education Fellowship,
29, Tavistock Square, W.C.i.

Mental Health Work in South Africa
-----------------------------------
The Report of the Commissioner for Mental Hygiene, Union of South
Africa, for 1933 (published 1935) calls attention to the need for providing
special psychopathic wards as integral parts and under the administration of
the larger general hospitals. To a great extent South Africa is meeting the
need for the treatment of mild and early cases of mental disorders in this way.

Capetown, Johannesburg and Pretoria General Hospitals have instituted
psychiatric clinics for out-patients and plans for the new Capetown Hospital
include a ward for the treatment of suitable in-patients. The Commissioner
expresses the hope that the lead given by Capetown in making this special
provision for in-patients will be followed by other hospitals in the large
centres. " . . A definite duty rests on the modern general hospital to make
adequate provision for the treatment of mild and curable cases of mental ill-
ness and I am strongly of opinion that our general hospitals should no longer
refuse to accept this responsibility."

Referring to Institutions for the Feeble-minded, the Commisioner men-
tions the recent modification of restrictions which allow the admission of de-
fective children under the age of 16 years who require care and teaching in an
institution for the feeble-minded. He is not satisfied that it is the function of
institutions to deal with children with slight mental defect characterised prin-
cipally by failure to make normal progress in ordinary schools. These present
a problem which is primarily educational and, he says, the onus of providing
facilities for this class of child is one which may reasonably be placed on the
Education Departments.

New Colony for Mental Defectives
---------------------------------

The North Riding County Council have recently opened a new Colony
?The Claypenny Colony, at Easingwold, North Riding, Yorks.

This is the first attempt in the North Riding to provide a colony for the
treatment and care of their own cases who have been previously boarded out
at the institutions of other Authorities.

Accommodation has been provided in the first instance for 90 patients
but an additional 100 acres of land and a farm adjoining the premises have
been acquired for extension and it is proposed to erect three further pavilions.

Public Health Congress Report
------------------------------

A verbatim report of the Public Health Congress held at the Agricultural
Hall, Islington, from November 19th to 24th is now on sale and may be
obtained from the Congress Organising Council, 13, Victoria Street, S.W.i.
The Report includes full accounts of the sessions on Boarding-Out
Patients from Mental Hospitals, After-Care of Mental Patients, and Voluntary
Sterilisation.

Proposed British Federation of Social Workers
-----------------------------------------------

At the Annual Meeting of the Association of Mental Health Workers
a short account was given of a proposed British Federation of Social Workers.
The Federation would be composed of organisations of social workers (as
distinct from organisations engaged in social work) and its objects would be:
(a) To promote consultation and co-operation among constituent
organisations.
(b) To provide opportunities for the interchange of knowledge and ex-
perience between members of organisations.
(c) To discuss, and when considered desirable, to take common action
in matters affecting social legisation.
(d) To assist organisation in securing for social workers such conditions
of employment as will attract and retain able and well qualified men
and women, thus enabling workers to render their best service to
the community.
(e) To promote or facilitate research either by organisations or individuals.
Many social workers have felt the need for some means of voicing their
views when social legisation is proposed and an organisation representing the
workers in various branches of social work, would carry more weight and
conviction than individual associations could hope to do. The question of
training is intimately bound up with that of salaries and conditions of work
and the Federation should be able to help constituent organisations in many
ways.

It is proposed that membership of the Federation should comprise
organisations of workers, and for the first two years, individual associates who
would be workers engaged in some branch of social work in which no organ-
isation of workers has yet been formed. The standard and training of workers
belonging to the constituent organisations would be the concern of each
individual organisation.

Management would be by a Council representative of the Constituent
organisations with an Executive Committee and the usual officers.
A provisional Committee has been formed (on which the A.M.H.W. is
represented) to consider in more detail the constitution, finance and a possible
programme of work for the Federation should it materialise. This Committee
will report to a Conference of representatives of organisations in six months
time.

Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilisation
-------------------------------------------

The Joint Committee, formed for the purpose of forwarding legislation
on the lines of the recommendations of the Departmental Committee, con-
tinues to collect evidence of public support for its work. It now has the
honour and great advantage of possessing Lord Horder and Sir Francis Acland
as Chairman and Vice-Chairman respectively.

A Bill embodying the proposals of the Departmental Committee (of whom
Mr. Brock, it will be remembered, was the Chairman) has now been drawn
up. It has been approved by the County Councils Association, the Association
of Municipal Corporations and the Mental Plospitals Association, and has been
presented to the Minister of Health. Copies will be obtainable from the
Joint Committee at the end of May, when representatives of the above associa-
tions and of the Joint Committee will have had an opportunity of discussing
it with the Minister.

Meanwhile, in response to many requests, a Voluntary Sterilisation
League has been formed, to assist the Joint Committee with its educational
work, to promote co-operation between all those who support the same object
and to provide members with regular information as to the progress of the
work and the facilities available for educational propaganda. Lord Horder
and Sir Francis Acland have kindly consented to act as President and Vice-
President, the headquarters are at 69, Eccleston Square, London, S.W.i, and
the nominal subscription is sixpence a year. Members may, however, send
more if they wish, and the response so far has been exceedingly generous. In
return they will receive a quarterly bulletin, and any information or help
they may require with local educational work. Those who are interested
should write to the Secretary for membership cards and further particulars.
