Family Book
=============

:Type: Book Reviews and Abstracts
:Author: Gwen St.
jjubyn, with an Introduction by Harold
^icolson. Arthur Barker, Ltd. 8/6 net.
1935.

While the daily papers and women's maga-
^'Iles print frequent and regular articles on the
Puririging of children, and at the/ same time
unierous excellent text-books on the subject
e published, these are usually mainly con-
^rned with the health of the baby and small
ftud. Occasionally, though much more rarely,
subject of the diet and care of adolescents
Cr?ps up, and it is seldom that we have pre-
^'nted to us expert advice on the suitability of
*tterent types of education, having regard to
le age, sex, and environment of the child.
.All these problems, and many more, dealing
^Uh every possible aspect of family life, are
lscussed fully in " The Family Book," which
c?nsists of a series of contributions by several
^titers, each of whom is an authority in his or
ler particular subject. It is an admirable
Method of presenting knowledge to the layman,
.'hen it is intended to cover such a wide field,
'Hce by this means no one particular period of
8r?\yth, mental or physical, is stressed to the
?triment of others.

. 1 o the modern and thoughtful parent the book
}VlU be of immense interest, and, what perhaps
?f more importance, a practical help. While
ls thoroughly up-to-date it avoids the extreme
Tories which are so often set forth in books
?u child welfare, and arc, therefore, frequently
'Snored by the average parent who, as Harold
^colson suggests in a thoughtful and sym-
pathetic introduction, has no wish to experi-
ment on his own child. What strikes one most,
a^er reading the book, is the very balanced,
c?ttimonsense attitude of the contributors,
Xvhich will be particularly appreciated by the
l^any ordinary people for whom it is presumably
lri tended.

. The first section, " Preparing for Marriage,"
ls> as its title suggests, of an introductory
Mature. While it has its place in the scheme
thc book, and may be of general interest,
did not seem to me to be of great practical
^lue. The succeeding chapter on Birth Con-
l?l is well set out. It combines two separate
CotUributions by partisans for and against the
Practice, an arrangement helpful to the reader
is attempting to form an unbiassed opinion.
0 my mind, the result is a balance in, favour
of birth-control. Michael Fielding, its advocate,
wrote with a conviction lacking in his oppon-
ent, who left one with the impression that she
was forlornly fostering a lost cause.

The third section, " On Having a Baby,"
is a; comprehensive guide for the woman who
is expecting her first baby, written by a doctor.
His advice regarding her diet and general health
is sensibly and clearly given.

" Feeding from Birth to Adolescence "
follows, and is divided into three parts: feeding
during infancy, the diet of the pre-school child,
and the diet of the school child. Although the
first part is full of valuable information, I attach
almost more importance to the second and third.
In these days, when clinics and nursing maga-
zines abound, it is nearly impossible for the
modern mother to remain ignorant of the right
feeding of infants, and the result can be seen
in the large number of healthy-looking infants
there are about. Unfortunately it so often
happens that by the time the baby outgrows
infancy, and is promoted to a mixed diet, its
mother's zeal diminishes, or her ignorance be-
gins, and the healthy infant develops into the
peevish and puny toddler. The author of this
section deals most effectively with the problem
and makes, in my opinion, one of the most
valuable contributions to the book.

Other writers pay attention to further aspects
of the physical life of the child?its clothing,
simple ailments, and diseases and deformities,
with home nursing and first aid. This con-
cludes the first part of the book, dealing with
the health of the child.

Part II discusses its development and educa-
tion. There is a chapter on sex-education for
young children, written with moderation, and
another on " Problems of Behaviour," followed
by two sections dealing with the development of
the child and adolescent. Then come four in-
teresting sections on the education of boys and
girls at home and at school. All types of edu-
cation and their relative merits are discussed in
an unbiassed manner.

Part III comprises sections on general aspects
of family life?the child and its books, the
ethics of family life (dealing with religious and
moral teaching), and the financial problems of
the family, followed by a very full discussion
of the careers open to boys and girls. This is
a practical and informative section, likely to
prove useful to the parents of older children.
The book, which has rightly been described
as an Encyclopaedia of Parenthood, concludes
with a chapter on the history of child welfare,
and describes the valuable work done by the
various clinics and welfare centres in existence.
The editor is to be congratulated on having
achieved a remarkable correlation between the
various sections, which are well illustrated with
photographs and diagrams. There is also ap-
pended a long and comprehensive list of refer-
ence books, useful to the reader who wishes to
make a further study of any of the subjects.

E. M. W.
Constructive Eugenics and Rational Mar-
riage. By Dr Morris Siegel. McClelland
and Stewart, Ltd., U.S.A. Price
Dr Siegel defines his eugenic programme as
aiming at the elimination of the unfit and the
promotion of the qualities of the fit. With
these aims few will be found to disagree, but
the reader who comes to his book in the hope
that it will illuminate the problems which beset
any constructive eugenic policy is likely to be
disappointed.

It may be reasonably assumed that the pro-
gress of eugenic policy within a free democracy
will depend firstly upon an unanswerable de-
monstration of the necessity for eugenic legis-
lation, and secondly upon an adequate biological
justification for the specific proposals suggested,
and it is clear that the eugenist's case will not
be strengthened by exaggerated appeals to the
alleged pollution of the racial stock. It is
therefore unfortunate that the author ascribes
to " most authorities on eugenics " the belief
that the increase of feeble-mindedness and in-
sanity is such that within the next seventy-five
years about 60 per cent, of the population will
be degenerate. It is not surprising that no
evidence is given in support of this astonish-
ing statement, and it may be as well to remind
the reader that the Brock Report, while noting
an apparent increase in the incidence of mental
defect, concluded that there was no ground for
alarmist views of wholesale racial deterioration.

However, it is probable that the bare facts as
they are revealed in current social writings may
be regarded as sufficient to convince the majority
that; there is an appreciable proportion of the
race which should be discouraged from repro-
ducing. The real difficulty lies in the fact that
our increased knowledge of heredity has actu-
ally made it more difficult to frame any policy
directed towards this end. For example, a
condition due to a dominant gene should t>e
manifested by every individual possessing that
gene, and it should therefore be possible to
eliminate it in one generation by sterilising all
affected individuals. The difficulty here li^
in the existence of " imperfect dominants
which may sometimes be carried by normal in-
dividuals; polydactly, about which (according t?
Dr Siegel) some doubt exists as to whether it
is a dominant or recessive, is probably such a
condition. In the case of recessive genes the
problem is more difficult, for here the elimina-
tion of the condition would always require the
sterilisation of carriers as well as of affected
individuals, and as in most cases we have no
method of differentiating normal individuals
into carriers and non-carriers, we are faced with
the necessity of sterilising all unaffected close
relatives of an affected individual, a drastic
policy which could hardly hope to become
acceptable. Dr Siegel's book, though sincerely
written, is seriously reduced in value by the
elimination of such difficulties. Thus he states
that " reliable statistics prove beyond doubt
that over 90 per cent, of all people now living
do not suffer from any hereditary diseases ?r
taints, nor are they carriers of the same." But
it has recently been shown that 0.5 per cent, ox
the Swedish population carry a recessive gene
for juvenile amaurotic idiocy, and it seeinS
probable that we are all carriers of deleterious
genes which are, however, unlikely to manifest
themselves, except sometimes through a cousin
marriage (a point in eugenic policy which is
overlooked by the author).

Dr Siegel places much faith in the spreading
of eugenic propaganda through schools, univer'
sities, the film and the drama, and he visualises
also the establishment of a government bureau
for the registering of family pedigrees. " Let
us establish specialists in eugenics and we may
rest assured that our young people will take
advantage of the services that they will offer.
It is, of course, of first importance that members
of families in which defects have occurred
should be aware of the danger of transmitting
the defect to their offspring, and should be able
to obtain such authoritative information on the
matter as may be available, but the treatment
of marriage as an aspect of stud-farming is not
only genetically impracticable, but is too naive
to be taken seriously at the present time.

In the reviewer's opinion the author does not
stress sufficiently the importance of the envir-
clearCn*' ^though he recognises its effect. It is
?f w f?r instance, that the well-known cases
ax Jukes and Martin Kalikak, which are
tj0 clll?ted yet again, are as much an illustra-
ari the effect of environment as of inherit-
Ho4 ^ccording to recent work by Professor
k en and others, the effect of the environ-
(]u 1 !n determining differences between indivi-
and ^ 1S- ^east as important as that of heredity,
? is now becoming apparent that the con-
ij^ rah?n of activity upon an all-round
js Pr?vement and levelling of the environment
arp ? ?n^ justified by the soundest biological
prg lments, but provides the most immediately
Pro} euSenic P0^cy' and one which will
^ a% eliminate more of the unfit than will
-7 such negative policy as sterilisation.
E.J.W.B.

^Enty-First Annual Report of the
eneral Board of Control for Scotland
?r the year 1934. H.M. Stationeiy Office.
1Ce 1/6 net. 1935.

of^p twenty-first annual report of the Board
Pa'i?n^ro^ ^or Scotland, special attention is
u to the question of the boarding-out of
r !ents from Institutions for Defectives and
^ Asylums.

he majority of cases boarded out in Scotland
bfe ^ectives, and of recent years there has
f0 n a tendency to use this form of care mainly
a r the high grade cases. The Medical Officers
Uni Assistance Officers of the areas
di ^ke the task of selecting suitable guar-
^atls and of supervising, guiding and advising
in the best interests of the patients,
off; *s Pa^ t? the ungrudging work of these
^,npers who do so much more than carry out
eir statutory duties; a plea is made for some
P^'cial form of training for certifying officers,
ahi ? guar(^ian has changed consider-
in the last 20 years, and there is little
i r!Cuhy now in obtaining guardians who are
lng on their duties, not only for the value
r Nv?rk performed by the patient but with a
^ a* sense of responsibility and keen interest in
Welfare and happiness of their charges.
any are cared for in out-lying farms or crofts,
, ^ in some families guardianship has become
^?st a matter of heredity.

0j ?t much account is taken of the objection
y fixing normal children with an adult defec-
Ve in the same household; in fact it has been
found that this often gives the children a sense
of responsibility and tolerance.

A number of defectives boarded out in their
own homes attend After Schools for instruction
in handicrafts. Stress is laid on the necessity
for providing such schools or suitable occu-
pation.

Licence has proved very useful, particularly
in trying out a patient who has been living for
several years under institutional regime and
needs a few months' trial before finally settling
down with a guardian.

Ascertainment is far from complete, and there
are many high grade defectives (who are not
sufficiently marked out from the normal child
at school) who only come under notice of the
Authorities when either destitute or brought
before the Courts.

So far the boarding-out of cases of chronic
mental illness of a harmless kind has not been
much explored, though it is generally agreed
that this form of care could be expanded.
