The Psychological Study of Blind Children
===========================================

B:Author:y Walter E. Dry
Superintendent, Oregon State School for Blind,
and
Elizabeth C. Cooper
Washington State School for the Blind

When I first began to learn to laugh cheerfully with a blind
child when he walked square into a door ajar, and to put objects
into hands before they had a chance to grope, I began also to
wonder if the queer forms of behavior I saw everywhere about me
were entirely due to the accident of sightlessness.

For instance, there sat Rollo, slouched in his seat, his mouth
half-opened, one hand flapping persistently back and forth before
his one quite hopeless eye; Rollo, who never answered by much
more than a grunt unless it were to explode into violent recriminations; seventh-grade Rollo, who could read a Braille sentence
seventeen times and still not frame the sense of it.

The day before, in seventh-grade arithmetic, when I had asked
pretty, curly-haired Jane the value of one-half in per cent, Jane
had, after much frowning concentration, suggested five per cent,
at which the class and I had gone over the old drill: '' one-half?
fifty per cent; one-fourth?twenty-five per cent; etc.," and Jane
and I had discussed whether we would not have just as much apple
to eat if we had fifty per cent of one as we would if we had a half
of one, and Jane had entered into the discussion vivaciously and
had smiled engagingly at me, and then had answered two minutes
later, when I propounded the original question, "Forty-two per
cent!" A number we had never mentioned!

And again there was Marjorie, who, in the sixth grade, spelled
as, "a-z," and sixteen-year-old Charles, who was greatly puzzled
over the recently discovered phenomena that 8 and 8 could equal
88 as well as 16.

So I went to the Little-Boys' Housemother, knowing she had
had medical experience, and she informed me with a pitying smile
that at least half these children were definitely feeble-minded and
a third of them congenitally syphilitic so that many would be suffering from paresis in another ten years.
"Do you see that boy?" she asked, pointing out the window.

I looked, and observed a little chap of seven or eight, throwing a
sheet of paper into the air, shouting with glee when the wind took
it, and running to follow inaccurately its path and to hunt about
till he could find it and repeat the process. He was utterly alone
on the playground and deeply engrossed in his game, and we
watched him repeat the operation several times until the Housemother said, '' That boy is ten years old and has done nothing but
that one performance every day that was dry enough, on an average of four hours a day for six months! You can't tell me lie
isn't feeble-minded!''

A moment later she said, "Do you see David there?" I saw
David, an awkward, big-headed child of six or seven, sausageshaped, coming slowly down the schoolhouse steps to the walk that
led to the Little-Boys' Cottage.

"He has come along that walk four or five times a day every
day for six months, but?watch him!" We watched. David came
down the steps to the walk, followed it to where it branched, took
the correct branch, then stepped off onto the grass, and, instead of
trying to regain the walk, wandered hopelessly off into the yard
and was soon wailing dismally that he was lost.

'' He has every sign of feeble-mindedness?there's not much one
can do with him but teach him a few things and put him where he
can't harm others. Half the children here are of his level or worse.
No, it's not their blindness?look at the brilliant blind ones?look
at Frank there.''

I looked again and saw a sturdy small person of about six industriously dismembering an alarm-clock. He came at the Housemother's call, without stumbling over anything or hesitating, to
talk unselfconsciously with me in the manner of any normal interested six-year-old. And I thought of the fourteen-year-old
Bess, brilliant in geometry learned from a Braille text, of fifteenyear-old Arthur with his slow smile and his incredible speed and
accuracy in arithmetic?and was convinced.

From the Housemother I went to the Shop-Teacher and put my
question again, "What about these children? Are they feebleminded?"
The answer was indirect, "You have Martin in some of your
classes, I'm sure. What do you think of him?"

"Martin! Why, he is one of my best students in eighth-grade
arithmetic. He quite regularly and constantly gets 'one,' and on
his last card he had a 'one' in his history also. He showed me a
very creditable poem he had written the other day, and, all in all,
I should say he is at least average, and probably better than the
average eighth-grade pupil in public school.''

"You do not come much into contact with the younger pupils,
but do you know which one is David ? Probably not by name, but
I know you have seen the little seven-year-old who will not walk
to the stairs, but sits down and slides along as a two- or three-yearold would do. And he is afraid of everything, doesn't know how
to play, is extremely 'edge-y' when the other children come near
him, going into most violent tantrums if they accidentally bump
him or touch him. His conversation is rather foolish and meaningless, and, on the whole, you probably regard him as anything
but a normal seven-year-old, if you are to believe your own senses.
"And yet, he is just about where Martin was when he was
David's age! I know that is hard to believe, but Martin could not
dress himself when he was eight or nine, was simply terrified at
the shower-bath, was almost totally helpless in getting about, had
absolutely no initiative, and, in fact, would have been classified as
absolutely feeble-minded!''

The difficulty was hardly solved by the above conflicting opinions of those who should know these children best. How does one
tell whether a child is feeble-minded or not ?

Every competent psychologist, confronted with a supposed case
of feeble-mindedness, resorts to one or a number of mental tests,
the results of which can be checked against the norms of thousands
of children. Thousands of normal, sighted, children.1
What do you see when you hear the rasp of a saw? Well, you
see something?the shiny blade, the pile of sawdust, the rhythmic
swing of the sawyer's body, the piece about to fall. But what does
a blind child see when he hears that noise? We do not know. He
'sees' the noise, perhaps. But assuredly he does not see anything
that remotely pertains to the thing seen by the normal sighted
child. And that is just why even those tests which are not physically impossible for the blind child are not usable, because so far
there is nothing, or at least very little, to check them against.
Again, no blind child is ever treated in an entirely normal man1 For a discussion of psychological testing of the blind see E. Pintner,
Intelligence Testing, new edition, Chap. XIX.

ner, at least not until the age of six, and neither are the abnormalities of treatment the same for different children. Which degree of
abnormality resulting from abnormal treatment shall one consider
'normal' for blind children? Shall we say that this blind child,
who has been waited upon hand and foot and so is physically and
mentally helpless, is more nearly feeble-minded than this one, who
has been treated like a puppy that should be drowned and so is a
gibbering little demon? The one nearest the sighted norm is not
necessarily nearest the yet undiscovered norm for blind children.
Feeble-minded, or only under-developed? That is, congenital
feeble-mindedness, or "pseudo-feeble-mindedness"? This is the
problem awaiting solution at the very threshold of work with blind
children, and almost none of the carefully graded instruments
used in this problem with sighted children can be, or are, used.
The few we could adopt, we find little data on to standardize by,
and so we are thrown back upon the old method of trial-and-error?
of taking them in, imbeciles and all, of trying one method after
another, following each hypothesis to its own blank wall, until
at. last we fail, or succeed, and at the end know only one thing?
that these tactics did (or did not) help this child with that background and those emotional disturbances make normal reactions
and become a civilized human being.

Let us look at David today. He is in no sense a normal boy,
but neither is he the same David just described. Today he walks
downstairs; he is not what one would call fearless, but there are
many things of which he has absolutely no fear. He goes about
the place, hardly ever getting lost; he swings in the boys' swings,
slides down the slides, climbs trees, and does many of the things
that Frank delights in. He is still somewhat 'edge-y,' but rarely
goes into a tantrum. His conversation has taken on meaning and
sense; he is fair at numbers, reads everything he gets hold of, has
a knowledge of words beyond his age. Who shall predict what he
will be when he reaches the age of Martin ?

Or, let us consider John. At the age of fourteen, John came
to us from another school for the blind, two years ago. Perhaps
'stodgy' would describe John as well as any word. He seemingly
did not take an interest in much of anything; he was not ugly or
vicious, but just did not care to exert himself or seem to want to
co-operate in any way. Today, without exception, he is the most
helpful and dependable boy we have. He is not brilliant in his
studies, but he is interested, willing, and a hard worker. He passed
the eighth grade tests this spring and is anticipating his entrance
into high school with a great deal of pleasure.

Just last fall, Alice came to us. She was eight, a delicatelooking child with some sight. She has had poor health and has
so often heard her parents tell just how 'delicate' she is, that there
are many things she cannot possibly do, and many foods she cannot possibly eat, because they 'always make her ill.' Dogs, or
animals of any kind, make her 'very nervous' when there are
adults near, though she has been seen to play with them and enjoy
it when alone. She tattles, she weeps, she goes to almost any
length to get attention, and of course is heartily disliked by her
playmates. However, Alice is in no sense the same Alice she was
last fall when she first entered school. It is too early to tell
how she will respond; she may turn out to be definitely feebleminded, or it may again be a case of " pseudo-feeble-mindedness."
In the cases cited above one can definitely say:

"David had been excessively frightened before we took him.
John had been brow-beaten and abused at the school he came from.
Alice had been too much pampered at home." All true?all perfectly obvious after the child had been experimented with long
enough to prove him, in Burnham's phrase, only "pseudo-feebleminded," and, as such, probably curable.
Nearly every blind child appears to be feeble-minded and a
great many of them are?how can one know whether there is any
use starting in on educational work, how can one know in what direction to start, how can one know, save by comparison with the
child's own past behavior, what sort of results are being obtained ?
These questions are not answered, at least not by a single answer.
Every one with every child has several quite workable hypotheses
which must be tried.

In this connection take our study of Bill, a totally blind highschool boy, whom we have had opportunity to observe rather
closely and individually for several years.

Bill was born in 1911 in a small town in Minnesota where his
sixteen-year-old actress mother was awaiting his father's return
from a drunken spree. No one knows why his eyes "went bad,"
ophthalmia neonatorum, incorrectly cared for, most probably. He
was supported by his grandmother, who never allowed him to dress
or feed himself and who never taught him anything, until, at the
age of five, he entered a School for the Blind. Here he learned to
march lock-step into the huge barn of a dining-room, to avoid punPSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF BLIND CHILDREN 189
ishment by sneaking, to masturbate, and very little else. At
twelve, an aunt in the eastern part of Washington took him (his
grandmother was dead, his father had disappeared and was thought
dead, his mother had married again) and he appeared at our school,
a cringing, dirty, ill-kept, ambitionless, quite obviously feebleminded little lad.
Tomorrow Bill will be twenty years old. Far down the hall I
hear his joyous, echoing, spontaneous laughter; up he comes with
his swinging, uneven, 'blind man's' step?happy, loving, eager?
to ask a sensible question about a project of his own that he is
working out on the typewriter. He is slight, five feet and a half
perhaps, careful in his dress, handsome in a clear-cut, engaging
fashion, his sensitive mouth is smiling, his artists' hands are quick
and nervous, his eyes white and sightless. Except for this last, he
would compare favorably in appearance, manner, and 'manners'
with the ordinary high school boy. Yet, living with Bill, knowing
him intimately, we are in serious difficulties with the analysis and
treatment of his particular type of "pseudo-feeble-mindedness"
which, after all, may be real.

In Bill seem to be concentrated to a greater or less degree, almost all the behavior problems with which we have to contend in
our work with blind children. He is not typical, because most of
them have only one or two of the feeble-minded traits he shows,
but he is a conglomeration of typical 'blind-school' difficulties.
To begin with, there is seemingly a very real inability to take
direction?direction of any kind, suggestion, command, reason.
Our whole school is permeated with this stubborn, and in most
cases quite unconscious, clinging to one's own uncorrected thinking. It is an axiom that groups of blind people cannot work efficiently together and that "you can't tell a blind man anything."
In trying to explain to Bill how to get from one side of Fifth
Street to the opposite side of Sixth Street, a thing he very much
wished to know one morning, I was confronted with his entire loss
of self-control. He could not, or would not, remember which way
Main Street ran. His sole reply to careful, kindly direction was a
hurried, dogged, "Yes, but when I go from Tenth Street, I always turn to the left, so I can't see why I should turn to the right
here." Or, "7 do it by left-and-right, so I don't know what you
mean when you say north and west." "No, I can't do it," "No,
I don't see," over and over, despite the fact that Main Street is
entirely familiar to him and that he found his way home over un190 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
familiar territory by figuring directions from the sun a very few
days before.

Then, seemingly diametrically opposed to this tendency, is the
immense reluctance of many blind children, as well as adults, to
assume any responsibility or to undertake any type of action
whatsoever.

One summer Bill lost three copies of Braille music, pieces he
loves (he is a very fine musician) and can hardly replace, through
sheer inability to remember to replace them on the piano when he
placed his 'cello beside it. He has not yet written to order new
ones, although they were not his own and he has complained of
their loss on an average of once a month ever since; although he
has the money and the address necessary and is very much humiliated to have to confess to his music teacher that he has lost them.
He never looks for an object before he asks the nearest member of
the family where it is; he never looks at his watch without asking
what time it is; he has only recently learned to change his underwear without being told.
Another almost universal trait among blind people is extreme
inattentiveness?so extreme as to be often mistaken for the firstmentioned trait, unwillingness to take direction, rather than for
what it is, partial inability to receive it.

Bill's hearing has recently been tested and found extraordinary?he has what musicians call'' perfect pitch'' and can instantly
name any tone or tone combination that he hears?yet he goes
through many whole meals with a family he loves and is interested
in without comprehending one word of the general conversation,
or even of conversation addressed directly to him unless he is
spoken to several times. The most common speech in a 'blindschool' is not "I don't know," but "What did you say?"
One or more of these characteristics, combined with a great
many others of similar type, are found to an extremely abnormal
degree in almost all blind children. All of these and many more
are present in Bill to such an extent that we are hard put to it to
devise ways to correct them, or indeed, to decide whether they can
be corrected at all.

Perhaps one of Burnham's types of pseudo-feeble-mindedness,
that case where emotion dominates intelligence to such an extent
that the individual is unable to correct his thinking by reference
to experience, is the explanation of Bill's apparent unwillingness
to be told. Perhaps Adler's statement that children whose imPSYCHOLOGICAL STUDY OF BLIND CHILDREN 191
portant organs suffer defect look with suspicion and mistrust at
the opportunities which they see developing around them, and have
the tendency to isolate themselves and evade their tasks, is an explanation, and Bill is really failing to allow himself to comprehend
because he can evade a task if he refuses to understand it. Perhaps he is simply over-compensating his ever-present sense of inferiority by an insistent emphasis upon his ways, no matter upon
how trivial a basis his way may be erected. Adler's statement that
such belligerency may arise when the normal tenderness of parents
toward their children is not manifested to the proper degree may
account for it. We do not know. All we can do is to try every
hypothesis and see if any helps to change Bill's obvious feeblemindedness to normality.
In each of the difficulties, we have no basis but a theoretical one
upon which to proceed, but since we believe as Adler that "inabilitj7 or seeming stupidity, clumsiness, apathy, are not sufficient
proofs of feeble-mindedness,'' we have no choice but to go on using
somewhat the same tactics as Witmer in his study of Don, hoping
to determine the really feeble-minded from the pseudo-feebleminded and to cure the curable.
We must remember that what is essential is "to see the child's
situation with the eyes of the child," and that "children who come
into the world with organ inferiorities become involved at an early
age in a bitter struggle for existence which results only too often
in the strangulation of their social feelings."

If we can succeed with David as we did succeed with Martin,
Jf we can make a normal man of Bill, if John continues on his
normal high-school existence, then we can begin to use as a basis
for measurement some of the criteria we have so painstakingly
worked out by our theoretical, cut-and-try, methods. Then we can
begin to accomplish with these children some few of the things
that are being so strikingly accomplished with sighted ones.
