Three Case Studies in Diagnostic Education
===========================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1931, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XX, No. 3 May> 1931

:Author: T. W. Richards, M.S.
Clinic Teacher, The Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania

I. David
David's early history is an interesting one. He was born after
a pregnancy of only six months; during the pregnancy the mother
developed a toxic condition, and one month before the child s birth
she had her tonsils removed. David weighed but one and threefourth pounds at birth. It was difficult to find food which he
could digest, and due probably to malnutrition he had at least
?ne convulsion during this initial year of his life. At two months
age lie had chicken pox. During this entire year his parents
despaired of his life, yet he continued to live, and likewise through
a second year, not much more hopeful. During the third year the
child began to pick up. He learned to walk at three years, he
Sained weight much more rapidly, he grew stronger. At four he
"Was completely broken of enuretic habits.

We learned from the family history that the maternal grandParents were alive and that the paternal grandparents were dead.
The paternal grandfather had died of influenza, the paternal grandmother of angina pectoris. The health of David's parents was
good. The eldest child, David's only living sibling, fourteen years
?f age, was in the first year of high school, doing satisfactory work
a*id in good health. A second child, a boy, had died of diphtheria
at the age of three. David was the third and youngest child of
the family.

It is at once apparent from the medical history that David got
to a bad start. It was almost a miracle and probably a misfortune that he survived the first year of his life, and the fact that
he developed from such a delicate infant into the physical specimen
we had before us for psychological examination was nothing short
of remarkable. There is in the boy's appearance a suggestion of
malnutrition, but when examined at the age of eight years and one
month his weight was equal to the median for boys of nine and his
height was equal to the median for boys of ten. Of the anthropometric measures taken, only the head girth of 47.5 cms. was subnormal. This head girth is so decidedly inferior as to raise grave
suspicions.

Psychologically, the history reveals evidence of retardation almost from the start. David did not learn to talk until he was five
years old, and even now his speech is mutilated very noticeably
with an infantile type of enunciation. School was not considered
possible by the parents until the boy was seven years old. At this
age he was entered in a private kindergarten. David was extremely unsociable until he entered this class. He disliked playing
with other children and his whole reaction to social situations was
marked by a tendency to isolation, to play by himself. The school
did much for him here; gradually he learned to enjoy the company
of other children, to play with them. His teacher noted that the
boy's greatest defect was an inability to concentrate on problems,
no matter how simple, and to maintain his attention on a specific
thing for any length of time as compared with the others in her
group. It was this teacher who referred the case to the clinic for
examination.

David was examined by Dr Murphy in July, 1930. The quantitative results as shown in the record of the boy's performance on
the tests were generally poor. His time on the "Witmer formboard
as compared with norms for first grade children was, on the first
trial, inferior to twenty per cent, and his second and third trials
were worse. He failed the Witmer cylinder test, which is passed
by fifty per cent of first grade children, though on the second trial
he improved to the extent of being inferior to but twenty per cent.
He gave an auditory memory span of four on the third trial, which
is inferior to sixty per cent, and a visual span of four, inferior to
but forty per cent, but a lack of ability to give any reverse span
placed him inferior to fifty per cent.

On the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Scale, David was
given a mental age of six, and an Intelligence Quotient of 74, but
subsequent testing, six months later, yielded an Intelligence Quotient of only 66. In this later testing he was unable to pass two
tests for which he was given credit in the earlier trial?counting
thirteen pennies and describing the pictures.

It was evident from the results of the examination that David
could not be given a higher rating than borderline mentality.
There was little evidence that the boy would ever develop to the
extent that he could provide independently for himself. The tendency in diagnosis was toward feeblemindedness rather than toward
normality. David had demonstrated his competency to be inferior
to at least eighty per cent of boys his age. Handicapped by a poor
physical constitution, despite present good health, and also by an
infantile mutilation of speech, improvement for which could not
he predicted because of the low mentality and slight degree of
trainability, constructive educational guidance was extremely difficult. How might we estimate David's chance for school piogiess,
how determine whether any schooling would be worth while?
Granting that the boy could be taught to perform successfully a
few useful tasks, what might their nature be, and how might they
be taught most profitably ? The opportunity to start the first grade
at the usual age of entrance into school had been denied the boy
because of physical retardation. Was it possible that because
?f this fact David was naturally not readily comparable to fust
grade children ? If he fell markedly below those standards, could
it not be attributed to this educational retardation, and not to
feeblemindedness? These questions demanded answer, for they
were of vital importance to intelligent parents anxious to provide
for their children the best of opportunity. Occasionally the social
implication of retardation as it affects the family becomes alarmingly evident. Here was a case in point. With a certain position
?f influence in the community,?the father was a business man of
some importance, the mother was deeply and intelligently interested
in her children,?what was there to do with this unfortunate child ?
Had lie been only one more child in a poverty-stricken family, institutionalization of some sort would have been obvious. Or, on the
other hand, had he been a child of the rich, and had there been less
of family attachment, this freak might have been hidden f 1 om \ iew
by placement in an expensive home for exceptional children. W ith
a family pride which precluded dependence upon the state, jet not
in a position to pay the price of expert private attention, the question of doing what was right for the boy and for themselves was a
real one to the parents.

It was in an attempt in part to answer these questions, to determine the degree of trainability, of educability, precisely of mental status, that clinic teaching at least for the fall term was recommended.
David was placed for teaching from October until the early part
of January under Miss Margaret Shank, a student teacher in the
course in orthogenic teaching. He received, in all, seventeen hours
of teaching.

David learned very little during this time. His teacher found
in the early part of her teaching that the boy could recognize letters printed on the blackboard and that he could pick them out of
groups of letters printed each on a cardboard square, and mixed up
in random fashion in a box. He attached to each letter a meaning
which he had learned earlier: for Z he said "zebra," for A "apple." He could count to ten; he was able to write his name and
his telephone number. It was in one of these first periods of
teaching that he was tested a second time and received the Intelligence Quotient of 66 mentioned above. His memory span,
auditory and reverse, was the same as in July, though soon after
this test he gave a reverse span of two.

An attempt was made first of all to teach David to read. The
method adopted by his teacher was one which included the assignment of two or three words each day, having the boy write them in
his note-book, read them as he had written them, spell them, and
finally present them in the reading material used each day so
that he might learn to use them in text. The result was discouraging. Although David was able at the end of the term to recite
without error a page of printed material, and give what might in
the first instance be called "reading," it was impossible for him
to progress independently. His reading was a matter of approaching each word, spelling it, T-H-E, then looking up in a questioning way at his teacher, saying "THE, is that right?", waiting
for her assurance before proceeding to the next word, then starting
again, " F-O-X," and so on. Certainly this performance, no matter how accurately he analysed and said each word after he spelled
it, could not be called reading. There was no carry-over from
learned material to new words, there was no comprehension of
material read in this fashion, there was no increasing ability to
read even thus crudely. His teacher wrote "... his reading is
doubtful for he is lost with material other than that which has
been reviewed over and over through the three months of teaching.''
In oral spelling David was lost. Asked to spell a given word
he would invariably write it on the blackboard or on paper. He
had little or no auditory imagery which was of service to him, in
spite of the fact that he was sometimes echolalic in his responses.
He had built up a kinesthetic-visual habit in spelling, and it was
impossible for us to carry it over into the auditory field.
His knowledge of arithmetic when his teaching began consisted
of knowing how to count to ten,?nothing more. As the result of
teaching in the clinic he learned to count to fourteen, and to say
"one and one are two, two and one are three, three and one are
four," and so on, but when asked "three and one are what? it
was necessary for him to start through the series again from "one
and one'' and thence upward. The rote method he used in reading
was used in almost the same way in arithmetic; hence it was as impossible to assume that he learned what is essentially arithmetic as
it was to call his recitation of material on the printed page reading.
The most notable achievement in the teaching was the fact that
David learned to give a reverse memory span of three. This was
accomplished only after constant application through the three
months of contact with him, but it definitely indicated some ability
to grasp the units presented and to organize them intellectually in
the required pattern.

From the results of the clinic teaching in the case of David, Dr.
Murphy concluded that the boy was feebleminded beyond doubt.
The reports from his first teacher, from the parents, from the physician, the psychological examination, and now the report of the
teaching administered in the clinic,?all were evidence of a general
retardation made manifest in almost every aspect of the boy s behavior. He had learned to give a reverse memory span of three,
he had shown some trainability in rote types of learning, which
ability had not been demonstrated in the psychological examination
because of the child's lack of persistence. Throughout the teaching David demonstrated this same deficiency in control of attention
?r persistence?the "lack of concentration" of which his teacher
had complained?but the greater time allowance given him in
clinic teaching as opposed to the psychological examination permitted him in part to prove that, although he was low in this trait,
he was not wholly lacking. In spite of some ability to improve in
efficiency we could find no indication that the boy would improve
intellectually, that is, David showed some trainability but no educability. His teacher stated that David "can be trained but he
can never educate himself. For instance, he can spell some words
I can give him, but he does not comprehend the meaning.' Hence,
although he was efficient in a small measure, he had so little appreciation of ends to be sought that the efficiency was poorly directed.
His dependence upon his mother and teacher was so great that it
was impossible to determine what sort of motivation David possessed. That it was infantile there is no question. He wished only
to please those who became most gratified when he performed in a
certain fashion in preference to others. His extreme distractibility,
characterized by an infantile flow of questions at all times, as well
as by excess movement, did not permit of persistent, well-motivated
effort of a sustained sort.

The possibility that David will ever take a place in life independent of others is negligible. Prognosis for his case is unfavorable, for he will always need supervision. He may learn simple
tasks: sweeping, washing dishes perhaps, shovelling snow, and in
this way he may become a useful member of the household. The
educational recommendation would, however, include his placement
in a school for backward children where he will learn to get along
with others, and where he can develop as far as possible the low
order of ability which he possesses.

II. Martha

Martha was an unusual child among unusual children. Such a
distinction placed her for a considerable period of time under the
supervision of the department of Clinic Teaching, as much because
she was an object of interest to students in clinical work as because
of the fact that it was extremely difficult to determine her mental
status satisfactorily at the time of her examination. Referred as
she was by the University Hospital, where she had been given much
attention, we had throughout our subsequent contact with the little
girl a clear picture of her physical condition, and we knew that our
task was to determine, in short, what mental ability there was to
work with, and whether a training program could be established
which would bring satisfactory results.

Martha's parents, too, were unusual. The mother had undergone an operation so that she might have children. We never saw
very much of the father but from what we could learn directly from
the mother and from our own observation of her behavior toward
Martha, we concluded that in the home the balance hung on the
side of too much parental affection and interest rather than too
little. We came to appreciate this fact more deeply as our contact
with the case developed. There had been an earlier child, a boy,
who had died of measles at the age of six and shortly after a
severe fall. Later conclusions pointed to some form of encephalitis,
?"sleeping sickness," the mother told us.

In tlie first month of her pregnancy with Martha the mother had
fallen. At the time of birth, the child was delivered by the head
nurse in the lying-in hospital. The cord was twisted about the
child's neck, and rupture of the navel brought 011 a convulsion in
three days. From this period on convulsions were exceedingly
common; the child suffered them as often, sometimes, as eight or
nine in a day. During these episodes the child turned blue, was
spastic and rigid. Although she now has convulsions at most only
?nce in three months, and then only when she cannot have her own
way, during the period of early childhood they were extremely
frequent. Evidently the child in these early years was undernourished, for at five years she was rachitic. The mother told us
that the little girl talked at two years, and that she ceased wetting
the bed at night at two-and-a-half. She did not walk until four.
Her tonsils were removed at two years. During childhood she was
often constipated, but the only diseases she had were measles and
one attack of bronchial pneumonia.

An examination by the University Hospital at the age of fi\e
years and three months?five months preceding her examination at
the Psychological Clinic?revealed the fact that Martha had a right
dorsal left lumbar scoliosis, and spastic paralysis of the lower limbs.
She had been walking but a year, and even in that period she had
been able only to walk on her toes in an extremely awkward fashion.
Although she was extremely active, she tired easily. It was learned
at the hospital that the child had been examined at the city hospital
a year before their own examination, but no report concerning this
original examination and the treatment that may have followed was
ever received by us.

A recommendation was made at the Hospital that Martha attend
a Seashore Home for some time. This suggestion was carried out
during the summer that followed, a short time before the child "was
examined in the Psychological Clinic. It is reported that Maitlia
"Was well and happy during the day, but that at night she grieved
so for her mother that it seemed wisest to send her home after tin ee
Weeks. The discovery, soon afterward, that she had been suffering
from a tooth suggested to her mother that this may have explained
m part her restlessness while in the home.

Martha's parents were extremely anxious about her future and
although both the hospital and the Psychological Clinic believed
the mother to be intelligent and interested in a practical way in
her child, it was evident that she could not comprehend the nature
of the case. It was her dream, her anxious belief, that Martha
might some day pass through high school and college. She seemed
to understand the necessity, mentioned in turn by the family
physician, by the hospital, and now by ourselves, for the child
to develop proper social contacts through play with other children,
but rather than expose her to the rough but well-meaning play of
normal children of her own age, the mother felt that it would be
best in every way to adopt an older girl of eight or ten years to
play carefully with Martha, as well as to absorb, perhaps, some
share of her own clearly over-developed interest in the child. It
was suggested to the mother as a further solution of her problem
that she have another child, but the fear that in the condition of
this unfortunate little girl there was too much of an hereditary nature dispelled from her mind almost immediately the advisability
of such a step.

Here was a problem. What was there to do with a child, physically handicapped in such a way that she could not be other than
a burden to her parents for many years to come, perhaps forever?
What could be done with parents so keenly interested, so fond of
children, so hopeful that in the present condition of their child,
tragic as it was, there was still hope that she would develop as
other children do ?

Late in the summer session of 1930 Dr Murphy examined
Martha in the Psychological Clinic. It was impossible to accomplish very much in the way of objective measurement. On the
Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Test the child responded
fairly well. At three she passed all the tests, and at four she
counted pennies satisfactorily and seemed to comprehend the questions asked at that level, but she failed all tests at five and above.
With a mental age of three years and six months (her chronological
age was five years and seven months) the child received an Intelligence Quotient of 63. Her forward auditory memory span was
two; she could give no reverse span, and could not read numbers.
On the Seguin three-disc (ungraded) board the child replaced all
the blocks in five seconds, and on the first trial of the Seguin threefigure board she replaced them in fifteen seconds. Her trial on the
Witmer formboard was a complete failure, though in a time well
over five minutes she did manage to replace correctly each block
as it was handed to her. Her attention had constantly to be directed to the detail upon which she was working. She matched
colors, and "when pressed to it handed to the examiner the block
asked for."

Martha was an extremely pleasant little girl. Throughout the
examination she seemed tremendously interested in going from one
to another of the tests, on and on, to the new tiling. Tiring quickly
of the blocks on one board she asked eagerly for those of another.
Catching sight of the brightly colored cubes she stretched out her
hands for them. On the Binet tests she asked, "what do we do
next?", ''anything else to play with?", "may I play?", "give me
the pennies,"?these and countless other questions suggestive of
her boundless curiosity and the urge ever to be at something new
and different. Her attention wandered incessantly, her distractibility was exceptional. She was a child of a few months reaching
from her carriage for a bright ball shown to her; she was a child
of two looking eagerly about her for something new to play with;
she was a child of three trying obviously to do the task before her,
impeded by a distractibility which was part of her. Never was
she a child of five, almost ready for school,?ready for activity of
an intellectual sort. Her movements were at times incoordinate.
Her walking quite naturally was poor, although she wore the brace
recommended by the physicians at the hospital. She drooled at the
mouth occasionally, but hastened to wipe her face when asked to do
so. Her questions indicated a quick perception of changes about
her; they, only, were an indication that she was more than an infant, that she was eager for information. Her performances with
all the material given to her were clearly infantile, and the hyperactivity characterized by her running about from one thing to another, according as each attracted her fancy, indicated a lack of
control found in a child half her age. All this,?but the occasional
gleam of intelligence as shown by her questions and in lier remarks
suggested caution in diagnosing her as belonging definitely to that
class wherein her Intelligence Quotient and her work on the performance tests would place her. This child, handicapped physically and mentally, overactive, infantile, without the control of a
child her age, was more like a child of three. Yet, strangely, she
was a bright child of three,?bright in her response to the environment which surrounded her, quick to notice details, quick to see
what she wanted and that she could get it if she worked hard
enough, eager for attention, willing to use her mutilated language
in asking for a desired object. Never negativistic, yet headstrong ?
willing to submit, yet only because submission would bring her out
where she wanted to be. Clearly she was spoiled.

Clinic teaching was recommended for the purpose of further observation and a more analytic diagnosis.
Martha was given about eight hours of teaching under Miss
Sylvia Lenson. The teaching covered a period of about six weeks
during the fall term following the summer school in which Martha
was examined. Starting on the first day with the performance
material the teacher noticed at once that if anything at all were
to be accomplished it could come about only as the result of firm
disciplinary treatment. The fact that the child was spoiled, as
suggested by her behavior during the examination, was now very
clear. We had occasion to observe more closely the mother in her
relation to the child, and the constant affection which she poured
out upon her in speech and in gesture was regarded as symptomatic
of the treatment accorded her in the home, probably by both parents. Well aware as the result of our suggestion to her that this
was not the best attitude to maintain, the mother realized her error
too late. Her child had seemed so unfortunate to her that it was
only fair to act toward her in a manner more affectionate than that
shown to other children. An only child, the sole object of parental
affection, calling out by her condition more than the usual sympathy, the child learned literally to run ragged over others. Even
the hospital reported that in the week spent in the observation ward
she demanded constantly the attention of nurses and physicians.

Her teacher adopted a strict attitude toward Martha. She
resolved that nothing should be started which could not be completed within the hour. Starting with the Wallin pegs, proceeding
from there to the Witmer formboard, the child learned a better
method than the hit-or-miss system with which she began, which
could not be dignified by the term "trial and error" because there
was little to suggest "trial." In spite of her extreme distractibility the child learned gradually that she had a job to do, and that
she could do nothing else until it was completed. Gradually she
learned to do the Witmer formboard, then the cylinders. At the
end of three weeks the child performed the formboard test in about
a minute and a half, though under pressure of constant urging.
Her teacher did not believe that Martha had shown less distractibility, nor a real degree of trainability; she had merely continued
at a thing familiar by this time which she could have done in the
first place had she been held to it strenuously enough. By this
time her teacher felt that a new set of material might profitably be
introduced into the teaching procedure. The Witmer cylinders
were used. Although obviously she failed in her first trial with
this test the teacher reports: "On the fifth trial of the cylinders I
had a perfectly terrible time to finish it. She would throw the
blocks around, get up and start to walk away and do everything in
her power to make herself a general nuisance. In the following
Weeks we continued to work on the cylinders and she improved in
that she knew how to complete it. But she showed no signs of attention or discernment and was always trying to force the large
cylinders into small recesses and vice versa.''

The teacher noted in addition that Martha definitely knew her
colors, that is, red, blue, yellow and green. She could with some
help count to twelve, and when the teaching was discontinued after
six weeks she could count to fifteen. She was unable to recognize
letters. Because poor visual discrimination for form was suggested
in most of her performances her teacher tried to teach her letters
by a kinesthetic graphic method. Martha did show some improvement here: she learned finally to draw 011 the blackboard two semivertical lines, and a crossed one in the middle, to form the letter A,
but she seemed never to join the lines in an apex at the top. There
seemed to be the "feel" of the letter, but it had 110 significance to
the child, and the movement could not be transferred successfully
to writing on paper. I11 her cut-out work (though her mother here
stated that she thought the child quite adept) there was little or
110 semblance of form in what she produced.

In addition to these simple tasks, Martha's teacher stressed better walking. The child had each day to walk a certain distance
with her heels down, a task possible of execution but ignored because it was so little stressed except in the Clinic. Here the child
showed a slight tendency to improve, and we believe that were
such procedure emphasized daily by those in the home the child
might improve greatly in this respect. Emphasis was placed as
well on the drooling at the mouth. Here the teacher sought to develop in the child a sense of personal responsibility for her own
cleanliness to replace the dependence she had upon others, to remind her that her "hankie" was needed. In this teaching we were
unsuccessful, yet the improvement in her walking suggested that
the child could learn a task more simple than that, and the fact that
she was so well trained to obey the suggestion on the part of another that she wipe her mouth indicated that perhaps she would
be further trainable in this habit.

The teacher reports: "During the last two hours of clinic teaching, I tried to do a bit of reviewing. I gave her both the Witmer
formboard and the Cylinders. Her performances were qualita76 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tively far better than they had ever been. She went about doing
them in a very satisfactory manner and recognized her mistakes
immediately. Quantitatively the performances were bad, because
of her lack of attention and inability to concentrate. I then reviewed the few letters that I had taught her. (She) . . . knew A
and T and I perfectly. C and 0 were half-learned. She knows 1
and 7 perfectly and had a vague idea as to how to make 2. In this
review . . . (she) . . . showed some improvement in her walking
which, when called to her attention, made her even more conscientious and she didn't do so badly. She knew her colors, she remembered the names of a few objects, and she could count to fifteen."
In the terms of analytic diagnosis it was clear that the child
had evinced nothing of an intellectual sort during her contact with
us, except the occasional lucid query she would direct, and this
seemed to be founded less upon a curiosity than upon the same type
of chance response with which all her behavior was characterized.
Her lack of control permitted her to act spontaneously always, and
it was the chance use of language along with that of gesture which
made her questions appear pertinent. At best, they were those of
a child of three who sought to possess and do that which was new,
rather than to know. We do not mean that the child lacked comprehension, for she seemed to understand spoken directions, although she lacked the ability to understand their import, in terms
of their indication of a task to be done. Her discernment was not
of an intellectual sort, though her improvement with such material
as the making of letters would suggest that it might become so in
a crude fashion. Certainly she lacked the persistence to do even
a simple task independently. She could talk, babble incessantly,
grasp for a thing, and hold fast to what she wanted, but with a task
set before her which was unpleasant, or one which demanded the
attention she would prefer to direct upon something more to her
taste, there was no evidence of the persistence required to complete
it in even an elementary way. "We believe that were it not for the
always wandering attention she might have demonstrated some
motivation of a constructive type. Certainly she possessed motivation, but it was so multiple in its manifestations due to the deficit
of control and directing power that it was not productive. She
was ever active, physically and mentally. Quick to respond to a
pleasant situation, alert to an environment that might furnish a
temporary source of entertainment, there was some degree of intelligence manifested. This, we believe, was her long suit, though in
the face of her physical handicap and the tremendous exertion that
would be required to compensate for it, the suit was not long
enough. Efficiency was impossible from a physical standpoint,
and to develop that type of efficiency which is characterized by
mental production would assume a degree of mentality which was
not hers in the first place.

We could do little more for Martha at present. She was too
young to profit from schooling, too strange in her behavior to be
left alone. The chance that she would ever be able to shift for
herself seemed quite negligible; if she had had the physical capacity
she might have been able to do so. In the civilization about us
there are individuals, possessed of no more mental ability than
Martha has, producing enough to keep them alive, independently.
They do it by means of physical activity, the privilege of engaging
in which has been denied to Martha since birth. Education as it
is administered to most children would avail her nothing?she
might some day, perhaps, have been able to learn the work of the
first grade, but it could have been of practically no value to her.
Hers was a case of borderline mentality,?deficient largely because
of her physical handicap. Constant supervision was the unhappy
recommendation: perhaps the attempt to teach her a few letters
and words, to dress herself, to keep herself tidy. School in a year
or two to keep her occupied; play with other children who would
be kind but not too kind to her; discipline, most of all, so that the
burden of the misfortune might not forever rest only upon the
shoulders of her parents. In the fulfillment of this last recommendation would seem to rest the opportunity that the child would
have to become an individual, to become independent in any way,
and to divorce herself from the level of the three-year-old, whose
life is so entirely self-contained.

III. Freda
Freda came to us late in the spring of 1930. Her mother had
learned of the work of the Psychological Clinic with problem children in one of the radio programs offered by the Department of
Psychology during that year. Freda had been having difficulty in
school, particularly with arithmetic, and in the opinion of the
school the progress she was making at the time did not indicate
normal promotion through the grades above.

The marriage of which Freda was the only child was a second
one for both of her parents, who were born in Germany. The
father, a baker who had been in the same place of business for
eighteen years and thus must have been a steady sort of man, had
had three children by his first marriage. These ranged in age from
twenty-two to thirty-eight. The youngest of these was a girl who,
as a nurse, had to spend most of her time away from home. Another of Freda's half-sisters had married and given birth to four
children, all of them feebleminded. The health of both parents
at the time of Freda's examination in the clinic was described as
good.

Freda was eight years old when examined. Her mother told
us that her birth was normal, and that the child had always been
in good health, although she had been inclined to "nervousness."
At thirteen months the child walked, and she talked as early as
sixteen months. At two years of age she became clean. The only
disease of which there was record was a mild case of measles. Tonsils and adenoids had been removed.
After spending a year in kindergarten Freda had entered the
first grade at the age of six. She made normal progress through
the sections of that grade, and was promoted at the end of the year
to the second grade. For the year preceding her examination she
had done work that was below average, but satisfactory enough to
warrant her promotion into the third grade soon after her first
appearance at the Psychological Clinic. Although the school evidently considered Freda's work adequate to justify promotion from
grade to grade, they gave her consistent marks of failure in arithmetic. Freda's mother realized that greater difficulty lay ahead
in spite of the fact that she was promoted; and because she believed Freda's ability to be greater than would be judged by her
marks, that she was capable of better work than she was doing, she
brought the child to us for our opinion.

In the psychological examination made by Dr Murphy, Freda
proved herself to be inferior in general competency to about seventy per cent of children at her age, superior, however, to ten
per cent. In both of her trials on the Witmer formboard she was
inferior to forty per cent of first grade children, and in the lowest
decile of children at ten years of age. Her trials on the Witmer
cylinder test placed her in the lower fifty per cent of first grade
children, and again in the lowest decile of children at ten. On the
two trials of the Dearborn formboard Freda proved herself to be
inferior respectively to eighty and ninety-nine per cent of girls
ten years of age. Compared with first grade children as regards
her memory span, with an auditory forward span of five the child
was inferior to twenty per cent, and with a visual span of six inferior to but one per cent. These spans as compared with the norms
for girls at ten years of age are inferior respectively to fifty and
sixty per cent. In her reverse auditory span, however, the child fell
down, for here she was inferior to forty per cent of first-graders,
and to ninety-nine per cent of girls at ten years. The inferiority
of her rating on this test as compared with her ratings on the test
for forward span will be emphasized further, for it proved to be
of significance from the diagnostic point of view.

On the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Scale Freda was
found to have a mental age of six and one-half years, which, with
a chronological age of eight years, gave her an Intelligence Quotient of 81.
The results of tests for school proficiency showed Freda to have
second grade ability in reading and spelling, although the need for
drill Avas evident in her performance with the latter. She had so
little ability in arithmetic, however, that it could not be granted
even a first grade rating.

The psychological examination, the results of which Ave have
listed above, indicated that Freda was of normal mentality, but
that she was inferior to at least 60 per cent of children at her age.
These results help in a large measure to explain her difficulty with
school work, but they suggest that with some well-concentrated
instruction in the fundamentals of reading and spelling, but particularly in those of arithmetic, the child should be able at least to
do the work required in the third and perhaps the fourth grade.
There was little in these results to indicate the need for clinic teaching of a diagnostic sort. What was more significant than anything
we have so far mentioned was the striking personality picture. We
read in the report of her examination: " (Freda) presented an unusual and interesting appearance. When first seen in the waiting
room of the clinic she looked like a boy. . . . (She) had a very
pleasant smile, . . . alert blue eyes, and blonde hair . . . cut like
a boy's. Her complexion was fair. Her mannerisms, method of
walking and the use of her arms and hands seemed more masculine
than feminine. She wore boy's clothes, except for a skirt, hidden
by a boy's coat, and her whole appearance was that of a boy rather
than a girl. Her mother knows that (Freda) looks like a boy.
She says that (Freda) will not wear girl's clothes or have her hair
grow. She refuses to play with dolls or girls. She plays cowboys
and Indians, also soldiers. Slie likes guns and wants to be a
soldier. When asked about her appearance (Freda) says, 'I am not
going to let my hair grow'; 'I won't wear ruffles'; 'Girls are
sissies!'; 'I won't play with girls'; 'I don't like dresses.' Her
mother says that since she began to walk she has been like a boy.
Her interests and desires appear at present to be masculine. She
cannot dress herself. She never helps her mother. . . . (Freda)
showed signs of resentment occasionally when it was suggested that
she let her hair grow or that she wear girl's clothes.''
It was the personality picture of Freda in combination with her
educational retardation which suggested the advisability of diagnostic procedure covering a greater period of time. Dr Murphy
believed that the clinical picture was of such peculiar nature that
it merited further observation. Certainly the diagnosis of homosexual tendency, which first came to mind, could not be made without much more evidence. He felt also that an attempt, at least,
should be made to develop in the child the interests of a girl, to
guard against the increasing influence of a dangerous trait in the
girl's personality.

In October, as had been recommended in May, Freda was enrolled for clinic teaching, two one-hour periods per week. She was
placed under Mr. Harold Susskind and Mr. John Bernheimer.
The child attended clinic regularly for about seven weeks, receiving
in all thirteen teaching hours.

Freda's teachers also noticed the striking similarity of her appearance to that of a boy. We read in their report: "Her appearance . . . was striking. Of normal height . . . and weight . . .
the most arresting feature was her phenomenal resemblance to a
boy. When (Freda) was presented to her teachers, both immediately thought her a boy. Her hair was cut in a boy-bob. She wore
a shirt and tie. Her skirt was so pleated as to create the illusion
of trousers. She had on boy's stockings and sport shoes. She
swaggered like a boy, and when she sat at a table she cupped her
chin (like a) boy. All in all she presented a most remarkable picture."
A brief re-test was given Freda in the first hours of teaching.
No improvement was found in the memory span. On the Stanford
Revision she received an Intelligence Quotient of 77, not much
lower than that given her in the original examination. Her teachers found her school proficiency to be as poor as it had been estimated, if not poorer. Instructed as they were to observe her parSTUDIES IN DIAGNOSTIC EDUCATION 81
ticularly in arithmetic, tliey found that she could scarcely count to
twenty. Her addition was fair, as was her multiplication, but in
subtraction and division she was a failure. Early in their teaching
they found that they were unable to teach the child to give a reverse
memory span of more than two, whereas, in relation to her forward
spans, they felt that it should have been three, if not four. This deficiency in the ability to reverse, they felt, might account in some
part for her disability in subtraction and division, for it demands
the same type of organizability as is required in the performance
of these operations. She had been unable to count backwards from
twenty to zero when tested on the Binet-Simon Scale, and they
found now that she could not count backwards even from ten to
zero. Asked to perform this feat, the child would give back all
the numbers in the series, without repeating any one, but she could
not re-present them in the correct sequence, and was unable to do
so until she had had thirteen practice trials. Even after this successful performance, she was unable to give them again with any
degree of certainty, as if she knew what she was supposed to do.
She seemed to lack what her teachers termed the ability to "reason
backwards.''

Her teachers sought further to develop this diagnostic point by
presenting to Freda a list of ten three-digit numbers, reading them
as, for instance, two-forty-six, five-thirty-nine, four-seventy-five, and
so on. The list was repeated three times. The result was that on
every trial of this makeshift test the girl wrote the numbers as dictated on the board with the second and last digits reversed: 246 she
wrote 264, 539 she wrote 593, 475 she wrote 457. With thirty numbers presented the child wrote correctly only three, or ten per cent.
This experiment was re-tried at intervals through the teaching,
and each time the result was the same. They had noticed earlier
that when words were dictated orally for the child to spell in writing, although she knew the correct letters and number of syllables
for many words, she would stand at the blackboard for long periods
of time, experiencing difficulty in setting down the letters in the
correct sequence. An auditory confusion of a specialized sort was
evident. This explained the deficiency in reverse span. Hers was
a short-lived perseveration, easily disturbed by the necessity for
conscious intention, as required in the organization of units in a
specific way for the reverse span, or for the utilization of letters in
a specific way for spelling words. She was able, however, to give
back instantly a relatively long series of discrete units, in the same
order, as she had demonstrated in her performances with the forward spans. Auditory perseveration was not entirely lacking but
there was a lack of auditory imagery. This deficit in imagery, plus
her demonstrated lack of ability to organize, was so evident
throughout all of our contact with Freda that it seemed entirely
reasonable so to explain her difficulty in arithmetic.

Very little was accomplished in the attempt to teach Freda
subtraction. She profited to some degree from drill in counting,
in simple addition combinations, and very slightly in subtracting
simple combinations, but her educability proved to be so low that
the hope for progress in arithmetic is very slight. AVith a low general competency difficulty in all subjects could be predicted. It
seemed unlikely that she would ever be able to do third, or at best,
fourth grade work. Her discernment for such material as numbers
and letters was not lacking except when the material was presented
to her for auditory perception and retention. Her intelligence was
low, and although her persistence was demonstrated to a degree
almost abnormal in the remarkable amount of patience she displayed, it was not productive in the sense of its being intelligently
directed. Lacking as she was in power of comprehension, the prognosis for school work was unfavorable.
The results of clinic teaching as thus far described would indicate an unhappy picture for Freda, for in the attempt to improve
her status in one of the deficiencies noticed when she was examined,
namely arithmetic, we had done little or nothing. In respect to
her other deficiency, however,?that in the field of social conformity?a great amount of improvement was shown. Her teachers through interviews with the mother, through casual as well as
pointed talks with Freda, through the application of drastic disciplinary measures, through the attempt to inspire within the child
the confidence in themselves which was imperative if ever they
were to get at the bottom of her difficulty in conforming to the
accepted standard, amassed data which removed quite definitely
the suspicion of a fundamental homosexual motivation. They
found that influences upon the child's life had much to do with
her behavior in this respect. Freda's mother, it was learned, actually encouraged the child in her masculine preference in clothes,
companions, manner of behavior, and so on, although she denied
this when the child was first examined. When asked what she did
when Freda dressed in boy's clothes, as she often did, the mother
answered, '41 say, ' Off mit dem pants.' " It was found that in the
neighborhood in which Freda lived there were many more boys
than girls, and that for a girl fundamentally as sociable as Freda
there was little to do but join in with the boys in their games, if
they would have her. She learned quite naturally to talk as they
did; she swore as healthily as the best of them; she grew used to
their toys, their interests, their manner of living.
The first step taken by her teachers in the re-education of Freda
in regard to the development of femininity was to call the girl from
the start in all their contacts with her "Miss Freda." Mother as
well as daughter was not only instructed, but commanded, to change
in her attitude: to let the child's hair grow, to cease the use and
endorsement of all language which could not be called lady-like, to
replace guns and soldier suits with jacks and pretty dresses, to continue the child's play with boys but to see that it did not exceed
the amount of play with girls, and to have her play, when with
boys, as if she were indeed a little girl. When Freda broke faith
with these precepts while in clinic she was punished severely, for
it was soon recognized that the child was far more responsive to the
discipline of the traditional German home than she was to the rational exposition of her errors in order to bring about an intellectual
appreciation and penitence.

One day about three weeks after the teaching began, Freda
burst out in anger over an error she had blunderingly made in one
of her problems, with " . . . damn it!" Punishment was immediate. She grew penitent, was silent for a moment, and then burst
out, "I know why I swore before. It's because the kids around the
neighborhood do. The other day, only, I was playing with some
kids in front of the house and one of them said 'Hell!' So my
sister came out and said, 'You kids get the hell away from here, or
1 '11 report every damn one of you.' " It was evident that though
such language and manner of expression were probably not actually
encouraged in the home, at least they were tolerated to the extent
that they quite naturally influenced the child. Freda's mother was
told definitely to see that such language was not used in the presence of the child.
The treatment was effective, and the transformation it brought
about, even in the few weeks during which we observed Freda in
clinic, was indeed remarkable. In six weeks' time a little girl was
reporting to us in place of the hard-boiled boy who appeared in October. Here was a child with the interests of a girl, dressed in
girl's clothing, with not-long-enough-to-put-up hair, yet hair dis84 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tinctly not that of a boy, already broken in some measure of her
boyish walk and her masculine manual expression. Perfectly normal on the scale of social competency, the problem had indeed been
an orthogenic one. Had we subscribed to an unduly theoretical
consideration of the child's sex life, we should have delved into her
inner life, and found there mechanisms grave and fatal and foreboding. We chose rather to present the healthy and happy side of
the girl to her, for her consideration. We sought to direct her
interests toward feminine goals, to develop within her a respect for
girlhood, but more than that, to uncover a pride in the fact that
she was a girl rather than a boy, and that it was her duty to behave in a manner which this responsibility implied. Freda's was
a pleasing personality; what it needed, and needed badly, was the
conviction that it was to be preserved by an encouragement of the
normal and healthy, rather than disintegrated by the stimulation
of a pattern which was not rightly hers, and the conformity to
which could have resulted only in misunderstanding and grief as
she grew older.

Freda was unquestionably not of the intellectual type. For her
capability there is a future of sewing and cooking and housewifery,
?the responsibility, perhaps, of motherhood. She will never read
grave books and compute columns of figures. Her development
must be along social lines, not so ambitious that she will learn to
want that which is impossible for her, but sufficiently wholesome
to provide the fullest possible cultivation of her natural charm as
a girl, and later as a woman.
