General Psychology for Professional Students
==============================================

:Author: A. R. Gilliland,
John J. B. Morgan and S. N. Stevens. New York: D. (J. Heath
and Co. 1930.

The purpose of this work, as stated in its Preface, is "to fill the specific
need for a special text for professional students''; the professions mentioned
in the first chapter as fields for the application of a knowledge of psychology
are law, medicine, education, industry, selling, and advertising. The authors'
attempt "to introduce as much objective material and as little theoretical material as possible'' is definitely evidenced by the text, if one understands by
"objective" merely that which is not "theoretical," including some subjects
ordinarily thought of as subjective. Further, having been written by men
holding different points of view, this book escapes the pitfall of neglecting
large masses of material considered by reputable psychologists to be valid
psychological data.

One's first impulse in looking at a new book is to turn to the table of
contents for a quick diagnosis of its "personality." This one covers the
field of general psychology: The Nature and purpose of psychology, The
Human organism, Innate behavior, Sensory processes, Attention, Perception,
Learning, Memory, Thinking, Emotional behavior, Mental alertness, Personality, Social behavior, Personal efficiency and motivation, Sleep, Dreams,
and hypnosis, and Mental health.

As is likely in any text designed to be elementary a certain amount of
dogmatism results from the necessary simplification. Many psychologists will
disagree, for example, with the treatment of learning. However, this is balanced by the care that has been taken to make use of the latest data obtained,
whatever the point of view of the investigator. Prominent among the observable influences of the schools are those of behaviorism, Gestalt, and psychoanalysis; it is particularly noticeable that whatever the subject under
discussion, its bearing upon the individual as a whole is stressed, the simpler
being considered always in the light of the more complex.

This book has two of the cardinal textbook virtues: namely, constant
reference to actual experiments, and an adequate number of diagrams that
can be understood with a minimum of effort. We should like to mete out
special praise to the little section on recognition, which usually suffers from
inattention. Finally, as a text for professional students, the present work
will amply fulfil its purpose of giving applicable knowledge and suggestive
illustration of a specific nature in an interesting manner. It is to be recommended wherever such a text is needed.
Francis w. Ir-win
