A Case of Reading Disability due to Deficient Visual Imagery
==============================================================

:Author: T. W. Richards, M.S.

Clinic Teacher, The Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania
A case of reading disability is certainly not an unusual clinical
problem, but the remedial treatment which proved successful in
Arthur's case seems worthy of description in that it illustrates the
futility of attempting to teach all children to read by one method.
The psychology of individual differences includes in its literature
many instances of special disabilities found in children who possess
to a normal degree all those abilities required for school progress
but one or two isolated types. These children form so small a percentage of the total grade population that it does not seem necessary for practical purposes to adjust the methods which seem to
work out for most children to suit the minority. In reading, for
instance, it appears that the attitude toward such cases has been
this: a number of children who seem bright in almost every other
way have difficulty in learning the fundamentals, yet when they repeat the first grade their difficulties seem to iron themselves out, and
from this point on they make normal progress. If the child is unable to learn to read after a year in the first grade, why not have
him repeat? Reading is the most important thing taught in the
first grade and it is imperative for further progress in other subjects. It is unfortunate that the child should lose a year, but it is
far better that he do so in the first grade and better guarantee normal promotion later, than to be promoted into a grade the work of
which obviously he cannot do, and probably be forced to remain
there, where the subject in which he needs most drill is not stressed.
Certainly such a plan cannot be considered unfair to the child.
The mother of the boy whom we shall here describe, Arthur, had
been informed that her son in all probability could not be promoted
from the first grade in the coming June. Entering school as he had
in September, the boy's work during the 1A term had evidently
been satisfactory, for he was placed in the high or IB grade in
February. His reports throughout the year indicated that his conduct had been excellent, and that his work had been of passing
quality, which the mother described as "fair." Learning that, in
spite of this evidence, he probably would not be placed in the
second grade in June, the mother quite naturally became alarmed,
and brought him to us for advice.

Arthur was examined in May by Dr Miles Murphy. We
learned little of significance from the medical history of the case.
The ages for walking, talking and becoming clean were not at all unusual. Arthur had suffered from measles, whooping cough and
chicken pox, had had tonsils and adenoids removed, and had been
victim of 110 serious accidents which might have contributed to the
problem. Normal for boys of his age in height and weight, and in
fine health at the time he was examined, there was little to suspect
of definite physical etiology.

On the psychological tests the boy did well. Compared with
boys of his age he was superior to ninetj7' per cent on both the
Witmer formboard and the Witmer cylinders, and he gave a good
qualitative performance on the Dearborn formboard, though quantitatively he rates inferior to eighty per cent of ten year old boys.
The second and third trials on this test were evidence of definite
ability to improve. With the Stanford Revision of the BinetSimon Scale the boy, then aged six years and ten months, obtained
a mental age of seven years and nine months, receiving an Intelligence Quotient of 113. His memory span was five forward, both
visual and auditory, and three reverse.

Conclusions based on the history of the case and upon the results
of the tests as mentioned above indicated that Arthur was of normal mentality, at about the eightieth percentile of boys his age in
general competency. It was in the field of school proficiency that
Arthur fell down. He could do the work of the first grade in
arithmetic reasonably well, but he was unable to read anything.
He could not recognize printed letters, and could not, therefore,
spell. He could, liOAvever, write a few letters: h, e, d, o, and c, but
he reproduced onty the c and e when asked for the specific letters.
The h was for T, the d was for A, and o was for B. In the light of
what he had accomplished as the result of a year in the first grade,
the school was perfectly justified in considering Arthur unworthy
of promotion. On the basis of the boy's general competency to do
school work, however, it was felt that he should certainly be able to
do second grade work if his deficiency in reading and spelling were
removed. This deficiency merited further study, and it required
special teaching. If Arthur could receive this simultaneously with
his regular school work, he would thus save a year at school, and be
saved the stigma of a "left-back," which designation he in no way
deserved except for the fact that he had not done as well in his
reading as had most of the children in his grade. The recommendation was made to the school that Arthur be promoted to the second
grade, but that he attend the Psychological Clinic regularly for
teaching in the fall.

In October Arthur reported for clinic teaching?a boy in the
second grade who was not only entirely unable to read words but
could not even name letters. He was taught by Miss Libby Stone
over a period of about thirteen weeks, and received in all twentythree hours of teaching.
Naturally the boy's educational predicament came immediately
to the attention of his teacher. She early recognized that he had
very poor visual imagery and that although auditory presentations
of material were less difficult of perception, the association had not
been built up sufficiently for him to use this auditory ability in
learning to recognize printed and written symbols. She noticed,
also, that he whispered to himself and moved his lips almost invariably in attempting to give meaning to letters and words which
she printed on the board. It was evident that he relied very heavily
upon a combined kinesthetic-auditory method in his "reading."
On the basis of the evidence thus obtained, his teacher thought that
it would be wise to teach the boy first of all to recognize, reproduce
and give the sounds of letters and letter combinations of an elementary sort. In this way she believed that efficiency in visual
recognition might be established; the boy must learn to "feel" by
saying or writing what was before him, and thus read it.
Arthur's discrimination for form had been found quite normal
in his psychological examination, and it was evident that he had no
difficulty in auditory differentiations. His comprehension was
good, and although he lacked initiative to the extent that it was
impossible to establish any sort of competitive spirit about his improvement from day to day, the boy was eager to please, was cooperative and amenable to suggestion. He was extremely conformed in all his reactions.
After a few hours of informal experimentation Arthur's teacher
concluded that the best plan was to proceed at once to the alphabet,
teach the A, B, C's according to the old-fashioned, mechanical
method, and get something upon which to base a remedial program.
Within a month the boy was able to recognize letters when printed,
make them himself, and use them occasionally in writing words.
His teacher states, however, that he was "completely lacking in the
knowledge of what word integration might mean. He hadn't the
faintest idea of how to incorporate letters into words by listening to
the sound. The sound of the individual letter was a thing in itself
that to him could not be transferred into a group. The learning of
words is for him then a very mechanical process, attained only by
constant drill."

The next step was to establish the association of sound. This
was done by giving Arthur over and over words with sound elements of all kinds, by drilling on the sounds of different letters, by
having him say them to himself in an undertone, if he chose, by having him "feel" how to write the letter which stood for a certain
sound. A complex of kinesthetic-auditory-visual association was
thus induced. In another month his teacher noted "a very peculiar
thing . . . although Arthur recognized letters and knew their
sounds, if given a word containing letters whose sounds he knew
perfectly well he had no conception of how to go about applying
them to the spelling of a given word. Again his transfer of known
sound, or discrimination of sound values, failed him. ... For example, if he knew the word 'fan' and in the next lesson had the
Word 'man,' the fact that he could spell 'fan' did not help him at
all. I couldn't seem to make him understand that he need only
substitute one letter to get the desired results."
Proceeding slowly through lessons of primer material, with frequent testing for knowledge of letters whether written or spoken,
then for simple words, his teacher gradually covered the work for
the first grade. Constant repetition of spelling and of presentation
of words in many different ways was necessary. At times Arthur
was able to write and spell correctly short sentences dictated to him
hy his teacher, but after they were written he could not read them.
Yet, only in this way was progress at all possible.

By January Arthur had covered the first grade material in
reading. He was tested for his school proficiency and found to be
of second grade ability in reading and in spelling. The school as
well as the boy's mother reported to us that he was now doing his
work for grade in school, and it seemed proper to discharge him
from our rolls. He was now a good independent reader, able to
proceed with the others in his class; a second grader in every sense
of the word. Still he had difficulty with spelling?perhaps he always will have, for this ability involves visual imagery more than
does any other school subject.

Here was a boy who, with the exception of a specialized sort of
difficulty, was normal in every way, destined to be "left down" because he had acquired nothing in a very fundamental field as the
result of a year's teaching. It was found that the reason for his
difficulty was the fact that the method whereby most children learn
to read was denied him because of an unusual imaginal endowment.
Had his teacher but known it, his difficulty might easily have been
eradicated when he first started his letter work. A few hours of
special attention to assure herself that Arthur knew his phonic
basis as well as did the other children probably would have eliminated the later necessity for clinic teaching here. Certainly a program of special teaching, doubtless briefer than our own, since we
had to undo much that did not exist when the boy first began reading work, would have been far more economical than was the plan
to have the child repeat a whole year of school and would have
warranted the boy's placement according to his superior general
competency, which should have meant promotion without question.
