The Jungle of the Mind
========================

REVIEWS
:Author: Edgar James Swift. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. 1931.

In The Jungle of the Mind the author has stated in scientific terms, and yet
in a style both entertaining and witty, certain psychological facts of wide
popular interest. Man's naive and flattering opinion of himself is that he is
a thinking animal. He can think, of course, but does he? Dr Swift's verdict
is that he does not, except in rare instances. We find him a ready prey to
the insidious appeal of innumerable cults, superstitions, suggestions, pseudoscientifie jargons, false logic. He yields to the lure of astrology, electric
belts, weather prophets, brain waves, formulas for success. He is manacled
by habits and prejudices, and, truly indeed, a little knowledge is a dangerous
thing for him. The golden era of science through which we are now passing
has made nothing seem impossible to the lay mind, and charlatans need only
to make their promises extravagant enough, in order to win devoted converts,
whether it be "cures" by blood-washing and the use of sani-tractors, or the
achievement of success through charging one's soul batteries with M rays, or
by the purchase of a psychophone.

Some of the topics treated so delightfully by Dr Swift are: wishful
thinking (It's Easy To Believe), mental telepathy, memory systems (If I
Could Only Remember), mental healing, suggestion, habit (Iron Clad Manacles), the subconscious (Power Behind The Throne), psychoanalysis, dreams,
and behaviorism (Have Human Beings Minds?). The author's tilt with Dr.
John B. Watson with regard to the concept of consciousness seems to the
reviewer the most intriguing chapter in the book. It is probably the only
topic discussed on which the opinion of psychologists might differ to any degree.
To the psychologist, of course, Dr Swift's arguments on the above topics
are for the most part familiar, but his illustrations and anecdotes, as well as
his manner of treatment are refreshingly new. In these examples he contrasts
the befogged thinking of the misguided and those who exploit them, with the
clear thought of the greatest scientists.

The Jungle of the Mind should prove to be a very satisfactory reference
for eager students who crave answers to the questions raised in this book, but
who are still too immature and impatient to be referred to more extensive and
less entertaining treatises. The very persons, however, for whom the reading
of this book would act as a most desirable mental purge, will probably only in
isolated instances ever scan its pages. Jungle thinkers are, after all, very
human. They will always prefer to bask in the warmth of their own uncritical
thought; and the attempt to strike down old habits of thought and to cultivate new ones will always meet with resistance. The sedative effect of foggy
thought is both vicious and circular. For those who have genuine intellectual
curiosity, however, and who are not yet wholly crystallized in their mental
habits, this book should prove to be an excellent aid in their orientation toward
right thinking.

Mildred Loring Sylvester
192
