To the Editor
==============

Correspondence.

Dear Sir,

In the July number of "Studies in Mental
Inefficiency" a correspondent voices the
objection which is sometimes raised against
large Institutions, i.e., the alleged lack of
personal interest in the well being of the
inmates which a large institution seems to
entail. I use the term 'alleged' advisedly
because the objection appears to arise from
a misconception of the actual conditions
which exist. On the contrary I believe that
the advantages secured for the inmates
themselves to be gained from a large institution are so great that these would far outweigh such an objection even it if had an
element of truth in it.

It is obvious that a similar objection
might be applied to any large institution
whether it be a Public School, such as Eton
with its 1,100 boys, a large elementary
School, or an Asylum. The head of any
large undertaking has so many and varied
duties that he must inevitably be unable to
be in close personal touch with each individual member of the community over which he
rules. He has however a staff of assistants
who in their more circumscribed sphere are
brought into a much closer personal relationship with those who come within the scope of
their activities. The larger the institution
the more possible is this subdivision of
duties and of personal interest. This is
more essentially true of institutions for the
feeble-minded than for any other type of
corporate life. Small homes and institutions cannot in the nature of things provide
for this subdivision of labour nor can they
provide for the variety of occupation, yet
the happiness of the inmates depends largely
upon the degree of success with which their
interests and activities are brought into fullest
play. Indeed one of the chief causes of unrest
and reduced efficiency is the uniformity of
occupation and the resulting monotony of life
which is inevitable in a small institution. 

For example, many small homes for girls and
young women depend upon laundry work
as their main industry with the result that
after a few months the inmates, from want
of a change of occupation, sink into a state of
apathy or rebellion, according to their
temperaments. In a large institution where
many different kinds of work can be carried
on and where classification is possible,
things are very different, for here a right
proportion of grading of different types of
defectives is of the greatest value in keeping
the inmates contented and in aiding them
to self-realisation and discipline. Some years
ago it was my privilege to spend a week at the
Massachusetts Colony for the Feeble-minded
at Waver ley. Nothing could be more instructive than the system and organisation of the
ten pavilions in which were housed the
various grades of inmates nor the variety of
industries which were followed. There were
1,500 feeble-minded "colonists" upon 150
acres of land while sixty miles away was
Templeton, where 280 young men were leading a healthy life on 2,000 acres of rough
country which they were gradually bringing
under cultivation. Small institutions cannot
supply sufficient scope for a resident medical
and nursing staff nor for highly trained
manual instructors. Yet if the institution
is to be more than a store house for inefficients an adequately trained staff is essential.

The experience of the members of the
Royal Commission who visited the American
Institutions is of value in this connection.

They write (Report Vol. I. 297):

' 'They were impressed with the large
"size of American Institutions, some of
"which contained from 500 to 2,000
"inmates. This seems to them to secure
"proper classification, the general plan
''being that each institution contains three
''departments the custodial for the lowest
"grade, the school for the higher grade
"children, and the industrial. Our mem' 'bers are of opinion that the large size of an
"institution tends not only to better
"classification, but to greater economy."

It cannot be too clearly laid down that if
colony treatment is to be a real solution of
the problem, two main conditions must be
fulfilled. 

(1) The institutions must command the complete confidence of the public and of the relatives of the persons committed to them; 
(2) they must be a "business proposition," i.e., they must so develop the
individual capacities of the inmates that
there will be some sort of financial return
m proportion to the outlay involved.

The key to success is proper grading and
classification and this can only be attained
by establishments of sufficient size. It will
be disastrous to an adequate solution of the
problem of mental deficiency if the country is
studded with small, inadequately equipped,
imperfectly staffed, institutions where satisfactory grading is impossible and where there
is too little opportunity of utilising the productive capacity of the inmates.

It may be argued that such a policy would
be inimical to the numerous small homes for
the feeble-minded which have already done
such magnificent work. There is, however,
no ground for such a view and it would be
a simple matter to affiliate the smaller homes
"with some large centrally situated institution, in much the same way as the numerous
V.A.D. Hospitals were attached during the
"War to the large Military Hospitals. The
success of the large colonies in America has
already been mentioned and the experience
of other countries tells the same tale, e.g.,
Darenth in England, Bielefeld and Alsterdorf
in Germany, and Ebberogaard in Denmark.

We cannot afford to be misled by the fetish
of individualism in dealing with a question
of national inmportance.

I am,
Yours faithfully,
G. A. Auden.
Birmingham
October, 1920,



:Reference type:  Journal Article
:Record-number: 17147
:Author: Auden, G. A.
:Year: 1921
:Title: Correspondence
:Journal: Studies in mental inefficiency
:Volume: 2
:Issue: 1
:Pages: 20-21
:Epub-date: 1921/01/15
:Date: 1921/01//
:Short-title: Correspondence
:Alternate-journal-name: Stud Ment Ineffic
:PMCID: PMC5109145 
:Accession-number: 28909988
.. note:: Auden, G A eng, England, Stud Ment Ineffic. 1921 Jan 15;2(1):20-21.
:URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5109145/
:Author-address: Birmingham.
:Name-of-database: PubMed
:Language: eng
:Copyright: 

