Law Report
===========

A ruling or importance to local authorities and to the managers ol institu-
tions was given at the Abingdon Petty Sessional Court on 5th November, 1920,
as to the place of residence of two mentally defective women, inmates of the
Cumnor Rise Home for the Feeble-minded, Cumnor, Berkshire.

The facts in both cases were very similar. One woman had been born in
Reading, the illegitimate child of a mother who had returned to London im-
mediately after her birth and had boarded her out in Reading until 190f, when
she was 18? years old. She had then been removed to the Cumnor Rise Home
and had been paid for there by her mother till 1916, since when the cost of her
maintenance had been borne by the National Association for the Feeble-minded.
The other woman, also an illegitimate child in respect of whom no bastardy
order had been obtained, had been born in London in 1894, had entered the
receiving house of the Church of England Waifs and Strays Society in November,
1904, after having previously been for short periods in the workhouse at Bow,
had been transferred to various homes of the Society, at Southborne and at

Newark, had been placed from the latter institution in two situations in Notting-
hamshire for periods of four and eleven months respectively, returning after each
to the Newark home, and eventually had been sent from that home to the Cumnor
Rise Home where she had been maintained for a time from private sources which
had since ceased to be available. Her mother had died in a London County
Mental hospital in 1916, having been maintained there at the charge of a London
union.

In neither of these cases was action taken under the Mental Deficiency Act
until 5th July, 1920, when petitions were presented to a judicial authority by an
officer of the Board of Control for orders for the detention of both women in the
Cumnor Rise Home at the charge of local authorities. The judicial authority
made orders, and found that the defectives "resided" respectively in the County
Borough of Reading and in the County of London, with the result that the charges
for maintenance from the date of the orders would fall on the local authorities for
those sreas. In reaching this conclusion he accepted arguments put forward on
behalf of the local authority for Berkshire (who desired to resist a suggestion that
the defectives had been ,,residing" in the Cumnor Rise Home), to the effect
that that Home before it was certified as an institution under the Mental Defi-
ciency Act, was a hospital within the meaning of section 1 of the Poor Removal
Act, 1846, and that having regard to the cases of the Ormskirk Union v. Chorlton
Union, 1903, (2 K.B. 498) and the Ormskirk Union v. Lancaster Union (27
J .P. 45), as the time during which the defectives had been inmates of the home was
a time during which they could not acquire a place of residence within the mean-
ing of the Act of 1846, it followed that they could not acquire a place of residence
within the meaning of the Mental Deficiency Act and that consequently a case of
doubt within the meaning of section 44, sub-section 4, of the Mental Deficiency
Act had arisen and that the place of residence of each defective must be construed
"as the County or County Borough, as the case may be, in which the person
would, if he were a pauper, be deemed to have acquired a settlement within the
meaning of the law relating to the relief of the poor." The attention of the
judicial authority was directed to the case of the Kent County Council v. the
London County Council (re Helen Law, 79 J.P. 486), and it was pointed out that
in that case the Judges had expressed a doubt as to whether a "case of doubt"
as mentioned in sub-section 4 of section 44 of the Mentally Deficiency Act could
ever arise. It was argued also on behalf of the local authority for London that
even if a case of doubt had arisen, sub-section 4 was only applicable to section 44
and not to section 43 under which the petition was presented. Reference was
made also to the cases of the Stoke-on-Trent Borough Council v. Cheshire County
Council (79 J.P. 402), and the Yorkshire West Riding County Council v. Colne
Corporation (82 J.P. 14), and it Avas argued that residence under the Mental
Deficiency Act meant the place where in fact the defective resided, which was
clearly at the Cumnor Rise Home, in Berkshire. The judicial authority, how-
ever, decided that in each case there was a "case of doubt" within the meaning
of section 44 (4) and that the defectives had acquired settlements in Reading and
in London, respectively.

Applications made by the Reading Town Council and by the London County
Council under section 44 (3) of the Mental Deficiency Act, that the liability for
maintenance of the two defectives should be transferred to the Berkshire County
Council, were heard by the Petty Sessional Court at Abingdon on 5th November.
The Justices by a majority decided that both defectives resided in Berkshire,
and orders were made accordingly transferring the liability for maintenance.
As the Berkshire County Council desired to appeal from this decision, the
Abingdon Justices have stated a case for further decision by the High Court.
The result of this appeal will be awaited with interest.
