Clinical Study and Treatment of Sick Children
=============================================

:Type: Book Reviews.
:Author: John Thomson, M.D.
F.R.C.P.Ed. 3rd Edition. Pp. 877
xxxii., with 249 illustrations. Pub.
Edinburgh^ Oliver and Boyd, 1921.
Price, 32.s. 6d. net.

We have very great pleasure in welcoming a
third edition of this book, which has been not
?nly re-written and brought up to date, but
the scope of which has been considerably
enlarged so that it now forms a complete and
yaluable text book to the subject with which
Jt deals. The general plan of the work
reniains the same; after giving an account of
the principles of examination, the author
follows with a very interesting and useful
description of the main facts of growth and
development, and he then proceeds to deal
Avith the disorders and diseases of infancy and
ehildhood as they affect the various regions
and systems of the body. Teeth, limbs, nose
and throat, blood, alimentary, respiratory,
Clrculatorv, nervous, urinary, etc., systems,
are each dealt with in turn; there are special
ehapters on such subjects as the different
forms of paralysis, rheumatism, syphilis and
tuberculosis. A special chapter is devoted
to the chief functional nervous disorders, also
to the very important subjects of breast and
hand feeding, nursery hygiene, and thera-
peutics; and the volume is concluded with a
dumber of appendices on such questions as the
Method of case-taking, the periods of incuba-
tion and infectiveness of the infectious
diseases, anaphylaxis, directions to the
^others of paralysed and mentally defective
children, formulae and recipes, etc. It is
lrnpossible to give any detailed account of the
subject matter; it may, however, be said that
each section is an up-to-date description of
the matter with which it deals besides con-
taining abundant references to special articles
and recent work. In view of the fact that
there are often very considerable differences
between the organs of the child and those of
the adult, and that if this be not borne in
rnind serious errors may easily be made,
we regard it as a particularly valuable feature
of the book that the account of the various
diseases should be preceded by a description
of the normal anatomy and physiology at this
period of life.

What chiefly strikes us about the book,
however, and what is undoubtedly its most
valuable feature, is its sound practical
common sense and its wealth of clinical
information. Dr. Thomson is well known as
an experienced physician who has devoted his
life to the careful and scientific study of
children and this work is no mere compilation,
it is the result of years of painstaking clinical
investigation, and there is hardly a page which
does not contain some personal observation or
some bit of shrewd advice which cannot fail
to be of value to the medical practitioner.
When to this we add that the volume is very
pleasantly written and profusely illustrated
it will be seen that it is one which can be
thoroughly recommended.

A. F. Tredgold.
The Intelligence of School Children.
By Lewis M. Terman. Harrap. 85. 6 i. net.
The publication in 1919 of Professor
Terman's "The Measurement of Intelligence"
made it possible for the rank and file of
educationists in this country to use graded
mental tests instead of their remaining a
kind of bag o' tricks at the command of a few
psychologists. The "Stanford Revision"
of the Binet Scale is now familiar to many and
these will welcome this further book from the
same author. If any sceptics remain, we
would recommend them to read ' 'The Intelli-
gence of School Children," for they could not
but bow before this tremendous array of hard
facts. The book might perhaps have appeared
more inviting to the majority of folks had
some, at least, of the diagrams and tables
been relegated to an Appendix, and the main
conclusions, comparatively few in number
yet very important, would have stood out
more prominently.

Based on extensive work done chiefly by
Professor Terman's students, the book is a
plea for the use of Mental Age and Intelligence
70 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
Quotient in the classification of school
children and their vocational guidance. It
is shown beyond doubt that by the present
more or less mechanical system of promotion,
the true retardates are the "superior"
children while the laggards are almost always
found in classes higher than their degree of
intelligence would warrant. This makes the
work of the teachers more difficult than it
need be, while entailing great economic
loss as well as positive waste of effort.
Of great interest to us are the chapters on
"School Laggards," "The Intelligence Quo-
tient as a Basis for Prediction," and "Tests
and Vocational Guidance." An unhappy
state of affairs is revealed by the tables on
pp. 121 and 122, which show how in the
ordinary schools of a certain county in
California, children definitely feeble-minded
are attempting to do class work that is 2, 3, 4
and in some cases 5 years above the level for
which their mental age would fit them.
It is good to know how far we may rely on
the Intelligence Quotient as a basis for pre-
diction, though there is need for much fulle?
investigation on this point. We learn that
the chances are 1 to 5 that the Intelligence
Quotient may be found to increase by as much
as twelve points or decrease by as much as
eight points. Hence we must not make a
fetish of the Intelligence Quotient., and
whenever possible we should re-test at suitable
intervals.

For us, however, the book is of limited
value since the data and conclusions refer to the
condition of things . in IJ .S .A. It would be
well if those in this country who have been
using the Stanford Revision during the past
years would pool their results so that we
might judge of the reliability of the scale for
British children, and arrive at norms of
intelligence corresponding to the classes in
our own school system.

E.L.S.R.
Insanity and Mental Deficiency in Rela-
tion to Legal Responsibility. By
William G. H. Cook, LL.D. (Lond.).
George Routledge & Sons, Ltd. 10,9. 6d.
net.

Dr. Cook's new book covers a wide field
which is increasingly being explored by
lawyers and students of the law, and we are sure
the learned author's comprehensive exposi-
tion of his subject will be attentively studied
by many who desire guidance or instruction
in the highly technical matters to which the
contents of the volume relate.

It is a little unfortunate perhaps, that Dr.
Cook in his first chapter: "Definition and
Classification" should have been constrained
to state that ' 'for the purposes of this treatise
the words 'insanity' and 'lunacy' are inter-
changeable terms and are used throughout to
denote the same thing, i.e., unsoundness of
mind" (see page 2). That such statement is
incorrect will appear abundantly clear from a
perusal of page 3, and various subsequent
parts of the book where the above terms and
also "mental deficiency" and "mental in-
capacity" are used as though they all had the
same legal meaning, which is not the case.

Apart from the confusion of thought
occasionally resulting from this freedom in
the use of medical terms when stating legal
propositions we think Dr. Cook has very
lucidly dealt with the main principles respect-
ing the varied relationships between a person
non compos mentis and the law.
II.D.
