News and Notes
===============

Conference on Mental Deficiency.
----------------------------------

The Joint Conference of the C.A.M.D. and the National Special Schools
Union of which we gave notice in our last number, was held at the Church House,
Westminster, on November 25th, 26th, and 27th. Applications for 1,252
tickets were received which can be classified as follows:?

Government Departments of the Board of Control, Board
of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Pen-
sions, Home Office and India Office i. .. .. 53
Local Authorities under the Mental Deficiency Act .. 156
Local Education Authorities .. .. .. .. 204
Boards of Guardians .. .. .. .. .. 211
Special Schools (for P .D. and M .D. children) .. .. 286
Certified Institutions, Approved Homes, and Certified
Houses .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 112
Voluntary Associations for the Care of the Mentally
Defective .. .. .. .. .. .. 114
Social Organisations .. .. .. .. .. 89
Reformatories .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
Individuals .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
1,252

Owing to his absence in Geneva, the Rt. Hon. H. A. L. Fisher was unable
to deliver the opening address. His place was however taken by Sir George
Newman, K.C.B., M.D.

A full report of the Comference, giving the papers read and all the discussions,
can be obtained from the C .A .M .D. Offices, 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.
(price 2s.). The papers by the Commissioners of the Board of Control, Mrs.
Hume Pinsent on "The Relation of Day and Residential Special Schools to
Certified Institutions for Defectives," and Dr. Rotherham on "The Case for
the Large Mixed Institution," which were unable to be published beforehand,
will be included in this Report.

After the discussion following Mrs. Hume Pinsent's Paper, the following
resolution was carried, with three dissentients only:
' 'That the Conference is of opinion that there should be no legal obstacle
to combination between Local Education Authorities and Local Authorities
under the Mental Deficiency Act for the purpose of providing a Joint Insti-
tution, for all grades and types of defectives, certified by both the Board of
Control and the Board of Education, and asks the Government to introduce
the necessary legislation."

Standing Medical Committee of the C.A.M.D.
At the first meeting of the above, held on December 9th, consisting of all
the Medical Members on the Council of the C.A.M.D., Dr. Tredgold was elected
Chairman. The following were co-opted Members:?
Dr. F. C. Shrubsall, Principal Asst. Medical Officer, London County
Council.

Dr. A. Greenwood, Medical Officer of Health, Kent County Council.
It was decided that an Honorary Medical Secretary to the Committeee should
be appointed who would attend meetings and conferences in various parts of the
country and bring the subject of Mental Deficiency before other Medical Men.

Dr. Eric Prideaux, M.D., Medical Officer in charge of the Psychological
Clinic, Cambridge, was proposed, and he has accepted the appointment.
It was decided, subject to the approval of the London University that a
fortnight's Post Graduate Course be arranged for 1921, and a Sub-Committee
was appointed to make arrangements. Details of this Course are given below.

The Chairman drew attention to the fact that, though during the last few
years six Universities had established Diplomas in Psychological Medicine, only
one (London) had any reference to Mental Deficiency, though Cambridge had the
matter under consideration. It was obvious therefore that a man might obtain
the Diploma without any knowledge of Mental Deficiency, or that a man special-
ising in Mental Deficiency would be debarred from taking it.

It was therefore resolved to send round a letter to all Universities pointing
out to those who have not already issued a Diploma, the advisability for granting
such a Diploma, and urging on all that the study of Mental Deficiency be granted
a proper and definite place in the Syllabus.

University of London Post Graduate Course in Mental Deficiency.
The third Course arranged by the University Extension Board in co-operation
with the C.A.M.D., will be of two weeks' duration and will begin on Monday,
May 23rd, 1921, and end on Saturday, June 4th.

The Clinical Instruction will consist of visits to Schools, Homes and Institu-
tions for the Mentally Defective and deomonstrations of individual cases of
defect by experts, to small groups of students. As in the previous Courses it
is intended more especially for those medical practitioners who are engaged in
Certifying Officers to Local Authorities under the Mentally Deficiency Act 1913,
as School Medical Officers, or definitely concerned with defectives. The Course
will be based on the requirements of the Syllabus for the University of London
Diploma in Psychological Medicine.

Lectures will be given by Dr. A. F. Tredgold, Dr. W. C. Sullivan, Dr.
Eric Prideaux, Mr. Cyril Burt, Dr. F. C. Shrubshall, and Miss Lucy Fildes.
Visits to Special Schools and Institutions and demonstrations will be arranged.
The fee for the Course will be ?6 6s.

A detailed Syllabus and further particulars can be obtained from Miss
Evelyn Fox , University of London, S .W .7.
Course for Teachers in Special Schools.

At the suggestion of some teachers who have already attended two of the
Courses arranged by the C.A.M.D. and are therefore ineligible for further ones,
the C.A.M.D. hopes to arrange a Special Course for these, and for other experi-
enced teachers of the mentally defective, for one week in the summer in either
July, August, or possibly the beginning of September.

This Course will not be as strenuous as previous Courses, as there will be no
school visits. Lectures, Classes in Singing Games, etc., and possibly in Manual
Work (according to the demand) will be arranged, and there will be ample oppor-
tunity for informal discussions. A seaside resort on either the East of Welsh
Coast has been suggested as being the most convenient place for such a Course.
The Course will, however, have to be self-supporting, so the sum charged to
students must cover the expenses of lecturing, etc., as well as of board and lodg-
ing. For the latter a sum of from 2| to 3 guineas for the week will be the probable
charge. If thirty students attend, lecturing expenses, etc., will amount to
?2 10s. to ?3 a head. If there are more students it will be proportionately less.
The total cost would therefore be about ?5 10s. a head. It is possible that some
Education Authorities may assist their teachers to attend.

There are still a few vacancies for this Course. If any teachers with special
experience would like to join, would they send their names provisionally as soon
as possible, in any case not later than January 31st, to Miss Evelyn Fox, C.A .M .D.
24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.

Would they also at the same time make any suggestions as to how the Course
would be most helpful to them and state whether any of the times suggested are
impossible.

London Association for the Care of the Mentally Defective.
We should like to draw special attention to an important development in the
work of the above Association.

When the Association was formed in 1914, it, as one of its activities, worked in
co-operation with the After Care Committee for Children leaving Special Schools.
There has been a steady growth in this branch, the number of cases on the books
in 1913 being 1,198 and in 1919, 5,042. The Association has hitherto received a
grant from the Board of Control, the L.C.C. Asylums and Mental Deficiency
Committee (for carrying out supervision under Section 30 (b) of the Mental Defi-
ciency Act), a few smaller grants and voluntary subscriptions, but no direct
grant has been received for this particular branch of its work. The L.C.C.
Education Committee therefore, subject to the approval of the Board of Educa-
tion that such a contribution would rank as recognised expenditure under Section
44 (2) of the Education Act, 1918, made the following recommendation, which
was adopted by the Council:?

"That in pursuance of the provisions of the Education (Choice of Em-
ployment Act), 1910, as amended by Section 22 of the Education Act, 1918,
approval be given in principle to payments to associations for the after-care
of blind, deaf and crippled children, and mentally defective children, in
respect of the work performed by such bodies in connection with the after-care
of children leaving special schools; and that the Council be recommended
accordingly.''

This grant has been approved by the Board of Education.

We hope to publish further details as to the amount of grant and the organisa-
tion of this branch of the work in a subsequent issue. This grant under the
Education (Choice of Employment) Act, 1910, should be a valuable precedent to
other Associations undertaking similar work.

Meetings of Secretaries of Local Associations.

Two well-attended meetings of Secretaries were held on November 23rd and
24th. At the first meeting the following Secretaries spoke on special features of
their work:?

(a) Grants recently made to the Association by the L.C.C. Education Committee for the After-Care of Children leaving Special Schools. Miss Darnell (London).
(b) New Occupation Centres for Defectives. Miss Brayn (Portsmouth), and Miss Woolston (Ipswich).
(c) Occupations for Defectives in Institutions approved under Section 37, where only a limited number of cases are taken. Miss Blake (Wiltshire).
(d) Work in connection with Police Courts and cases dealt with under Section 9. Miss Nevile (Essex)-
(e) The placing of Defective Boys on the Land.. Miss Walford (Warwick).
(f) Wolf Cub Packs for Defectives. Miss Townsend (Cambs.)I STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
(g) Classes for Voluntary Visitors. Miss Luce (Organising Secretary, C.A.M.D.)

At the second meeting a new Form of Annual Return from Local Voluntary
Associations to the C.A.M.D., drawn up by the Statistical Committee of the
C.A.M.D. Avas fully discussed, amended and adopted. The Council and Medical
Committee of the C.A.M.D. feel that the information thus obtained may be
most valuable for statistical and research purposes.

Lectures arranged by Local Associations.
------------------------------------------
Several Local Associations have during the last three months arranged
lectures for their members and visitors and others specialty interested in work
for defectives.

The Portsmouth Association has had among others a lecture by Dr. Devinc,
Sheffield by Dr. Nairn, Wiltshire and by Dr. Glover.

An interesting address was given in Lancaster to the North Lancashire
Association by Dr. Coupland, Medical Superintendent of the Royal Albert
Institution. After tracing the growth of public opinion during the last century
and the different developments in the work for defectives up to the passing of the
Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, he went on to show how Voluntary Associations
could be of the greatest assistance to Local Authorities by helping to obtain com-
plete ascertainment of persons in the area who were defective, and supplying
accurate information. They could also do very good work by assisting the
relatives of all defectives in their homes by kindly advice and suggestions for
their care, and where possible introducing some simple occupation.
The Magistrates' Association.

The recently formed Magistrates' Association should do much to aid Justices
in their work, and especially that part of it which affects mentally-inefficient
offenders, to which we understand particular attention will be given. The
chief purpose of the Association is to keep Justices informed of developments in
penal thought, practice and experiment, both in Britain and abroad, and to this
end there will be set up a clearing-house to collect, collate and publish?possibly
through the medium of a journal?information on all aspects of Magistrates'
work, other than the purely legal. There is great need for a settled policy on the
part of Magistrates, and when it is remembered that in England and Wales the
courts of Summary Jurisdiction alone number more than a thousand, that each
court works in its own water-tight compartment, so to speak, neither profiting by,
nor even cognizant of, the experience of courts elsewhere, the vagaries of "Jus-
tices' Justice" are easily understood. Hitherto, every court has attacked its
problems de novo, because there existed no machinery whereby it could do other-
wise. The Magistrates' Association will afford such machinery. In addition
to a "general clearing house," the Association will set up standing committees
relating to matters on which data are constantly required, e.g., Probation,
Licensing, Defective Offenders; and ad hoc committees to deal with such special
matters as from time to time arise, e.g., war-strain and crime. Enquiries
should be addressed to me at 43, Devonshire Chambers, E.C.2.

Cecil Leeson,
Hon. Secretary, Magistrates' Association.
Tavistock Clinic.

The Tavistock Clinic for Functional Nerve Cases was opened in September at
51. Tavistock Square, W.C.I, to bring the most modern treatment for such
conditions within reach of those who cannot afford specialists' fees. Every
form of Psychotherapy will be available when necessary. Patients will be
treated gratuitously or charged a fee not exceeding 4s., according to circum-
stances ; whenever possible they should bring a letter from their own doctor.
Every weekday there will be three sessions, beginning at 10, 4 and 6-30 respec-
tively. It is anticipated that some mental defectives will present themselves
in the children's department. These will be advised how to obtain treatment in
special schools or institutions if necessary. Dr. H. Crichton Miller is the Hono-
rary Director of the Clinic, and Dr. W. A. Potts is the Director of the Children's
Department.

Board of Education (Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer for 1918).
The Chief Medical Officer in this report states that three new schools for
mentally defective children have been opened during the year. There are now
194 in England, and five in Wales, providing accommodation for 15,825 children
in all.

A return furnished by the Board of Control is printed in this report, giving
the total number of cases ascertained during the year by various Local Authorities
showing which of the number have been notified to the Local Education Authori-
ties. These figures show great divergence of activity on the part of both Local
Authorities and Local Education Authorities. The latter are reminded that
their duties under the Mental Deficiency Act include the notification to the
Local Control Authority of all children who fall within certain specified classes
as defined by Section 2 (2) of the Mental Deficiency Act. The attention of the
Local Education Authorities is also drawn to the Board's Regulations (Art.
31 .d.) requiring that for all special schools particulars must be given of the after
careers of children who have left.

Ministry of Health (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill.
----------------------------------------------------

The above Bill contained an interesting though highly controversial clause
(Clause 8) on the Treatment of Incipient Mental Disorders.
The whole Bill however was thrown out by the House of Lords at its first
reading on December 13th.
New Residential School for Mentally Defective Children in the County of
Durham.

The Durham County Education Committee have established a residential
school for mentally defective children at Dinsdale Park, about four miles from
Darlington. The school is accommodated in the Hall of Dinsdale Park, which
has been purchased by the County Education Authority and altered to meet the
requirements of the Board of Education. The Hall overlooks the river Tees
and stands in about ten acres of grounds, beautifully laid out, and has been
furnished and fitted with great care. The school is certified by the Board of
Education for 100 children (52 boys and 45 girls).

The classrooms are bright and airy with a south aspect and with delightful
views of the valley of the Tees and the North Riding of Yorkshire.
The School was officially opened on the 1st June, 1920, and there are now 50
scholars in residence. It is expected that the accommodation will be fully
taken up after the Christmas Vacation. The whole of the accommodation is
reserved for children residing in the Administrative County of Durham.
The Master and Matron of the school are Mr. and Mrs. Robert Young, who
are assisted by a staff of certificated teachers. During the short time the school
has been opened, the physical condition of the children in residence has shewn a
very marked improvement.

The school is organised to give special training in practical work, and
apparatus has been provided for recreative and hand-work exercises. Singing and
games provide facilities for brightening the corporate life of the school.
The grounds provide unusual opportunities for the special development of
Nature Study lessons.

The fact that the children are taught in very small classes ensures the possi-
bility of special consideration being given to each child's needs in the general
scheme of instruction.

Rawcliffe Hall Institution.
-----------------------------

Rawcliffe Hall, near Goole, was opened last September by the West Riding
County Council for the reception of mentally defective women and girls over 10
years of age. The Board of Control issued their certificate authorising the
admission of 130 patients of the feeble-minded and imbecile type. By the
middle of December a small staff and 27 defectives were in residence.

The Institution was formerly a private residence. The grounds are exten-
sive and include a good kitchen garden. The elder defectives are receiving
training in housework, laundry work and plain sewing. In the spring they will
assist in the gardens under the direct supervision of one of the staff.

The younger defectives are to receive instruction on Kindergarten lines.

They will also be taught sewing, knitting and rug-making.

The accommodation is to be reserved for West Riding cases.

Provision of Institutions and Schools for Defectives by Local Authorities
under the Mental Deficiency Act.

Dr. Rotherham's paper on "The Case for the large mixed Institution for
Defectives, which he read at the C.A.M.D. and N.S.S.U. Conference in Novem-
ber should be of interest to all Local Authorities who are starting or about to
start Institutions for Defectives.

Local Authorities under the Mental Deficiency Act and Local Education
Authorities should read Mrs. Hume Pinsent's paper on "The Relation of Day
and Residential Special Schools to Certified Institutions for Defectives," as it
refers to the opinion of the Law Officers of the Crown, which seems to indicate
that it may not be possible.

The C.A.M.D. is taking up the question and we shall be very glad to hear
of any Authorities which have the matter under consideration.

