Syphiliphobia
==============

Mr. Acton, in his recently-published work on the Diseases of the Repro-
ductive Organs, has done much service in directing professional attention
to a class of affections hitherto almost overlooked by the practitioner. He
says?

" This class of complaints stands in direct opposition to feigned diseases; instead
of our patients simulating certain affections or complaining of sensations which they
themselves well know are for the mere purpose of misleading the medical man, the
sypliiliphobist describes only what by an exaltation of nervous sensibility he fully
believes he sees or feels. Like hysteria, sypliiliphobia will assume every form of
venereal disease found or described in books, and in a tenfold degree, or like hypo-
chondriasis, every trifling ailment will be exaggerated till the medical man is unable
to distinguish what his patient really feels and what he supposes he feels.
" Did isolated cases only now and then occur, perhaps they might not deserve
attention, but so numerous are they in a large capital like London, so anxious are the
sufferers to obtain relief by consulting every man who can be supposed to offer them
any means of relief, that they spend fortunes in travelling about and visiting every
quack or novel quidnunc who gulls the public by assuming a knowledge which he does
not possess.

" I have been consulted by a great number of persons who are fearful they suffer
from syphilis in one form or another; and although many of these sufferers can be
said to have syphilis only in their imagination, others have presented anomalous
symptoms of disease which might lead the best educated medical man to waver, or
doubt if it really was syphilis he was called on to treat and not the phantom above
spoken of. Hie mistakes are most liable to occur from the surgeon depending upon
the history given by the patient, rather than by the appearance which he meets with."
?pp. 602-3.

He again observes?
" Sometimes the patient accuses the bladder, at other times the prostate, as being
the seat of very peculiar symptoms, which have only this in common,?that without
any apparent cause or symptom, his sufferings are exaggerated to a degree that we do
not really meet with in the disease the patient supposes himself affected with. A most
lamentable case of this nature came before the public lately, in consequence of the
sufferer having committed suicide.

" There is something very peculiar in the aspect of this class of patients, which,
coupled with the exaggerations of symptoms, leaves the surgeon in little doubt on the
nature of the complaint; but although the diagnosis may be easy, the treatment is by
no means successful."?p. 607.

We have, in the course of our practice, seen several cases of the kind.
This affection has occurred in persons of very sensitive and highly wrought
minds, who have been guilty of some slight impropriety, and have been
impressed with an idea of being affected with various forms of lues.
Mr. Acton remarks?

" The inmate of many a lunatic asylum could give us a sad catalogue of errors of
diagnosis; did he possess all his reasoning faculties, he could tell us that the mono-
mania syphilitica was countenanced early in life by many a designing knave, who robbed
him of his money while encouraging his fancies; that this same charlatan, profes-
sional or extra limites, thought, it necessary to carry out his views by frequent cau-
terization, which had terminated in the present affections of the genital organs, that
virtually produced the disease he once so much dreaded. But, poor fellow ! this view
of the case is happily not present to his mind, and he goes to the grave the victim
of his own imagination, and a martyr to the injudicious treatment which has been
pursued."?p. 608.

In a future number we may revert to this important subject.
