German Psychological Literature
==================================

197
Art. IV

^ E are indebted to tlie accomplished editors of the Berlin " Universal
Journal of Psychiatry" for the seventh volume of that ably-conducted
periodical. The three numbers or parts which constitute the volume
before us fully sustain its high and well-deserved reputation. We
proceed to make some extracts from the many very interesting articles
"which they contain.

The first paper to which we shall refer, is entitled " Pathological
Sketches (Darstellungen) characteristic of the various Organs of the
?Brain and of their Functions; together with an Anatomico-Physiolo-
gical Introduction." In this ingenious and fanciful article, the author,
Dr G. H. Bergmann, presents us with a selection of detailed and
striking cases, from his own long and varied experience, with the two-
fold purpose?1st, Of showing how the disorganization or grave injury
?f the brain affects the various mental operations; and, 2ndly, Of
Opposing certain views tending in his opinion towards materialism.
Laying it down as an axiom, that a sound basis for physiological and
psychological inquiry can be formed only by a persevering stud} of
comparative anatomy, aided by constant investigation into and compa-
rison of the course of each disease, and its peculiar and individual
characteristics, with the excellences and deficiencies of the organs of
the brain of the individual in whom they are observed, the author
proceeds to his first or anatomical section, wherein his inquiries are
shown to have been conducted with marvellous minuteness and ability,
but in a spirit of speculative assumption which might probably stagger
bis less metaphysical fellow-labourers on this side the channel.
Dividing the entire hemispheric mass of the brain into what he is
pleased to term " three circles of life," closely entwined and always
acting in unison, and thus " serving as the basis of mental vitality,
Dr Bergmann confidently distributes into these three divisions the
various recognised parts of the brain, as well as many hitherto unre-
cognised, giving to all alike the designation of organs, and assigning,
in many cases, to each its separate and special function: " and various,
says he, " are the abnormities to which these are subject, and various
are the mental defects consequent thereupon." To the comua and
adjacent parts in the human brain, our author declares that no analo-
gous or corresponding organism has ever been found in the brain of
any of the inferior animals, with the exception of a few of the
* Allgemeine Zeitsclirift fiir Psycliiatre und psychisch-gerichtlicheMedicin, 8cc.
XJnter der Redaction von Damerow Flemming und Boiler. Berlin:
monkey tribe. " Here also," he observes, " as in the other parts, the
law holds that, in proportion to the number of the fibres, to their
development and complete decussation, is also the intelligence, and
the ability of motion." Hence it is, he believes, that beasts are deficient
in the power of combination, and of moving their limbs artistically-
The author points out, as a circumstance worthy of observation, that
the power of motion is injuriously affected by a too firm adhesion of
the pia mater, as well as by its softening or its induration.

To follow Dr B. through the complicated details of his investiga-
tions in cerebral anatomy, would be impracticable in the brief space
which can be here afforded. They are interesting from their minute-
ness, and often amusing from the whimsical neologisms employed in
their description. We may mention, however, that he regards the
central or middle cavity of the brain as a sort of camera lucida, sub-
servient to the visual power of the mind. To the reciprocal action of
certain parts (organs) of the brain he ascribes that unity of visual
objects (single vision with two eyes, as Dr Wells calls it,) which has
not hitherto been satisfactorily accounted for: on the individual
functions of these organs the author avows that he can only offer
surmises, which continued observation alone can verify. The pineal
gland, once regarded as the seat of the soul, Dr Bergmann does not
even consider as an organ per se, but rather as a mere medium for
communicating vitality to the central region of the brain. Lastly, of
certain parts, on which the Doctor somewhat gratuitously confers the
perception of musical harmony, he thus speaks :

" As long," says he, " as this organ is still active (though already
suffering and defective), and the deranged (irregehender) patient still
retains the consciousness of himself and of his torments, he is at issue
with life, because life and mind are no longer in unison. He is often
seized by a vehement desire, which he can hardly subdue, and which
imparts courage even to the pusillanimous and irresolute, to put a stop
with his own hand to his psychical anguish and mental discord; but
should the organ decay totally, and thus his partial vital activity cease,
we then see complete apathy, because the feeling of the disharmony of
life exists no longer."

From the manner in which Dr Bergmann treats his subjects, we are
inclined to infer that he is a disciple of Dr Gall, though the phreno-
logical hypothesis is not directly referred to.

This elaborate and curious article concludes with detailed accounts
of forty cases of insanity, with the results of their post-mortem exami-
nations, which were conducted under the personal direction and
observation of this laborious and enthusiastic inquirer. Our warmest
thanks are due to Dr Bergmann for his arduous and persevering
researches in the mysterious field of psychical philosophy. His generous
exertions cannot be estimated too highly \ nor are they less justly
appreciated, because we may be sometimes disposed to smile at the
fanciful distribution and classification which he has been pleased to
adopt, of parts so well known and familiar \ nor because we are com-
pelled to (at least) suspend our judgment as to many of the conclusions
which he appears to regard as irrefragable.

The same number contains an elaborate article, entitled, " Contribu-
tions towards the History of Psychiatry." The writer, Dr Bird, refer-
ring to his preceding contributions, inserted in the fifth and sixth
volumes, adds some few other facts, observing, at the same time, that it
is a mistaken notion to suppose, with certain French and German
psychologists, that mental insanity occurs more frequently among indi-
viduals in high life than among persons in humble station. The
reverse he affirms to be the case; and that we hear so much about the
insanity of persons of high rank, merely because, from their elevated
position, their mental state is more frequently observed and recorded,
whilst insanity in the lower walks of life escapes notice. In treating
?f hereditary predisposition to insanity, he points out the royal family
?f Hppsburg as being notoriously subject to this malady, which, it is
said, was introduced among them by the marriage of Philip the Fair
with Joan, the insane daughter of Ferdinand the catholic and his wife,
Isabella of Spain. This dreadful disease continued to run in the blood
until the extinction of the family in Spain, in 1700; and, in 1740,^ (as
far as the male line is concerned,) in Austria also. By intermarriage
with the Hapsburgers, insanity has been introduced into several other
reigning families. ? A genealogical table of that infected race, present-
ing a synopsis of considerable interest, is given in the next page.
The following cases of insanity are cited, resulting from despondency
?r despair?

Henry IV., emperor of Germany, was excommunicated by Pope
Gregory VII. in 107G, whereupon Bishop William, an adherent of the
monarch, excommunicated the Pope, at Easter, in the town of Utrecht.
Shortly afterwards the bishop was taken ill, repenting his proceedings
against the Pope. He fancied he saw spirits of hell by his bedside,
eager to snatch his soul. He declared himself lost for ever, and died
in confirmed insanity, from despair.

Christian IV., of Denmark.?During the campaign against Tilly, in
1625, this monarch being, at the time, apparently in good health, had
the misfortune, on the 20th of July, to fall from his horse into a pit
twenty-two feet deep, which was insecurely covered with planks. The
horse was killed upon the spot, and the king himself was buried by the
Febdinand, the Catholic king of Aragon, sinks into melancholy, and dies, 151G. Isabella, queen of Castile, dies 1504.

Johanna, heiress of Spain and the Indies, becomes insane in 1555, and dies, aged 76. Her husband, Philip, duke of Austria (Philip I. of Spain), dies of pulmonitis in 1506,
Charles V., emperor of Germany and king
of Spain, is occasionally disturbed in his
mind, and dies in 1558.
Philip II., king of Spain, halts between
crime and mental derangement. Dies
1598.
Philip III., king of Spain, mind deranged;
dies 1G21.

Ferdinand I., emperor of Germany, is of Charles, duke of Styria, dies 1590. Maria of Austria. She became totally
sound mind; dies 1564. | insane, and died in that state in 1581.
Ferdinand II., emperor of Germany, Iler husband was William the Rich.
Emperor Maximilian II. is sickly, kind, of dies 1637. Their son, John William, duke of Cleves,
sound mind. His consort is Maria, | was insane. He died 1609.
daughter of Charles V. Ferdinand III., emperor of Germany,
dies 1675. His consort, Marianne, was
| daughter, sister, and aunt of the three
Emperor Matthias last insane Hapsburgers of Spain.

dies 1619. His
Emperor Rudolph
II. dies 1012; de-
scended on both
sides from Johan-
na. Deranged in
mind.
sanity doubtful
during the latter
part of his life.
Leopold I., emperor of Germany. His
consort, Margaretlia Theresia, wa3
daughter and sister of the two last Spa-
nish Hapsburgers; she died in 1705.
Charles VI., emperor of Germany, died
1740, when the Hapsburg line became
extinct. He was of weak intellect,
always busy without doing anything.
His daughter, Maria Theresa, an intel-
lectual woman, took after her mother,
one of the Brunswick family.

Anne of Austria, of sound mind ; wife of Philip IV., king of Spain, was imbecile; died 161G. Maria Anne of Spain, empress of Ferdinand III., died in 1646.
Louis XIII., king of France ; dies 1666.
I I | |
Louis XIV., king of France. His queen, Maria Theresa, of sound mind, Chai'les II., of Spain, the last descendant Margaretha Theresia of Spain, the empress
I _ dies 1683. of the house of Hapsburg in Spain, was of Leopold I., died in 1C73.
Louis, dauphin of France, dies 1711. feeble, suffering, and of unsound mind.
I His mother was daughter of the emperor
Philip V., king of Spain, the first Bour- Ferdinand III.
bon in Spain, becomes insane; dies
1746. The hereditary disposition re-
mains in his family.

mould that had fallen over him, and a considerable time elapsed before
he could be extricated. At first he was believed to be dead, and for
three days he remained insensible and speechless ; however, he was so
far recovered by the 7th of August as to resume the command of his
army; but, from that time, his mind was no longer sound. At
moments when prompt resolution was required, his hesitation was
striking. Towards the end of the year the king had a vision, which
appeared to strengthen his failing courage. He fancied that he saw
Jesus Christ, attired in a purple robe, with a crown of thorns upon his
head, and a broken reed in his hand, looking at him with a melancholy
countenance, whereupon he regarded himself* as the elected champion
?f the Saviour. However, on the opening of the campaign in 1626,
the king's irresolution and mental distraction became still more appa-
rent. He looked pale and emaciated, and became intensely melancholy;
he spoke little, and that incoherently. Subsequently, on the restoration
?f peace, his mind improved somewhat. He died in 1648.

Rudolph II., Emperor of Germany.?This monarch was, both by
the paternal and the maternal side, a great grandson of the insane Joan
?f Spain. Rudolph was fond of Bohemia, and resided at Prague; and
his daily-increasing hypochondria rendered any change intolerable. He
had a magic mirror, in which he fancied that he saw the most dis-
tant objects, and deciphered the most secret thoughts of others, and
yet informers and slanderers were his favourite guests in his solitude.
He heard mass in a strangely barred oratorium, and would sit for hours
in a rigid posture, watching the operations of painters and watch-
makers. The easiest means of obtaining access to him was through
the protection of a favourite groom, or of some one of his numerous
mistresses. His proneness to anger was dreadful. He spent much of
his time in his stables, where he was known to have violated women
who had come to speak to him on important matters. His bastards
inherited much of his wild passions. One of them murdered people in
Vienna. Another was himself put to death by the command of his
furious father. Rudolph was at last deposed by the imperial princes,
who, in 1606, declared him mad. Towards the end of his life, his
mental state improved in some degree. He died in 1642.

The Emperor Charles Y.?Balzac and other historians speak of the
mental disorder into which Charles V. fell after his abdication; it is,
however, probable that he would never have abdicated had not his
mind been already disturbed. According to the memoirs of Du
Ribier (vol. ii.; p. 747), the reigning Pope, who 110 doubt was well
informed concerning the emperor's state, assured him that Charles had
fallen into the malady of his mother Joan. He is known to have
assisted at his own mock funeral, and such proceedings certainly bea^
the stamp of mental aberration. It is said by some that 011 his death-
bed Charles joined the evangelical church. He died September 21st,
1558, aged 57. No historian has taken due notice of this insanity of
Charles V., and, consequently, we do not yet possess a good history of that
emperor, nor of his age. Every exertion was made to conceal from the
world the hereditary insanity of the Hapsburgers, and for this purpose
literary Jesuits were employed, and in return the Jesuits were counte-
nanced ; thus the mental aberration of the Hapsburgers was the nurse
of Jesuitism. Charles had always been of a melancholy temper?he
was rarely or never seen to smile, and when later in life this melan-
choly was deepened by podagra and syphilis, he used to mope for days
together, while torrents of tears gave vent to his longing after monastic
solitude and death.

Of Philip Y. of Spain our author tells us, that after a fit of madness
that monarch considered himself as dead; would neither eat nor drink,
and even laid down the government. His imbecile son Louis, a youth
of 17, dying soon afterwards, the king was again prevailed upon by the
most urgent remonstrances of the clergy to resume, or rather, again to
lend his name to the government. Philip died in 1746, leaving as his
successor his son Ferdinand VI., who terminated his days in a state of
insanity.

The principal cause assigned by Dr Bird why this malady so obsti-
nately clung to the Hapsburgers and the Spanish Bourbons, is the con-
stant intermarriages which prevailed in these families. That several
German, French, and Italian princes had married with princesses of
these families without introducing hereditary insanity into the blood
of their posterity, our author considers as conclusive proof:?First, That
the mischief lay in the constant intermarriages of the Hapsburgers
among themselves. Secondly, That through marriages with healthy
(i. e., sane) families, the predisposition to this dreadful malady is soon
removed. This opinion must have been held by the Emperor Charles VI.,
who refused to ally himself in marriage with a descendant of a Haps-
burg princess.

In this number we have also an interesting paper by Dr L. Spengler
on the " Characteristics and Treatment of Demoniacs." It was com-
posed by the Armenian Bishop (Elisteus von Amatliunic. This prelate
lived in the fifth century, and his views are worthy of notice, as evinc-
ing a mind superior to the prejudices of his contemporaries, and far in
advance of the age in which he lived. From this curious little work
we extract the following passage, remarkable for its quaint mixture of
sense and absurdity:?

" Man is liable to pains, having a body subject to all kinds of suffer-
ing. Some of these pains can be cured by experienced physicians,
others cease of themselves, others again are incurable, causing lasting
Maladies, and sometimes even death. These evils, however, proceed
rom without; they originate in the change of the seasons, in excessive
ieat, violent cold, vitiated air, or damp climate. Others arise from too
ttnicli eating, too long fasting, and various well-known causes. Some
oi them resemble demoniacy, especially when the brain has been injured
y severe suffering from the stomach; particularly, also, by the increase
and decrease of the moon, which cause an increase and, decrease of the
brain, from which divers pains arise. Such people are seen to foam at
the mouth, their saliva and mucus are mingled with blood; they have
uts, see spectral apparitions, and become insensible. When, however,
jley are again quieted, their former consciousness returns, and they
have no recollection of what happened during their attack. Thus has
arisen the general opinion that it is not a disease, but the Devil which
tortures them. Some of these people recover their health, but others
uie of such attacks. In some, pains in the side and back, with various
Portions, trembling, shaking of the hands and feet, present a great
resemblance to demoniacy. Such fits recur every day at regular hours,
sometimes monthly, sometimes only once a year. Hence, the causes of
. evil are manifest: many of them are cured by the physicians; but
stul people call all such sufferers ' demoniacs.' That there are, however,
really people who are plagued by impure spirits cannot be denied. Such
jVere especially those that were brought to Christ, many of whom he
iealed by his mere word, without the application of any physical
remedy whatever, using, at the same time, the word by which people
are accustomed to call the evil, namely, 'epileptic,' 'lunatic.' When-
ever He healed epileptic lunatics and demoniacs, he did so as Man and
.0<1; for fevers, diseases, epilepsies, and lunacies do not yield to man
Without medicine, but to God all evils yield and are healed."
In the third number we have an interesting paper by Dr Willers
lessen, on the " convulsions" of the Jansenists of Paris. These remark-
able exhibitions the writer considers as destitute ~ of every trace of
supernatural influence, and even of religious enthusiasm; regarding
them merely as an expedient adopted by a sinking party, in order to
support their faction; similar expedients having been notoriously
resorted to by the ascetics, the puritans, and other parties, when placed
lr* a similar position. The opinion pronounced by the sharp-sighted
pijsicians, questioned on the trial of Martha Brossier (in 1599), Dr.
essen considers as strictly applicable to the hysterical Jansenists, viz.,
miilta Jictay pauca a morbo, nihil a spiritu."

adhe^^?r ^ie death of Jansenius, in 1638," says Dr Lessen, "his
that T S Critered upon a violent struggle with the jesuits, who were at
men aTG P0Werful at the French court. Among the distinguished
ArnaulY? T/anSed themselves on the side of the Jansenists were,
their n ' asca^' Nicole, &c. They were, moreover, remarkable for
piOJ ? ],VU e, m?rality5 but were, for this reason, actively opposed by the
i c ergy, the pope, and the dissolute court. They were per-
secuted for their opinions, and tlie pontiff hurled bulls against them,
which bulls many of them were compelled to recognise, by Louis XIV
who also, in 1710, destroyed the famous monastery of the Port Royal
?the great stronghold of the Jansenists. The struggle became still
fiercer in 1713, after the appearance of the bull unigenitus, wherein
Quesnel's commentaries on the Gospel (a book in great repute with
the Jansenists) were condemned. As this work, which was of a purely
moral character, contained nothing heretical, all France was now drawn
into the controversy; some receiving the papal bull, and thence called
' acceptantsothers rejecting it, and appealing to a future council, and
therefore named 'appellants.' In 1730, the parliament of Paris was
compelled to recognise the papal mandate. In this extremity, when
the Jansenists saw their cause sinking, they had recourse to a series of
pretended miracles, which they declared were performed by God him-
self, in order to bear witness to the justice of their cause. The
opportune death of the ascetic Francois de Paris, in 1727, supplied the
'appellants' Avith a wonder-working saint, against whose personal
morality no objection could be raised. These miracles lasted from
1727 to 1731, without the accompaniment of convulsions, and were
discussed in a great many publications of the time. On the 15th of
July, 1731, the archbishop of Paris issued his ' Mandement au snjet
iVun ecrit qui a pour titre ' Dissertation sur les miracles et en particw
lier sur ceux qui ont etc operes au tombeau de Mons. Paris, en
Veglise de St. Medard a Paris, avec la relation et les preuves de celiri
qui s'est fait, le 3 Novembre, 1730, en la personne d'Anne le Franc,
Paris, 1731." In this publication it was proved beyond doubt that, in
the case in question, the imputed cure was a fiction, and that the certi-
ficates had been procured in a dishonest manner; in consequence of
which the worship at the grave was prohibited. This was a sad blow
to the 'appellants.' The zealots had now recourse to a new expe-
dient, the management of which was given to the Abbe Bescherant.
The violent pains which used to precede the miraculous cures alluded
to, served as forerunners to the ' convulsions' which now took their
place. The first person by whom they were displayed was Aimee
Pivert, who, according to her own account, felt violent pains whilst at
the grave, on the 12th of July, 1731. She screamed aloud, her bones
crackled, and her whole frame was violently convulsed. These con-
vulsions continued every day, as well in the churchyard as at home,
until the period of her perfect recovery, which took place on the 3rd of
August following. The next cure attended by convulsions was that
exhibited August 2nd, by the wife of Hardouin, a tailor. This Woman
pretended to have been paralytic and dumb for some eight days before,
and was cured on her way home from the tomb. The next cures were,
first, that of a deaf and dumb person; then, those of two women; and,
at last, the Abbe Bescherant, who had been lame with club-foot from
his infancy, fell into convulsions; and, although no cure was visible,
yet were the fits declared to be equally miraculous with the cures
themselves, and were represented to the public as sanatory efforts of
divine origin, tending to restore health; and they were compared with
the movements to which a skilful surgeon subjects his patients, iu
order to restore the use of contracted limbs. At first, the fits came 011
while the patients were at the grave, but gradually the whole extent o
the churchyard, the church itself, and the charnel-houses, became
possessed of the healing virtue. For more than six months people
crowded to these sights. ' Allons ii St. Medard, voyons le miracle que
l^ieu y fait!' was the watchword. The gate was thrown open before
daybreak; portraits, and copies of the life and progress of M. de Paris,
Ayere sold there, and the police was employed in keeping order. At
fast, in January, 1732, an ordonnance of the king appeared, command-
ing the closing of the little churchyard of St. Medard. This ordon-
nance, on the attestations of the most eminent physicians and surgeons
of Paris, declares the fits in question to be fictitious, and denounces
them as calculated to mislead the credulous, to give rise to scandal
and riots, and to facilitate theft and licentiousness. The accompany-
ing proces-verbaux were signed by such men as Winslow, La Peyrannie,
Le Dran, and Petit. The papers contain the depositions of seven
individuals, who, having been examined by a royal commission,
declared that their convulsions had been factitious, and several of these
witnesses volunteered to imitate them before the commissioners, one
them declaring that he had repaired to the church at the instigation
?f his confessor. The ordonnance and the report now became the
objects of attack by the appellants, the number of the convulsionists
increased, each of them acting separately and endeavouring to outdo
the others. The churchyard being shut against them, mould from the
grave, water from the neighbouring springs, and_ even the rcliqune of
the sainted Paris, were sufficient to produce the miraculous effects.

The exhibitions now taking place in private houses embraced a wider
range, including representations from the history of the sufferings of
Christ, others from the Hfe of Paris; prophecies, spiritual discourses, repre-
sentations of the state of death and of infancy, as well as the grossest
indecencies, among which may be classed the so-called "secours, which
latter consisted in kind offices which were rendered, generally by men, to
the female convulsionists, and which, from having originally consisted
in merely holding and preventing the pretended invalids from hurting
themselves during the fits, had now become atrociously indecent. The
term convulsion was now accordingly extended and applied to that
state of divine inspiration in which these women pretended to find
themselves during the performance of these absurdities. But as many
of them were guilty of gross indecencies whilst in convulsions, and
many had before been in prison in consequence of immoral conduct,
these miracles were suspected even by their adherents. Their own
party now split into sections, some considering all these proceedings as
j^ioss fiauds, others taking opposite views, from which violent contio-
versies ensued. On the 17tli February, 1733, another royal ordon-
nance appeared, prohibiting the convulsionists under penalty of im
pusonment, from exhibiting their fits in private houses?forbidding all
the king's subjects from attending sucli exhibitions?and denouncing
the fits themselves as the production of disordered imagination and
of fraud. But this ordonnance also found opponents, and the pretended
sufferers were declared to be orthodox martyrs. The ordonnance was
of no avail, and the extravagances increased. At last, in the year l73o,
was published by authority the " Consultation sur les convulsions,'
which, on the 7tli of January, was signed by some of the most eminent
of the appellants. In this publication the convulsions and the "secours
were condemned, and the miracles said to have accompanied them
declared to be deceptions and impostures. This consultation created
an extraordinary sensation, and called forth a controversy in which the
appellants were reproached with inconsistency, inasmuch as they had
formerly entertained opinions diametrically opposite on the same sub-
ject; whereupon one of them ingeniously declared, " Quant a ceux
qui aussi bien que moi, ont juge trop favorablement de cette ceuvre,
nous riavons pas de peine a avouer que nous nous sommcs tro?npes."
This was the crisis of the convulsions?the impostors were now
frequently unmasked and ridiculed. The miracles thenceforward
decreased, and Jansenism itself declined. Meanwhile, discord arose
among the convulsion] sts themselves, and three parties, or factions,
became conspicuous. These were the Augustinists, or adherents of
Casse, who had assumed the name of Augustin, and pretended to be
the forerunner of the prophet Elijah. Secondly. The Vaillantists, or
followers of Vaillant, a priest of Tours, who pretended to be tlie pro-
phet Elijah himself. And thirdly, the " Moderate convulsionists," who
condemned the extravagancies of the other two parties. These three
factions attacked each other, and thus prepared their mutual ruin:
however, the convulsionists lingered on till 1741, or as some authorities
say, till the year 1746.

We subjoin a few cases particularizing the symptoms and proceedings
of these " malades imaginaires," though few of them indeed deserved so
lenient a designation.

The Abbe Besclierant, the originator of these impostures, had a club-
foot, which rather disfigured the limb than prevented him from walking.

According to his own account, when he saw the miraculous cures, lie
hesitated whether he should of his own accord present himself to the
divine influence or not. At last lie determined to wait for a divine
direction, first resolving to consider as such, an appeal from Montpellier
?accordingly, he soon afterwards received a letter from a cousin of his
at Montpellier, wherein it was urged what an effect a cure operated on
himself would produce at that town, where lie was well known. In con-
sequence of this letter, he laid himself on the grave of Paris on the
25th of August:?subsequently, being ashamed at the great concourse
?f People wlio came to witness liis exhibition, he wished to withdraw,
ut did not do so, owing to the convincing arguments of a friend. He
^nt twice a-day to the grave, accompanied by a great number of spec-
tators. Here he was stript of every tightly fitting article of dress, and
e lay half naked with his back on the grave, making the sign of the
cross, and calling for heavenly assistance. The bystanders at the same
tnne chanted aloud psalms, &c., from large breviaries; upon this he
eSan to shake, to roll his eyes, and make various grimaces; struck
the tombstone with his feet, stretched out his arms, jerked out his legs,
raised and lowered in quick succession the region of the stomach, and
Violently shook his head. At the same time his legs trembled, and his
stomach expanded. The spectacle lasted each time more than an hour,
urmg -which his adherents protected him from all injury: after this his
S was measured to ascertain by how many lines it had become longer;
ut if all these lines are added together, it will appear that the dis-
used leg must have exceeded in length the sound one. After each fit
le c?nversed with his friends, and did not appear fatigued, although he
? t the want of rest from not going to bed at his usual early hour.
ter the little churchyard was shut up he continued to visit the church,
ut had no fits, either there or in the large churchyard, where the police
Were stationed; but the fits came on in his own residence; at last he was
Rested, when the fits ceased altogether, because, as he stated, heaven
^d not vouchsafe to the gentlemen of St. Lazare to witness such
Miracles! However, his leg, according to a medical examination and
attestation, remained exactly as before, without any improvement.

Another case is that of Folard, who had formerly been an officer and
a free-thinker. Every day regularly he had a fit when, in saying
Vespers, he came to the " Magnificat," when " he falls to the ground,
stretches out his arms in the form of a cross, and remains motionless in
posture. Then he sings psalms, and sometimes weeps. Sometimes
a. 0 sound comes out of his ear. Then, again, he suddenly utters
single syllables, which some assert to be Sclavonian. Occasionally he
suspends himself by the legs from the arm of his chair, and flounders
j\ 0Ut ^e a carp. He often claps liis hands, and maintains that, when
us eyes are open, lie is quite in the dark; but that, when he closes them,
ls surrounded by brilliant light. He ties a rope round his neck,
au then shaking himself, he remains motionless. Towards the end of
sin win o- S*n2s > and, when all is over, he says, c I fancy I am
the"" J^e meetiu?S the Convulsionists, a contemporary periodical,
ino- descr'1"11^ an 01'gan of the appellants, gives the follow-
In their meetings they recite psalms and prayers. When the Con-
vultionist is suddenly seized with a violent fit, slie falls on the carpet,
rolls about, and becomes convulsed. To relieve her she is beaten,
squeezed, hung up, pulled about, and carried up and down by men
employed in rendering her these attentions. During these evolutions
the girls hold spiritual discourses, sing psalms and hymns, represent
the mysteries of Christ, especially his passion, prophecy, and guess
secrets. They do not appear fatigued even after having had fits every
day for months, or having been beaten with pieces of wood. One girl
is said to have swallowed hot coals, another to have devoured bound
books; for example, a copy of the Gospels, together with its case!!
Another broke stones and marbles with her head!"

The indecencies they were guilty of are thus described: "They
assume immodest attitudes; their hair is dishevelled, their feet and
legs are bare, the rest of the body carelessly covered; some in the
costume of harlequins, or otherwise fantastically dressed, so as to
display their limbs to advantage. From their convulsive movements
their dress requires to be frequently adjusted, and this often by the
hands of a man."

The pretended miracles were, by their adherents, divided into three
classes: first, miraculous cures; second, cures attended by miraculous
fits; third, fits without cure, which Avere designated as a divine work.
Moreover, the convulsionists possessed the gift of divination. They
could read sealed letters; could smell, in the streets, the houses in which
other convulsionists were residing. They also prophesied, many of them
being able to predict the place and hour when others would have fits.
One of them could read letters by touching them with his nose, although
his eyes were hoodwinked. They also laid claim to the gift of tongues.
Some idea of their blasphemies may be formed from the fact, that
brother Augustin asserted himself to be sinless; to be the second John
the Baptist, the forerunner of Jesus; and, at last, that he was God
himself, maintaining that, instead of three, four godheads were to be
reckoned. In one of his fits he laid himself on the altar, saying, " Let
them look at me; I am the sacrifice!" Another impostor, brother
Hilaire, baptized in fire and blood. Brother Etienne and another,
called the Juif Errant, went forth to meet the prophet Elijah, (to
whose advent most of their prophecies related,) and became mad on
the way. Brother Augustin also went forth to meet a girl of twelve
years old, who had prophecied that he would arrive in Paris in the
night of November 21st or 22nd, would lodge at the hotel of the Stag,
and then repair to the convent at Calvaire. Among their predictions
was that of the restoration of the Jews, and of the last judgment,
accompanied by eclipses of the sun, and by the appearance of stars,
angels, &c.

As a curiosity, we copy a certificate, signed by eleven persons, attest-
ing the following stupendous absurdity:
" Que nous avons vu ce jourd'hui la nommee Marie Sonnet etant en
convulsions, la tete sur un tabouret et les pieds sur un autre, les dits
tabourets etant entierement dans les deux cotes d'une grande cheminee
et sous le manteau d'icelle, en sorte que son corps etait en l'air audessus
du feu qui etait d'une violence extreme, et qu'elle est restee l'espace de
36 minutes en cette situation en quatre differents reprises, sans que le
drap dans laquelle (sic. in orig.) elle etoit enveloppee n'ayant pas d'habits
ait brule, quoique la flamme passat quelquefois audessus."

The blasphemous impudence and indecency of these girls may be
inferred from the fact, that one of them having been brought to bed,
declared that there was nothing astonishing in the fact that she, a vir-
gin, should, like the mother of God, have been delivered of a child
without a father.

We may conclude our extracts from Dr Lessen's voluminous article,
with the case of an amusing impostor who had nearly carried the joke
too far. This individual gave out that he intended to crucify himself,
being especially moved thereunto by the Spirit. Having attracted
great notice by preparations made for months previously, he on the
appointed Good Friday saved himself by flight from the grasp of some
zealous companions, who, on his refusal to consummate his laudable
project, were proceeding to accomplish it for him by a little douce
violence; and he was afterwards compelled to confess that the whole
Was a fiction, and had never been suggested by the Spirit.

Among all the German States it is found that Wurtemburg has
proportionately the largest number of individuals of imbecile mind.
According to a report presented to the government, there were (in 1846)
5000 cretinistic persons, of whom 150 were of the worst description.
The neighbouring Grand Duchy of Baden, among a population of
224,300, in 1810 contained but 213, and in 1845, among a population
?f 1,300,000 souls only 440 cretins. The first German institution for
the reception of these sufferers was established in that kingdom in
1835, at Wildbcrg, in the district of Nagold, and it was supported by
voluntary contributions. Since that time, however, several others have
been founded, which are partly supported by government, and a great
deal has been effected for the education and relief of these unfortunates.
It appears from an article, entitled " Statistics of Mental Derange-
ment and Epilepsy in the Duchy of Anlialt-Gothen, Germany," that
the Duchy of Anhalt numbers about 40,000 souls; among these there
are?insane, men, 1; women, 10; labouring under fatuity, men, 1;
Women, 1; imbeciles of various grades, men, 32; women, 27; epileptic,
2fO. XIV. P
men, 6; women, 2; epilepsy combined with fatuity, men, 1; women, 1.
Cured of mental derangement (cure doubtful), men, 3; women, 7;
cured of epilepsy, men, 2; women, 1. The total number is 102.
Besides these there are 89 persons disturbed in mind, so that out of
every 450 inhabitants, one is a sufferer from this dreadful scourge.
In the Faroe Islands (Denmark), which contain about 8000 inha-
bitants, there are seventy insane persons. The large proportion of these
unfortunates is generally ascribed to hereditary predisposition to mental
derangement, which, as the Germans phrase it, is at home in this
group of islands.

The commission appointed by the King of Sardinia to inquire into
the causes of cretinism, has presented its report, from which it appears
that there were malformations in the skulls of all the cretins examined;
that their mass of brain is very small, and that there was an entire
absence of muscular vigour in all the cases that camc under the cogni-
zance of the commissioners; who, moreover, do not consider the wen
as a necessary concomitant of cretinism. The cretins are, almost
exclusively, found in deep and secluded valleys only. Among a popu-
lation of 3,650,905 souls, in Sardinia, there are 5073 cretins, of whom
2014 have no wen. The assertion of Saussure, that at an elevation of
1000 metres above the level of the sea cretinism ceases, is refuted by
the fact, that at the height of 1G00 metres above the sea level, the
commissioners found 9 per cent, of the population afflicted with goitres
and cretinism.
