The Mental Aspect of Epidemics
===============================

Art. II.-

The history of plagues, like that of the sacking of great cities by
hostile armies, is a theme full of the most mournful images, The
physical and moral evils of such terrible catastrophes are seldom con-
sidered. The order and regularity, the comfort and wealth, in which
We repose, exclude them from our thoughts; nor is it until some shock
of nature or of politics awakes us with a start, that we are made aware
of the terrjble vicissitudes to which we are exposed.

It would be difficult to recapitulate the opinions of the various
authors who have treated of epidemics and contagious diseases. For
what use would there be in trying to arrange a chaos of hypotheses,
built for the most part on conjecture, superstition, or empiricism?
What, in fact, have we learnt on this perplexing subject from the quid
divinum of Hippocrates, down to the fungoid theory of modern cholera?
Cardan, Mercurialis, Yalesco of Tarentum, and others, impute a divine
anger or malignant influence to the conjunction of certain planets,
which they assign as the efficient cause of epidemic pestilences. Van-
helmont, Paracelsus, and the old German school, pretend that the
contagious and epidemic principle consists in salt, sulphur, alkali, or
arsenic, floating in the air. Schenck, Wirdig, Misald, and les curieux
de la nature, have collected a great number of observations on this
point, which are as worthless as they are ingenious.

Baillou, Sydenham, Ramazzini, Huxham, Tissot, Grant, Zimmerman,
Lepecq, Monro, and Pringle, are the authors who have given us the
deepest insight and the soundest reflections on this interesting topic-
Some modern writers, indeed, have fancied that they have found out
the cause of epidemics in certain states of the air, vitiated by a hetero-
geneous though unknown matter, which chemistry and natural philo-
sophy have in vain endeavoured to discover in the constituent elements
of the atmosphere.

Webster entered on some researches, for the purpose of proving the
coincidence of epidemics with particular phenomena in nature, such as
comets, volcanoes, earthquakes, &c.; but with what real benefit to
practical medicine, it is not easy to perceive,?at least, we have not
gained a single aphorism in addition to our present catalogue of
them.

Every region of the globe is at times the seat of epidemics,?conti-
nents, islands, and even the ocean itself. The Matlazahuel, a kind of
diapedesis, or bloody sweat, prevails among the savage tribes who
wander upon the flanks of the Cordilleras. The Siamese of the old
Avorld, and the inhabitants of Massachusetts in the new, both fall
victims to the yellow fever. The insular natives of the Maldives in
the eastern, and the settlers of moist Cayenne in the western hemi-
sphere, as well as our convicts at Botany Bay, in what is miscalled the
fifth quarter of the world, are all of them liable to be carried off by
fevers of a malignant type. In short, the snowy deserts of Siberia,
the temperate and salubrious climate of Switzerland, the warm and
humid levels inundated and fertilized by the Nile, the hot and dry
provinces in the midst of Spain, the towering heights of Caucasus and
the Alps, the immense plains of Poland, the shores of the Baltic and
the Mediterranean, the marshy districts of the papal states, the beau-
tiful and fertile champaigne lands of France and Lombardy, and the
smiling vales of Tuscany,?all of them experience the baneful influence
of epidemic maladies. Some, indeed, are indigenous, as the Siberian
tara. But others perambulate the earth, such as the influenza and
the cholera. The genius, epidemic agent, ens epidemicum, is a true
Proteus, cloaking itself in every possible form of disease, and sparing
not country, nor latitude, nor clime. The succession of the seasons,
the various temperatures of the several zones, and the ever-changing
winds of heaven, present no obstacle, offer 110 diversion, to its threaten-
ing and irresistible progress. We can watch, note down, and report
the stations in its line of march; speculate on its deadly.onset, and
count the numbers of its slain;?nay more, we can look tlie portentous
monster in the face, and touch its terrible existence with our hands:
but respecting its intimate nature, its penetrating virus, we cannot
pretend to anything better than a shrewd guess; and then, as to its
specific treatment, we are forced to own that we know next to
Nothing.

No writings worthy of credit as scientific memorials have reached us,
?f a higher date than the close of the fifteenth century. Massaria,
Arnaud de Villeneuve, Capivaccius, Gallus, Guy de Chauliac, Fracastor,
ftnd afterwards Zacutus Lusitanus, Ferri, and the Cardinal Gastaldi,
have left us some interesting remains on the contagious maladies that
happened in their time. Fracastor is the first who spoke of petechial
fevers and epizootic diseases. Kamazzini, Lancisi, and Yallisnieri
followed in his footsteps. The latter proposed (as Yirgil had done
before him) to slay the animals seized with contagious maladies on the
spot, so as to intercept their propagation.

M. le Docteur Loudun, of Lyons, says, that the greater catarrhal
diatheses of the present time are, in all probability, owing to the increase
?f cold and moisture observable in Europe ever since the great earth-
quake at Lisbon, as well as to the progressive debility of the human
constitution, in consequence of the present mode of living, morals,
habits, and the agitating events at the close of the last century and the
beginning of this. And the late Dr Prout considered, that, for the last
thirty years, phlogistic or inflammatory states of the constitution have
been decidedly on the decrease?a fact which accords with our own
experience, extended over the same space of time. Dr Beddoes had
observed, as far back as 1807, the increase of pulmonary disorders,
owing, as he remarked, to a state of atmosphere favourable to the
development of asthenic diseases. Our private observations on this
point certainly confirm us in the notion, that nervous debility has
prevailed very extensively ever since the first appearance of the cholera
in this country in 1832, while acute inflammatory affections have dimi-
nished in the same ratio. The object of this article, however, is not
upon the physical, but the moral character of epidemics, with which,
nevertheless, the foregoing remarks are not altogether irrelevant.
The passions of the soul have not unfrequently given rise to con-
vulsive epidemics, or dementia, spreading by imitation. History, both
ancient and modern, is full of examples. Pausanias makes mention of
the maidens of Prtetus and the women of Argos, who fancied them-
selves metamorphosed into cows. According to Plutarch, the girls of
Miletus conceived a strong propensity for hanging themselves. M.
Desloges, physician of St. Maurice in Valais, relates a similar epidemic,
prevented from running to extremities by the timely exhortations of
the cure of the place. Bonnet speaks of a transport of the same kind
among the females of Lyons, inciting them to drown themselves. We
have seen similar instances in our metropolis. Epidemics of persons pos-
sessed were common in Germany and France in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries. That of the Nonains was notorious in Saxony, Branden-
burg, and sober Holland. In the seventeenth century, the demoniacs
of the rural district of Labour in Gascony, and the possessed of Loudun,
made a great noise in France. Then came the convulsionists of
Cevennes; and, in the last century, the fanatics at the miraculous
tomb of the so-called blessed Paris; and, lastly, the crucifying women
(crucifiemens des femmes) of Fareins in Dombes, 1786-88. These
epidemic ecstasies were bad enough in their way, but nothing in com-
parison of those to which we will briefly refer.

The disaster of a large community infested by the well-known
plague, of which Defoe has given so vivid a description when it hap-
pened in London, cannot be better understood than by calling to mind
the manner in which it operated on the mixed population of Marseilles,
about 100 years ago. What must have been the feelings of an entire
population, driven to desert their dwellings, bivouac in the open
country, or seek refuge on board the vessels anchored in the harbour!
The magistracy and the religious orders abandoned the town, and none
were left behind except the lowest class, the tradespeople, and the
secular clergy, who, animated by the example of their excellent bishop,
M. de Belzunces, continued to discharge their incessant and dangerous
duties with the most heroic fortitude. A plan was formed for victual-
ling the place, and the paupers and vagabonds were constrained to
assist in burying the dead. Business of every kind was at a stand-still;
disorders of all sorts were perpetrated, but most especially those of
plunder and debauchery. It was a fearful scene; the streets and
squares were obstructed with the dead and the dying, dragged from
their doors, or thrown out of their windows, and left to expire or
putrefy in the public way. A thousand persons died daily. The dogs
prowled about the thoroughfares, and gnawed the naked carcases.
But what renders a plague peculiarly terrible, is the mental illusion
that bewilders the populace in these critical moments. Alienation
of mind forms, in the greater number of instances, the prominent
feature of a genuine epidemic. Indeed, a plague of any kind is a
species of madness. There is nothing too absurd, too cruel, too enor-
mous not to be believed, and not only believed, but acted upon with the
most terrific promptitude. The religious instinct, intensely excited, is
the origin of all the extravagant and mischievous ideas usually broached
in these appalling hours. Tumult is the result. And what can be done
against a multitude maddened to frenzy on a single point, the most
absurd and ungrounded in the world]?a fatuity too silly not to be
despised, and yet too potent not to be sliunned or destroyed, like
a noxious reptile? Unhappily, such derelictions of reason constitute
an ominous item in the accounts of epidemics; and the tale of many
a stately city, ravaged by the plague, warns us to beware that, when-
ever the angel of death unfurls his black banner above our heads,
superstition will not be slow to erect her hideous crest in front, while
crime of the blackest die will dodge our heels at every step, and
cowardice and despair beset us at every turn.

Obstupucre mentes et obduruerunt, says Otho d'Arezzo. The ties
of blood and friendship are broken?our animal nature reigns supreme.
Some die drunk?others starving?and others, again, drop amid thought-
less pleasures. Public instruction is at an end,?Christianity itself is
defunct,?its ministers die, so do the rulers, and the men of might.
Husbands, having become widowers, seek to enter holy orders, for the
sake of doing penance, or, perchance, from the sordid motive of pos-
sessing themselves of the unbequeathed wealth of the deceased clergy.
The laws can no longer be put in force, for the courts of justice are
Vacant, and the culprits either escape the legal penalties due to their
misdemeanours, or else they affect to punish themselves according to
their own fancies. Remorse, that spiritual element uniting the future
"with the past, degenerates into a morbid desire of self-discipline, as soon
as ever it is abandoned to its own mad caprices, and left uncontrolled
by the rule of faith and the guidance of authority and discretion. Such
are some of the dismal particulars drawn from ancient chronicles.
Hence came the fanaticism of the middle ages,?the flagellants and
others; and the rage which seized the world, when the Jews were sus-
pected of having poisoned the air, and were consequently hunted to
death and slaughtered in every part of Europe. At Essling, a whole
congregation of them were burnt together in their synagogue. Mothers
threw their infants into the flames, and then jumped in after them, to
avoid a violent baptism at the hands of their infuriated persecutors. In
vain did Pope Clement Y. issue, from Avignon, a charitable brief in
their favour: or the Emperor Charles IV. offer them a refuge within
his dominions; or Albert, duke of Austria, threaten and inflict tem-
poral vengeance on those implicated in these revolting crimes. Legis-
lation was useless: the political mania was an epidemic beyond the
reach of the triple mitre, the crown, or the sword.

But the biography of the human species is a burlesque as well as a
tragedy. There was a profane song the children used to sing about the
streets of Paris in the reigns of Charles VI. and VII., the words of
which were these;?" Votre . ... a la toux, commere; votre . . . ? ?
la toux, la toux!'''' The tune, or the words, (those of a vulgar ditty, of
course,) were imagined to be the cause of an epidemic catarrh, which
threw almost every one prostrate on their beds. The symptoms were
those of exhaustion and fever, which lasted about three weeks. They
called it La tac, or Horion. Those who had recovered from it con-
gratulated each other, jokingly, " Par ma foi, tu as chante voire . . . ? a
la toux, commcre/"?the word omitted in the text being an improper
one. Nevertheless, high mass was sung daily in spite of the hoarseness
and the cough. Men and women, especially those who were mothers,
suffered severely, and were a long time in regaining their health and
strength. There was no accounting for the disease, neither did the
physicians seem to understand it. Superstition alone ventured to cut
the knot in two, by confidently affirming that it was a curse upon those
who had sung the profane song; and so prevalent was this gross idea,
that if any one called on a friend just fallen sick with it, the usual
exclamation was: ? " En as tu ? Ah, par ma foi, tu as chante la
chanson I"

"With a scene of this flippant description, more like a vaudeville than
a sick chamber, Ave may contrast one of the most terrible castral epi-
demics ever recorded by military surgery. It happened during the
retreat of the French army from Moscow; and it will be easily under-
stood how much any malady would be aggravated in the midst of such
a disastrous combination of circumstances.

Wilna, over-crowded with troops hastily thrown into it, and at the
same moment attacked by the Russians, became a scene of the most
horrid carnage ever witnessed for several days in succession. The
streets were choked up with the slain, and the French prisoners were
thrust into the hospitals and the church of St. Casimir pell-mell. Not-
withstanding the intense frost (28? Reaumur), typhus broke out among
them, generated by the pestilential atmosphere arising from the putre-
fying corpses of the soldiery that had died from wounds, cold, hunger,
and fatigue, in the midst of the most disgusting and unavoidable filth.
The disease announced itself by headache, delirium, stupor, and anguish
of the limbs, generally frost-bitten. In their delirium, the forlorn
wretches beheld the cossacks charging down upon them in fury,?
villages and towns glared with flames,?the frightful passage of the
Beresina yawned before them,?and all the distresses of the retreat
were repeated minutely before their inflamed and bewildered fancies.
They imagined themselves preternaturally divided into a multitude of
individuals, or surrounded with dreadful fiends to whom they were
fastened, but from whom there was no escape, and by whom they were
mocked and tormented with the most officious and loathsome assiduity.
To their delirium was added a fiery heat and a burning thirst,?fury or
apathy,?bloody spots, ulcers, mortifications;?such were the unparalleled
horrors of this hell upon earth.

The Jews, who purchased or pillaged the chattels of the dead, paid
dearly for their avarice' by the penalty of disease and death. Entire
families, of the first respectability, fell a sacrifice to the hospitality with
which they treated the invaders of their country. Of 30,000 military,
attacked by the malady, 25,000 died; and out of a population of
30,000 Jews, 8000 perished. In the hospitals, the confusion was
beyond redress. The wisest and most humane measures were com-
manded by the Emperor Alexander; but in vain. The devotion and
skill both of the Russian and French physicians were heroic to the last
degree; but it was hopeless. Nor was it until death had very con-
siderably reduced their numbers (40,000 persons, civil and military,
Were carried off by it), that proper remedies, food, nursing, &c. could
be brought effectually into action for the assistance of the survivors. It
Was a time never to be forgotten.

By what particular course of events, or great moral lessons of weal
or woe, the mass of mankind have been materially improved, it were
hard to tell. Nevertheless, when we compare the present with the
past, and review the social condition of the world, not four thousand,
hut only four hundred years ago, we are compelled to acknowledge that
We are, both individually and collectively, a superior order of beings to
what our forefathers were, either in the middle ages when the helmet,
the cowl, and feudalism were rife, or in the days of the Persian
monarchy, when Xerxes drove his servile myriads across the Hellespont
at the beck of task-masters, with a lash in one hand and a bowstring in
the other. Philosophers as well as religionists, however, are not wanting
who are convinced that the world deteriorates, in morals at least, if not
in intelligence, the older it grows, and that the last periods of the pro-
tracted history of our race will be worse than the first. In the ancient
Sagas, or poems of the Brahmins, this discouraging presentiment forms
the burden of their song; and of the four thousand years that have
succeeded to the earliest date of their primeval legends, the concluding
two, of which we are now living in the last, shall be, according to their
vague predictions, the consummation of infidelity, misfortune, wickedness,
and woe.* We are told upon authority, which the boldest contro-
* This prediction or propliecy, most probably of antediluvian origin, from the line of
Cain, is verified in the fate of the Hindoos themselves. Their present condition, unc er
the dominion of the Anglo-Norman race, is despicable, degenerate, and corrupt, when
compared with their earlier dynasties, of which the Vedas sings. Their independence,
their wealth, their martial prowess, their architectural splendour, are now no nl0|e>"
I he spiritual teaching of Vishnu, however idolatrous and false, was eclipsed y t e
rationalistic reformation of Budda; and the modern Hindoo is no longer a clnva ious
believer in the creed of Brahma, but the helpless dupe of a pantheism and fatalism cou
joined, as withering as it is incurable.

versialist or philosophic inquirer may not dare to gainsay, that the
terrestrial world "waxeth old as doth a garment;" from which we may
rationally infer, that the general face of nature, like the features of a
person advanced in years, exhibits the traces of decrepitude and decay,
?so that, if one, born in the postdiluvian period, when this globe had
just emerged, damaged indeed, but still fresh and young from the
recent deluge, were to rise from the dead and appear among us, he
would exclaim with unaffected surprise, that the sky, the air, the water,
and the land were evidently the worse for Avear, and apparently verging
towards their final ruin and dissolution. In regard to the physical
structure of our frames, it is a popular opinion, that in magnitude men
are smaller now than they were formerly, and that our size has
diminished even during the comparatively brief interval of the Christian
dispensation; but that previously, men not only lived longer than they
do at present, but that they were actually of much larger growth than
ourselves; in short, that " there were giants in those days." It is
the concurrent notion of the moderns, however, who have applied them-
selves to the investigation of this curious question, that our anatomical
structure was originally cast in the same mould, and fashioned in the
same proportions, both relatively and absolutely, as it still continues to
be demonstrated in our dissecting-rooms and museums, and that this
permanent fixedness of construction would appear to be attested by such
human remains as have been discovered from time to time. It must
be owned, indeed, that such remains are few and scanty, and that they
scarcely ever exceed the date of a very modern antiquity.

This question was agitated in the early periods of learning, and the
prevailing notion then was, that the primitive inhabitants of the earth
-were of larger growth than the later. Thus, St. Augustine, in his work
J)e Civitate Dei, Lib. xv., c. 9, says, that the incredulous refused to
believe that the stature of men, before the flood, exceeded that of those
in his day, a.d. 427. Frequently he continues, from ancient tombs,
whose contents have been laid bare by floods, violence, or time, I myself
have beheld gigantic bones purposely exhumed, or exposed to light by
chance.

Pliny considered (he adds) that, as time went on, mankind
diminished in the same degree?the procreative powers of nature
becoming exhausted. And the complaints vented by Homer, of the
degeneracy of men subsequent to the siege of Troy, may be regarded,
not so much as a poetic licence as an historic hint of some value from
so accurate an observer as the author of the " Iliad" evidently was.
Virgil, likewise, in his striking passage of the field Pharsalia, mentions
the ossa grandia sepulchri, not as a pleasing fiction, but as a matter of
fact with which his readers were well acquainted.* At all events, such
testimonies prove a train of thought with which the world was already
familiar. It has been objected that the bones mentioned by St. Augus-
tine were merely the fossil remains of animals now extinct] but St.
Augustine expressly says, sepulchra convincunt; nor was it likely
that so keen, practised, and experienced an intellect, as that of the
Bishop of Hippo's, could have been deceived in this particular. Moreover,
let any one dispassionately examine the monumental remains lately
collected and brought to Europe from Nineveh by Mr. Layard, and he
must be convinced that they represent a race of men who, in their
animal formation and propensities, were manifestly far superior to the
average character of men in the present state of society.

Be this as it may, Ave cannot but conclude that, however much our
bodies may have degenerated in lapse of time, our minds have, on the
contrary, become more enlightened by the experience of ages. The
banner in which the epidemic that visited us in 1849 was met and
submitted to, is a decisive proof of this, and shows that the mental
capacity and docility of the masses of mankind are very materia y
exalted in the scale of moral beings. Our Transatlantic brethren, t ie
Americans of the United States, surpassed us, we must own, in t is
respect. No superstitious propensities were evinced on either sic e o
the ocean?no fatal delusions, instigating the populace to public ou -
breaks of a terrifying nature ?no disabling panics ? no shameless
libertinism,?nay, no profane outcry, or brutish infidelity. But every
thing was conducted with the most perfect self-possession?soberly,
humanely, and discreetly. The best means, suggested by the best
reason and knowledge, as far as they went, were listened to, adopted,
and resolutely put into practice; while the heartfelt piety of the people
was exhibited by the whole nation willingly relinquishing their temporal
* In one of tho?e delightful passages witli which the author of the Decline and Fall oc-
casionally treats his reader, there is an allusion similar to tint of Virgil's quoted above :
"From the first hour of the memorable twenty-ninth of May, disorder and rapine prevai e
in Constantinople, till the eighth hour of the same day, when the sultan himseii
passed in triumph through the gate of St. Romanus. He was attended by is vizier? ,
bashaws, and guards, each of whom (says a Byzantine historian) was ro us
Hercules, dextrous as Apollo, and equal in battle to any ten of the race o 01 in y
mortals."?On the same day, the muezzin proclaimed the name of God and the prop
from the most lofty turret; and the altar, before which the last of the Caesars a
lately bent in prayer, was now the high place of a Turkish mosque. As tie SU?i:s.
Wandered through the desolate mansion of the great Constantine, lie muttere a
tich of Persian poetry: "The spider has wove his web in the imperia pa ac?'
the owl hath sung her watch song in the towers of Afrasiab." The sac ing o
stantinople was the closing scene in the downfall of the Roman empire i:<rf,sed
appalling and stupendous event recorded in history. Greek literature was gge
throughout Europe; Laura and Petrarch appeared upon the stage , ie raiddle
opened a way to " the wealth of Ormus and of Ind;" and the asceticism o
ages disappeared, perhaps for ever.

concerns, and calmly offering up their petitions to Almighty God, on a
solemn day, unanimously appointed by themselves for that purpose,
with prayer and fasting. It is an historical fact: and, with the exception
of the Ninevites, who repented in sack-cloth and ashes at the preaching
of Jonah, we are not aware of any other instance on record in which a
mighty empire demeaned itself in the same sublime, dignified, patient,
and heroic attitude of attrition.

On a former occasion, under somewhat similar circumstances, more
than two thousand years ago, when the plague depopulated Athens,
fine examples of filial piety and generous friendship were at first dis-
played; but as the consequences were almost always fatal to the chil-
dren and friends, they were but rarely repeated afterwards. Then the
fondest ties were broken; the eyes about to close for ever, beheld on
all sides nothing but the most profound solitude, and death no longer
produced even a tear. This callous insensibility gave rise to unbridled
licentiousness; the most splendid fortunes were left a prey to inex-
perienced relatives, strangers, or the populace; and the survivors, ima-
gining they had but a short time to live, felt themselves justified in
passing their remaining moments in the midst of pleasure.

An ungovernable imprudence of this description stigmatizes most of
the fatal epidemics related in the histories of nations. A tone of mind,
sufficiently composed and energetic to meet the emergency without
alarm, is the only one that affords a chance of success in combating
the malady; but it implies a mental cultivation of a very high and
venerable order?such, indeed, as has rarely been met with, except in
the later epochs of the Christian era. A remarkable instance of this
sort presented itself at Nola, in the kingdom of Naples, 1815.
Upon the first intelligence of its having broken out among them,
measures were instantly adopted for its extinction. The city was sur-
rounded by two ditches, six feet wide and deep: the first was sixty feet
beyond the houses, and the second thirty feet beyond the first. A body
of troops guarded the entrances, the sentries being posted within sight
of each other, and lighted at night by fires. There was a drawbridge
to each entrance. It was death to pass, or communicate with, the
guards. A hospital was established within the city, with a proper staff
of officers, nurses, etc., habited in toile ciree, a mask, gloves, and wooden
sandals. They used iron pincers for handing everything to the sick,
and carefully abstained from contact. They oiled their hands, lived
well, drank wine, and attended to their digestion. The foul linen,
rerifoved by pincers, was immersed in acidulated water, and offensive
matters were instantly removed or burnt. Nitrous fumigations were
used in the morning, and every evening the floors Avere sprinkled with
an antiseptic fluid. The corpses were never touched except with the
pincers, and were buried in quicklime without delay. Suspected parties
were separated in a hospital of observation, from whence, if they showed
infection, they were removed to the hospital-in-chief. Infected localities
"were surrounded with a barrier, and their respectable residents held in
rigid quarantine. Parties of pleasure were interdicted; the churches
closed; hotels, taverns, ?tc., shut up, under the severest penalties,
domesticated animals were destroyed; and the butchers were not per-
mitted to slaughter their cattle within the city, nor to bring in their
bides and offal. Contagious substances were burnt; the concealment
of them being a crime punishable by martial law. The entire city was
divided into sections, placed under committees; and all the inhabitants
had to present themselves at their windows twice daily, and to quote
and deliver up their sick. The committees acted as commissariats.
The local reports, returned to head-quarters, were submitted to the
closest scrutiny and deliberation. In six months the town was clear of
disease; but a triple quarantine was persisted in for three months
longer. 950 persons Avere attacked, 728 died.

By a diligent investigation of the circumstances of the case, an epi-
demic, however malignant, could scarcely withstand the sanatory mea-
sures of the present age. It requires the co-operation of the civil,
military, and medical authorities, united in a police force, and acting
together with firmness, severity, and agreement; without which, their
allied efforts will be useless. The separation of the infected, the
appointment of proper hospitals, the burning of the dead, the destruc-
tion of contagious articles by fire, daily fumigations and " swabbings"
(to use a nautical phrase), killing the domestic animals?e.g., dogs, cats,
hirds, <tc.?inquisitorial visits, and an extensive commissariat, are the
chief points to be carried into execution by a sanitary police. And the
more vigorously such measures are enforced at first, the shorter will
be the time of their disagreeable continuance.

Such a systematic plan for arresting the progress of disease does not
appear to have been thought of by the ancients. Hippocrates is said
to have stayed a plague at Athens and at Phocis, but we have no parti-
culars of it, and most critics regard it as apocryphal. Judging from
his " Epidemics," Ave may conclude that he knew but little about the
matter. He excels in his prognostics and descriptions, but his practice
is generally puerile, and sometimes ridiculous.

Before we part from our reader, let us ascend this flight of steps, and
from the lofty battlements of history look down upon the deep-worn
channel of ages. In the reign of Tarquin II. a plague raged at Home,
which made him send his two sons to Delphi.

- During the contest respecting the fixed laws proposed by Arsa, the
city was alarmed by violent earthquakes and fiery exhalations in the
air. These natural phenomena were regarded as the forerunners of
calamity. Superstition fanned the fears of the populace. A thousand
optical delusions were imagined or seen, and supernatural voices fancied
or heard in the night. Livy and Dionysius report that it rained raw
flesh, and that birds of prey caught it piecemeal while falling, like
snow,?probably aerolites or meteors. No particular plague broke out
in consequence of these presages; but the state of the public mind was
itself the plague.

Upon the reduction of Veii, the victory which procured such glorious
popularity to the plebeian military tribunes, a pestilence broke out in
the depth of winter. Its rise may be traced to the troops, who had
suffered severely from the cold during the operations of the siege. On
their return in triumph, the weather suddenly changed from extreme
cold to oppressive heat. Dissipation generally characterizes a vic-
torious army; malaria was rife ; and the mortality was great among
men and cattle. The effect on men's minds was anything but that of
horror and despair, the disease caught them in a moment of success
and exultation. The sybilline books being consulted, the duumvirs
discovered an expiation as novel as it was harmless and cheerful, the
Lectisternium. The statues of Apollo, Latona, Diana, Hercules, Mer-
cury, and Neptune were taken down from their niches, and laid on
three beds placed about a table, on which magnificent repasts were
served up to those deities for eight days together. Private families
imitated these public ceremonies. Every one kept open house for
friends, strangers, and even enemies. Actions at law, animosities, etc.
were suspended; prisoners were released from their chains and forced
to join in the entertainments. Rejoicing Avas the order of the day;
nor were the prisons opened again until the festival was over.

A pestilence arose (364 B.C.) without any apparent cause. The
seasons were regular. The winter had not been too dry, neither had
heat succeeded to cold unexpectedly. The summer was not damp, nor
the vegetation sickly, nor had the Calabrian winds prevailed. All
ranks were swept away?Camillus among the rest. It is probable that
some meteoric agency was at work; for, two years afterwards, that
chasm opened in the midst of the Forum, into which the young Curtius
leaped. The gulf closed again; but the people threw loads of earth
and rubbish into it, along with the corn, fruit, and other oblations for
the gods. Fifty years after, during a triumphal procession, on account
of the defeat of the Samnites, the city was again visited by a plague.
The triumph of Fabius was interrupted by funerals, and the plaudits
of the populace were mingled with lamentations for the dying or dead.
Prodigies were in abundance?there were evil prognostics of all sorts?
in short, a panic. Blood, honey, and milk had been seen to flow from
the altar of Jupiter; and one phenomenon is recorded not unlike that
?f recent date?namely, that it rained earth, in the same manner as it
was said to have rained soot in some part of Ireland, during the Asiatic
cholera, in 1849. This black rain still remains to be accounted for.
Was it the result of volcanic eruption1? for after the eruption of a
Volcano in Nicarigua, 1835, ashes fell and darkened the day in Jamaica}
600 miles distant, and the same is related of Byzantium from the first
eruption of Vesuvius.* Exactly thirty years later, another most
dreadful plague fell upon the mistress of the world. The sybilline
hooks implied that it was the result of some secret crimes. The sus-
picions of the crowd were awakened, and a vestal would have been
sacrificed to their fury, had she not anticipated her fate by putting an
e^d to her own existence. This popular outbreak reminds us of a
similar one at Moscow, on the first appearance of cholera in that city,
?when the mob broke open the hospitals, killed or wounded some of the
medical officers, and were at last dispersed by an armed force.
During the reign of the Emperor Maximin, the empire was afflicted
"With every evil?a drought, a famine, a carbunculous plague, followed
hy blindness. Bread was excessively dear?the deaths beyond number.
The rich pawned their possessions for food, and were at last reduced
to nothing. Ladies of quality begged from door to door, in splendid
apparel, but with downcast looks. Others tottered along like spectres,
till they dropped by the wayside, crying out for food. Those Avho had
wherewithal to give, refused to do so, fearing lest they themselves
should be reduced to a like necessity. The public ways were strewed
with corpses, which the dogs preyed upon; and the survivors killed the
dogs, lest the infuriated animals should turn upon the living and attack
them. The pest directed its ravages chiefly among the higher classes.
Whole families perished at once and were buried together; and the
pagans declared that the only charitable persons were the Christians.
In another plague, fifty years later, in Nicomedia, there was an
earthquake?buildings were overthrown, and a conflagration arose from
their ruins. The bishops were assembled in council, at the same time.
* St. Augustine, J)e Civ. Dei, lib. iii. c. 31, mentions the rain of earth or chalk,?
true stones, not hail,?as a phenomenon well-known to his readers. From an erup-
tion of Etna, he says, the waters of the Mediterranean became so warm as to melt
the pitch on the bottoms of ships. In Sicily, such a quantity of ashes fell, that the
houses were covered with them, and broke down under their weight. This was at
Catana. There was also a flight of locusts from Africa, which fell into the sea, and
were washed up in such quantities on the shore that a pestilence arose from them in
the kingdom of Masinissa. He says, that at Utica, out of 30,000 soldiers, only ten
survived, c. 23. He mentions an epedemic madness among dogs, horses, asses, and
oxen. The City of God is generally disregarded as nothing more than an elaborate
religious disquisition; but it is, in truth, the best comment on Koman history extant.
There is a French translation by Moreau, printed, Paris, 1845; but the Latin is pleasanter
than the French.?Latin edit. torn, ii., Cologne, 1851.

A Persian ascetic, to wliom miraculous powers were ascribed, and who
had once been master of the lions under the Emperor, learnt by revela-
tion or report, that the city, which he seldom condescended to visit,
was being devastated beneath him by the plague, for he lived alone in
a lofty turret in the citadel of Nicomedia. After one of the shocks of
the earthquake, he was found dead in an attitude of prayer; and the
plague ceased.

Palestine was convulsed by an earthquake, 419 a.d. A cloud rested
on the Mount of Olives, and a supernatural figure, real or imaginary,
appeared in it. The pagans beheld their clothes covered with glittering
crosses, or what they mistook for such. The year before, there had
been an eclipse of the sun, and the stars were visible at noon-day,
followed by a drought, sickness, and a mortality among men and cattle.
A luminous meteor was visible in the sky throughout the summer, and
a strange fire fell upon earth, and was swept into the ocean by a hur-
ricane. There was a panic, and the end of the world was supposed
to be at hand. St. Augustine wrote to prove that the alarm was
needless.

The most formidable plague on record is that which occurred 542-
594 a.d. Such was the universal corruption of the air, that the pesti-
lence which burst forth in the fifteenth year of Justinian was not
checked or alleviated by any difference of the seasons. In time its first
malignity was abated and dispersed; the disease alternately languished
and revived; but it was not till the end of a calamitous period of fifty-
two years that mankind recovered their health, or the air resumed its
pure and salubrious quality. No facts have been preserved to sustain
an account, or even a conjecture, of the numbers that perished in this
extraordinary mortality. During three months, five, and at length ten,
thousand persons died each day at Constantinople; many cities of the
east were left vacant; and in several districts of Italy the harvest and
the vintage perished on the ground. The triple scourge of war, pesti-
lence, and famine, afflicted the subjects of Justinian, and his reign is
disgraced by a visible decrease of the human species, which has never
been repaired in some of the fairest countries of the globe.
But as an instance of popular hallucination, that which took place at
Milan would surpass belief, except from the acknowledged testimony on
which it rests. The entire population was afflicted with second sight,
or phantasmagoria. On a calm day, when the western front of the
duomo reposed against the blue sky of a Lombard summer, a terror-
stricken citizen saw, in the middle of the square, a carriage drawn by
six horses: within, was a person of majestic mien, dark complexion,
eyes inflamed, and lips compressed and threatening. The spectator
entered the carriage: it drew up before the gates of a magnificent palace.
He alighted, and, entering its spacious halls, beheld a strange scene of
horror and delight. Pale ghosts sat in council: he was tempted by a
vast bribe of gold to accept a small vase of poison, for the deadly pur-
pose of employing it against his fellow-citizens. He refused; the
scene vanished; and he found himself once more in the empty square,
before the duomo, beneath the deep blue sky, the same as ever. This
tale was repeated by a hundred lips. The carriage, the palace, the
phantom council, were listened to and believed. Milan was tossed in
the stupor of an uneasy dream. The pestilence was explained. The
dust on the pavement was a poisonous powder. But who were the
poisoners? They found an old man dusting a bench?was it he? They
fell upon three French artists admiring the venerated duomo, and
touching it with their hands,?surely it was they! Such was the dis-
tempered fancy that peopled the ancient streets of Milan. Frederic
Borromeo was appealed to, and he replied that they were the dupes of
a panic.

Mortality, in its ordinary form, is regarded with indifference by the
crowd. Man passeth to his long home, but no one layeth it to heart;
hut in the gloom of a general calamity, the consciousness of an im-
pending evil, from which there is no escape, becomes, when deepened
hy despair, a stupefying element, that benumbs the faculty of reason,
unnerves the senses, and deranges the order of the understanding. The
foregoing accounts, which have been copied, almost verbatim, from
Fleury, Gibbon, Hooke, Manzoni, and Ozanam in his history of epide-
mics, are, strange indeed, and melo-dramatic as they may appear,
entirely illustrative of the mania, partial or complete, usually attendant
on the progress of a pestilence.

The old astrologers might be correct in their mystical surmises,
although mistaken in the inferences they ventured to draw from them.
Their prognostications may have been hazarded upon data, fallacious
because they were partial, not because they were absolutely unfounded.
There is no question that our lives depend on telluric, meteoric, and
astral influences, to a degree rejected by the dull philosophy of the last
age, and received with attention and scientific exactness, but tardily, by
the present. It is impossible to exclude sidereal phenomena from
playing a chief part among the operations of what may be strictly
denominated " vital dynamics." Indeed, the shock imparted to the
mind, both individually and collectively, by the mere occurrence of
strange appearances out of the course of nature, is no trifling ingredient
to help us in accounting for the political, moral, and sanitary condition
of the world; evolving, as it does, in bold and decided attitudes, inhe-
rent energies of the soul, which would, like the hidden elements of the
terrestrial globe, have remained, under ordinary circumstances, latent,
invisible, and unknown. For a comet may. as the poet says, " shake
from its horrid hair both pestilence and war," by altering the electro-
chemical affinities and barometrical pressure of the atmosphere, and
thus excite the sensorial and sanguineous functions of our frames to
the last degree of national frenzy. A solar eclipse refrigerates that
portion of the earth's surface over which the lunar shadow passes;
earthquakes disturb, if they do nothing worse than disturb, the accus-
tomed direction and velocity of winds and currents of air; and volca-
canoes emit mephitic vapours, and dust, and sheets of flame, poisoning
at once and overheating vast districts of inhabited countries, in a manner
as inimical to life as it is subversive of that diurnal and regular routine
of health, so essential to animal and vegetable organizations. The
mind corresponds to the vigour or debility of the body,?excitement,
superstition, and fear, are the invariable coincidents or consequences of
particular ailments, or physiological conditions. Multitudes may be
staggered by an apparition or visual change in the aspect of things, and
their blood be curdled or inflamed by the invasion of an epidemical panic.

All classes are merged in the common evil. Princes and rulers sym-
pathize with the crowd; and, instead of riding on the whirlwind and
directing the storm, may be, like the meanest of their subjects, hurried
away by the vulgar impulse, and lashed on instinctively to the strange,
unnatural, incontrollable issue of events. Yiewed in this light, the
history of mankind is, in its final causes, nothing more than the natural
history of the universe, of which man constitutes an integral part
equally with every other organic and inorganic substance, and submits
to a destiny in accordance with the revolutions of planets (of which
this earth is one) around the sun, and in compliance with appointed
changes, proceeding with a giant's stride among stars and systems of
stars, infinitely remote in the boundless regions of space?where comets
wander with amazing and perplexing precision, and constellations appear
and disappear in a mode that baffles the wits of the most refined phi-
losophy. That man made of clay (memento, liomo, quia pulvis cs, et in
pulverem reverteris) with a soul full of celestial aspirations, should,
for the short space of three score years and ten, be doomed to a lot
little above that of an earth-Avorm, is an enigma only to those who have
not studied the discoveries of science in their moral relations, nor
turned to behold, with the eye of faith, " the works of the Lord, and
the wonders that He doeth in the deep 1"
