The Association  of Medical Officers 0f Hospitals for the Insane
=================================================================

We subjoin the Official Eeport of the meeting of the Association, held
in London on the 17th of July last. At this meeting, the Association
was partially reorganized. According to the rules of the society, all
medical superintendents of public asylums were ex officio members of
the Association, and its meetings were confined to the provinces.
Agreeably to the new arrangements, medical gentlemen connected with
private asylums have been admitted into fellowship with the Association,
and there are to be quarterly meetings of the society in London, as well
as an annual meeting in the month of July, and a metropolitan as well
as a provincial secretary has been appointed.

We congratulate our readers on this liberal and necessary enlarge-
ment of the boundaries of the society. We sincerely trust that no event
will occur to interfere with the usefulness of this Association. It has
great objects to accomplish. It should, in every sense of the word, be
a working body, watching Avith proper jealousy the progress of public
opinion in reference to the insane, and thwarting, to the best of its
ability, the introduction of legislative measures calculated to cripple the
hands of those entrusted with their care, thus retarding the advance-
ment of mental pathology, and inflicting a serious injury upon the cause
of humanity.

If the influential body of able and intelligent men connected with
this Association act in concert, and are influenced by the same enlarged
and humane views, it will be impossible to estimate the good that may
result from their combined operations. We have important objects to
effect, principles to establish, and common interests to protect. It is
therefore the sacred duty of each individual member of the Association
to put his shoulders to the wheel, and do his utmost to co-operate with
his brother members in the furtherance of a cause so closely connected
with the advancement of an important branch of medical science, and
the well-being of the human race.

No private feelings, no mistaken views of the course to be pursued,
no professional jealousy, should for one moment interfere with that
unanimity of action so essential to the successful working, if not to the
very existence, of the Association. We have enemies outside of the
camp ready to take immediate advantage of any disunion in our own
ranks; let us not be guilty of the folly of extinguishing ourselves by
an act of suicide, by engendering and encouraging internal feuds and
dissensions. As an Association, our actions should place us beyond all
cavil and suspicion. Let us beware of the fatal rock against which so
many kindred societies have, alas! been lamentably wrecked. As a
first principle, the repudiation of all attempts to form that most odious
and destructive of bodies, a clique, should steadily, resolutely, and per-
severingly be carried out. As an Association, Ave meet as equals.
Recognising the respect due to talent, knowledge, and character, Ave
must indignantly refuse to boAV the knee to mere names. If Ave com-
mit the fatal mistake of permitting any one member, or even a small
section of our body, to exercise undue influence or control over its
deliberations, we reduce ourselves to a contemptible position, and sur-
render, what ought to be dear to every Englishmen?the right of think-
ing for ourselves. Should such be the unhappy result, then for all
useful purposes the Association has ceased to exist! High and noble
impulses ought alone to actuate, guide, and urge us on. We must have
no private ends to serve?caprices to gratify?wrongs to redress. If
differences of opinion arise?and differences Ave must expect?let them
be openly expressed, and then calmly and dispassionately considered;
but beware of allowing the important, the vast interests at stake to
be perilled by the injudicious?we were on the eve of saying, imbecile?
submission to the authority of the few ever ready to over-ride and
lead by the nose those unfortunately weak enough to blindly prostrate
themselves at the shrine of any idol that may have obtained a factitious
and temporary elevation. The Association of Medical Officers of Hos-
pitals for the Insane must not consist of toadies and tuft-hunters, men
possessing the minimum amount of intellect and knowledge, conjoined
with the maximum degree of ignorance, arrogance, and presumption;?
but of intelligent, educated members of a liberal and enlightened profes-
sion, engaged in the solemn prosecution of a just and holy undertaking.
With these suggestions, we proceed to lay before our readers the
Official Report of the secretaries.

At a meeting of the Association of Medical Officers of Hospitals for the
Insane, held at the Freemasons' Tavern, in London, on Thursday, July
17th, 1851, the following members were present;?Dr John Conolly,
visiting physician, County Middlesex Hospital for the Insane at Ilamvell;
Dr Richard Lloyd Williams, do., North Wales Hospital for the Insane,
Denbigh; Dr Kirkman, resident physician, County Suffolk Hospital for
the Insane; Dr Nesbitt, do., Northampton do.; Dr Bucknill, do.;
Devon do.; Dr Begley, resident surgeon, County Middlesex do.; Mr.
Diamond, do., County Surrey do.; Dr H. Ramsay, Gloucester do.,
Dr Stewart, resident physician, District Hospital for the Insane, Belfast;
Dr Boyd, do., County Somerset do.; Mr. Prosser, resident medical
superintendent, Leicester do.; Mr. Alderson do., Nottingham do.; Dr.
Stewart Allen, resident physician of the Marylebone Hospital for the
Insane; Mr. Ley, resident medical superintendent, Oxford and Berks
do.; Dr Wintle, do., Warneford Hospital for the Insane, Oxford; Mr.
Eccleston, do., West Derby County Hospital for the Insane, Eainhill,
Prescot; Dr Forbes Winslow, Hammersmith; Dr Henry Monro, May-
fair ; Dr William Conolly, Hayes Park; Mr. Cornwall, Fairford, Glou-
cester; Mr. Mallam, Hooknorton, Oxon; Dr Bush, Sandywell Park,
Cheltenham; Mr. Ogilvie, Bristol; Dr Bascombe, Wyke House, Brent-
ford ; Dr Cox, Fishponds, Bristol.

Dr John Conolly, being the senior member present of the Metropo-
litan Hospitals for the Insane, was requested to take the chair.
Dr Steavart, Secretary of the Association for Ireland, was requested
to act as secretary to the meeting. The minutes of the last meetings,
held in Oxford, were read and confirmed, and signed by the chairman.
Letters were read from Drs. Hitch and Williams, of Gloucester, the secre-
taries, and Dr Oliver, of the Salop Hospital for the Insane, regretting
their inability to attend the meeting. Dr Hitch having in his letter
expressed a wish to resign the office of joint-secretary, his resignation was
accepted, a vote of thanks being unanimoxisly voted to liim for his long-
continued and valuable services, and, at the same time, it was resolved
that he should be requested to continue his services as the treasurer of
the Association.

The usual Report made by the secretaries was read and adopted.
The Chairman briefly and ably addressed the meeting concerning the
objects of the Association, and pointed out some of the services it might
usefully perform, such as the revision of the Lunacy Acts, &c.
Dr ICiekman, with much effect, illustrated the necessity of a revision
of the Acts.

Dr Lloyd Williams supported Dr Kirkman's judicious and apposite
observations, and mentioned instances in which the dissent of counties
united in one asylum was not provided against, and obstructed improve-
ments.

Mr. Ley, Mr. Aldeeson, and Dr W. Conolly, respectively directed
attention to the necessity there existed for an improved state of the Acts
of Parliament relating to lunacy.

It was then resolved unanimously,?" That a committee be formed to
examine the Lunacy Acts, and to draw up a report thereon, indicating
ambiguities and defects, and suggesting alterations and amendments; such
report to be printed and circulated among the members of the Association
for their adoption, and subsequently transmitted to the Secretary of State
and to the Commissioners in Lunacy; and that the above committee con-
sist of the following members:?Dr J. Conolly, Dr Forbes Winslow
Dr Bucknill, Dr Hitch, Dr Nesbitt, Dr Boyd, Dr Corsellis, and Dr
Diamond."

Dr Forbes Winslow was requested to act as secretary to the com
mittee, and to apply for and arrange into proper form such written state
ments as might be supplied on the subject for which it was appointed,,
?which he consented to do, it being understood that although the above
committee undertook to apply themselves especially to the object for which
it was formed, yet the assistance and suggestions of all the members of
the Association would be willingly received.

The Chaieman read an extract from a letter addressed to him by
Dr Williams, of the Gloucester Hospital for the Insane, urging the pro-
priety of a petition being addressed by the Association to Parliament, for
the establishment of a Central Criminal Asylum, and observing that such
an asylum had been established by Act of Parliament in Ireland, and found
to work admirably. The Chairman, with much feeling and ability, alluded
to the unfavourable position in which criminals were now placed if the
plea of insanity was admitted, their doom being actually worse than trans-
portation, and almost worse than death.

Dr Begley said he had visited the Central Lunatic Asylum, at Dun-
drum, near Dublin, and found it excellently adapted to its purpose.
Dr Stewaet stated that he also had been visiting the Central Asylum,
which he considered admirably circumstanced in all essential respects for
such an institution, its situation, too, being most cheerful and picturesque,
and its whole management most ably and humanely conducted by Dr.
Corbett, the resident physician, appointed by government. After observ-
ing upon the great relief now afforded to the hospitals for the insane in
Ireland, by the criminal insane being placed in an entirely distinct esta-
blishment, he presented to the Association, in the name of the Government
Inspectors of Asylums in Ireland?Drs. White and Nugent?their " Fifth
General Report on the District Criminal and Private Lunatic Asylums
in Ireland," containing full particulars and statistics of the Central Asylum,
in common with all the other asylums in that country.

Dr Forbes Winslow supported the necessity for a central asylum in
England, where the criminal lunatics might be properly classified, con-
cluding his observations on this subject by alluding with much energy
and feeling to the indignities and browbeatings which of late especially,
medical witnesses of the greatest eminence and respectability were sub-
jected to, both from the bench and by the bar, when called upon to give
evidence in support of the plea of insanity in criminal cases.
Dr Kirkman advocated the importance of a criminal asylum being
established, and strongly advised that the Association should lose no time
in following the example of Ireland in a matter of so much importance,
and so much affecting the comfort and well-being of the ordinary inmates
of hospitals for the insane.

Drs. Nesbitt and Bucknili, having expressed similar views, and shown
the inconveniences and injustice of present arrangements for criminal
lunatics, it was unanimously resolved,?1. That it is desirable that there
should be a Central Asylum for Criminal Lunatics in England, distinct
from any asylum in which the insane, not criminal, are received. 2. That
Dr Williams, of the Gloucester Hospital for the Insane, be requested
to give his best consideration to this subject, and to prepare a petition,
to be submitted to the members of this Association, and to be forwarded
to the Secretary of State for the Home Department, Resolved unani-
mously, that the especial thanks of the Association be given to Drs. White
and Nugent, the Government Inspectors of Hospitals for the Insane
in Ireland, for their courtesy in now presenting the Association with
their lately published valuable annual Report, and for the great improve-
ments they nave been so instrumental in effecting in the District Hospitals
for the Insane in Ireland, by obtaining the decision of Government in
favour of none but medical men, duly qualified and experienced, being for
the future appointed the resident superintendents of those important
public institutions. Also, resolved unanimously, that Drs. White and
Nugent be elected members of this Association, and that a copy of the
foregoing resolution be duly transmitted to them by the secretaries.
The following resolutions were also agreed to:?That the Annual meet-
ing of the Association be in future held in London, on the second Saturday
of July, in each year, at the Freemasons' Tavern, at one o'clock, p.m.
That quarterly meetings, of such members of the Association as can con-
veniently attend them, be held on the first Saturday in the months of
March, June, September,* and December, in each year, at three o'clock,
p.m. (Dr Forbes Winslow offered the use of his rooms, in Albemarle-
street, for those meetings.) That Dr Diamond, of the Surrey Hospital
for the Insane, be requested to act as Metropolitan Secretary. That Dr.
Williams, of the Gloucester Hospital for the Insane, be requested to con-
tinue his valuable services as Secretary. That the annual subscription for
the purpose of defraying unavoidable expenses, be five shillings.
Mr. Alderson, of the Nottingham Hospital for the Insane, exhibited
and explained an improved lock-button, for the purpose of securing
the dress of the insane, for which the thanks of the meeting were voted
to him.

It was proposed, and agreed to, that the Association visit the new
Additional Hospital for the Insane for the county of Middlesex, at Colney
Hatch, on next day (Friday), at one o'clock, p.m. ; also, the Asylum for
Idiots, at Highgate, on Saturday forenoon, the 19th instant; and, on tho
invitation of Dr Diamond, the Surrey Hospital for the Insane, in the
* We are now writing on the 24th of September, and no quarterly meeting lias been
held?at least, the Editor of this Journal has received no summons to attend one.
Who is responsible for this neglect ?

afternoon of the same day; also to visit, on the same day, Bethlem
Hospital.
All tlie gentlemen present were voted members of tlie Association, as
also, Dr Stillvvell, of Hillingdon; Dr Tuke, Chiswick; Mr. Denne,
Hanwell; Dr Daniel, Soutkall Park; Dr White, resident physician,
Carlow District Hospital for the Insane; Dr Corbet, ditto, Central
Asylum, Dundrum; Dr Power, visiting physician, Cork District Hospital
for the Insane; Dr Hood, resident physician, Colney Hatch; Mr.
Snape, resident surgeon, Surrey Hospital for the Insane; Mr. Green,
resident medical superintendent, Borough Hospital for the Insane, Bir-
mingham; Dr Pritchard, Abington Abbey, Northampton; Dr Maxwell,
resident physician, Asylum for Idiots; Dr Wood, resident physician,
Bethlem Hospital.

It was resolved unanimously?that the cordial thanks of the meeting be
given to Dr Stewart, of the Belfast Hospital for the Insane, the Secretary
of the Association for Ireland, for his attendance and valuable services at
the meeting.

Dr Conollv having left the chair, and Dr Lloyd Williams having taken
it, it was resolved unanimously?That the marked thanks of this meeting
be given to Dr Conolly for the very able and courteous manner in which
he has fulfilled the duties as Chairman of this meeting.
First Adjourned Meeting at Colney Hatch New Hospital for the Insane
for the County of Middlesex, on Friday, July 18th.
Present.?Dr Hood, Dr Davey, resident physicians of the hospital;
Mr. Mallam, Dr Kirkman, Dr Wintle, Dr liamsey, Dr Boyd, Mr.
Eccleston, Mr. Alderson, Mr. Ogilvie, Dr Richard Lloyd Williams, Mr.
Ley, Mr. Cornwall, Dr Bush, Dr Stewart. Visitors.?Mr. Nunneley,
F.ll.C.S., Leeds; Mr. Moseley, architect of the New Hospital for the
Insane for the County of Lancaster, at Eainhill, Prescot, and the Surrey
ditto, and the New Wings at Hanwell.

The members being conducted through the entire establishment by
Doctors Hood and Davey, both gentlemen were thanked for their atten-
tions on the occasion, and Dr Hood for the hospitalities he had provided
for the Association.

A conversation having arisen amongst the members of the Association,
after the above meeting, respecting the address which had been presented
by them, some time since, to Mr. Gaskell, late medical superintendent of
the County Asylum at Lancaster, congratulating him on his appoint-
ment as one of the Commissioners in Lunacy, and to which no answer
had been supposed to have been received to the present time, but
which it now appeared had been duly given, it was resolved,?That Dr.
Williams, Gloucester, be respectfully requested to have the address above
referred to, inserted, with Mr. Gaskell's rej)lv, in the proceedings of the
Association, and printed at the same time with the minutes of this year's
meetings, for circulation amongst the members.

Second Adjourned Meeting at the Asylum for Idiots, J?arlc\ House,
Highgate, on Saturday, July 19th.

Present.?Dr Maxwell, resident physician of the asylum; Dr Ramsey,
Mr. Eccleston, Dr Bucknill, Dr Wood, resident physician, Bethlem Hos-
pital ; Dr Stewart.

Dr Maxwell having kindly brought the Association through the respec-
tive divisions, and over the grounds of the institution, they took their
leave, much pleased with Dr M.'s attention whilst conducting them over
the establishment.

The Association were received last evening by Dr Forbes Winslow, at
a conversazione, at bis residence, Sussex House, Hammersmith, a large
number of members and others being present on the occasion.
Third Adjourned Meeting at the Surrey County Hospital for the Insane,
Wandsworth, on Saturday, July 19tli.

Present.?Dr Diamond, Mr. Snape, resident medical officers; Dr.
Lloyd Williams, Mr. Eccleston, Mr. Ley, Mr. Alderson, Dr Ramsey, Dr.
Wood, Dr Stewart.

Dr Diamond and Mr. Snape conducted the members in attendance
through this large establishment, when a vote of thanks was passed to
them for their attention, &c.; after which the Association withdrew.
Fourth Adjourned Meeting at Hethlem Hospital, on Saturday, July 19th.
Present.?Dr Monro, visiting physician, and Dr Wood, resident phy-
sician of the hospital; Dr Richard Lloyd Williams, Dr Ley, Mr.
Eccleston, Dr Bucknill, Dr Ramsey, Dr iLirkman, Dr Stewart.
The members visited the several departments of the establishment, and
were shown a neat pattern window-frame, fitted up in one of the corridors,
and also a bed in use in the hospital for wet patients, both being the
designs of Dr Wood, and both appearing well calculated for their respec-
tive purposes.

The members of the Association thanked the medical officers for their
attention on the occasion of their present visit; and being honoured with,
and having accepted of, an invitation to dinner by Dr Wood, finally took
their leave, much pleased with all the attentions they had received.
