Notes of a Recent Visit to Some of the American Asylums
========================================================

:Author: J. BALL, ESQ., M.K.C.S.E.

The physical aspect of a country lias, wo believe, an influence upon tlie
character of its inhabitants; and the grandeur of American scenery?its
extensive forests?its vast lakes?and its magnificent rivers and waterfalls
?are morally suggestive of great undertakings. Hence the social institu-
tions of America are for the most part conceived upon a large and extensive
scale. Their public buildings, their street architecture, the style of their
principal cities, have a noble character, breathing rather an air of ostenta-
tious monarchy than of simple republicanism. The progress of the Ameri-
cans in science and literature has been signal; and in that department of
the profession to which this journal is dedicated, they have evinced an energy
worthy of a free and enlightened people. At this moment there are philoso-
phical works publishing in America that would do honour to Great Britain.
And to what is this to be attributed but to that spirit of liberty which
emancipates their philosophy from scholastic chains, which in European
universities too often restrict the independence of the inquiring mind.
Liberty and philosophy must ever go hand-in-hand; without intellectual
liberty there can be no progression of thought?no positive advancement
of knowledge. The liberal scale upon which all the great institutions of
America are founded, seems to outstrip European competition. Their
hospitals for the sick are admirably designed and organized?nay, we
believe that, in many respects, they are even better managed than many
in this country. Their architectural designs are vast and comprehensive.

Their wards, day-rooms, sleeping-rooms, baths, kitchens, &c., are lofty
and spacious, and well arranged; and so, likewise, we gather from the
various reports which we have from time to time analyzed, that their
lunatic asylums are admirably constructed, and managed upon the best
and most enlightened principles.

Plaving paid recently a visit to the United States, and being much inte-
rested in the subject of insanity, we inspected some of the principal
asylums in that country, a short account of which we purpose now giving.
Arriving in the state of New York, we found nearly in its centre the
city of Utica, and about a mile and a half distant from it is the New
York State Lunatic Asylum. The main building, we may observe, is.
constructed of hewn limestone; it has two wings, is three stories in
height, and occupies an area of 550 feet. The centre of the main
building is appropriated to the offices and private apartments belonging
to the officers of the establishment, and there is accommodation for
GOO patients. The halls are 225 feet in length, and 13 feet in width,
with sleeping apartments on either side, as well as a sitting-room,
dining-room, and bathing-room, en suite, capable of accommodating 30 or
40 patients. There are as many as 380 single rooms for patients, 24
for attendants, and 20 associated dormitories, each of which will accom-
modate from 5 to 12 patients. There are besides two large rooms fitted up
as hospitals, and a cliapel -which will accommodate a congregation of 500
persons. In addition to which there are various shops?1 plumber's, 2
joiners', 1 tailor's, and two printing-shops, and several work-rooms for
'females. It is lighted by gas, warmed by hot air, conducted by flues from
the basement, and there is a plentiful supply of water derived from a
canal half a mile from the building. The management of the asylum is
vested in a board of nine directors, who are appointed by the legislature ;
the majority of whom are required to reside within five miles of tlie institu-
tion. They hold office for three years, but may within that period at any
time be removed by the senate of the legislature. This board appoints
the superintendent and treasurer, and is empowered to enact such bye-
laws as may be deemed expedient for arming the other officers with
authority ; it also determines the conditions for the admission and the
?.support of patients, and the period of their discharge. Its staff" of officers
is far more effective than in any of our country asylums ; it consists of a
resident superintendent and physician, and three assistant-physicians;
a steward, matron, and two apothecaries. The power of the superinten-
.dcnt is absolute. He has the entire medical and moral control of the
.establishment, the other officers acting under his directions. His income
is 2000 dollars per year, with board and residence ; and each assistant-
iplrysician has GOO dollars per year, also with board and residence.
The following table exhibits the number of patients in the asylum during
the year 1849 :?

Number of patients, January 1, 1840
Admitted during the year
Total number in tbe course of the year
Discharged recovered .
? improved ...
,, unimproved,
Died
Males.
241
192
433
113
37
70
35
Females.
254
170
424
90
29
22
34
Total.
495
3C2
857
203
CG
48
09

By this table it will be observed, that 857 cases were under treatment
?daring the year; and of these, 203 recovered, giving a per centage of 56
on the admissions during the year, or 23| on the whole number of patients
?in the asylum. The deaths were 09, or 8 per cent, on the patients for the
year; and of these, 28 died from epidemic diseases, viz., small-pox and
? dysentery. This asylum escaped the cholera, although that disease was
.during the year fatal in the neighbourhood.

The following return shows the causes of the 69 deaths :?
DISEASES OF THE HEAD.
Meningitis     7
Epilepsy   3
Apoplexy  1
General paralysis  4
DISEASES OF THE CHEST.
Consumption       G
Pneumonia  2
Hydrothorax     1
OF THE AMERICAN ASYLUMS. 431
DISEASES OF THE ABDOMEN.
Dysentery  14
Diarrhoea     3
Perforation of intestine   X
DISEASES OF UNCERTAIN SEAT.
Small-pox   14
Exhaustion after excitement   5
Marasmus   2
General dropsy   1
Suicide  1
Puerperal fever   1
Spinal disease  1
Erysipelas   1
Old age   1

There being 14 deaths by small-pox is somewhat remarkable, as it is
difficult to trace the origin of the disease. The first occurred in a patient
who had been seven months in the asylum; no case of small-pox had
been in the neighbourhood, nor had any patient, as far as could be ascer-
tained, come from a part in which that disease prevailed. The 14 deaths
from dysentery were, with two exceptions, all demented and incurable.
The following return shows the whole number of patients admitted,
recovered, and the deaths which have occurred since the opening of the
asylum in 1843.

Number of patients admitted   237G
Recovered   1017
Improved    419
Not improved   222
Died    269
Remaining in the asylum   449
Hence, 43 per cent, recovered, 18 per cent, improved, and the deaths were
11| per cent.

In this, and all other state government asylums throughout the United
States, private patients are received at a charge above that of pauper
patients?the latter are admitted at two dollars per week, the former pay
from two dollars and fifty cents to four dollars. No distinction is made
between these two classes of patients?they all live in the same halls and
dine at the same tables. This plan appears to answer well in America,
where there is not the distinction between classes of society which pre-
vails in England, and where every person can, at the expense of the state,
receive at the public schools a liberal education.

The classification of patients according to their mental state is very per-
fect in this asylum, there being no less than twelve different classes, the
benefit derived from which arrangement is obvious. The wards may be
observed to be quiet, and it very rarely happens that any patient is placed
in seclusion or under restraint, which, when we consider the large number
of recent cases admitted, is highly creditable to the institution, and suffi-
ciently evinces the able manner in which it is conducted by its present
experienced superintendent, Dr Benedict, who has only recently been
appointed to this office, vacated by the death of the late Dr Brigham,
whose psychological investigations we have frequently had occasion to
notice. He was an accomplished physician, and an amiable and good
man.

The occupations and amusements provided for the patients constitute
one of the most prominent and praiseworthy features of this asylum.

Besides tlie workshops we have mentioned, there is a farm of 130 acres, at
which 512 patients might be observed to be farmers interested in their
agricultural pursuits, and 151 labourers. The employment is much liked,
and the patients who arc capable, are very ready and willing to be so
occupied. The women, during the day, ride, walk, and employ themselves
in making clothes, and various kinds of needle and fancy work. The
evenings are invariably devoted to some kind of rational amusement;
such as lectures, reading, music, dancing, chess, tableaux, &c. Frequently
during the winter, dramatic representations are got up, the characters
being performed entirely by the patients. There is also a school in the
asylum, daily open for persons who are disposed to receive instruction.
In one of the halls the patients hold an annual fair, at which a vast
variety of fancy articles, made by the patients themselves, are exhibited
and sold?such as carvings in wood, ivory, bone, needle-work, netting, &c.
The proceeds arising from these fairs in five years yielded 1000 dollars,
with which an organ for the chapel was bought, as well as musical instru-
ments and books for a brass band. It remains only to add, that a clergy-
man is attached to the institution, and there is generally a large attendance
of patients in the chapel every Sunday. The management of this asylum
reflects the greatest credit upon the resident superintendent, the physician,
and assistant-physicians, and indeed upon all the officers connected with
it. It is by their united zeal and their conjoint labours that results so
satisfactory are produced. Persons unacquainted practically with the
management of a lunatic asylum, and who do not know how much can
really be effected to instruct, improve, occupy, amuse, and ameliorate
generally the condition of the insane, may suspect that such accounts as
the above are exaggerated?that there is an air of Utopianism about them
which cannot be realized?but our own experience?had we not even
crossed the Atlantic?is otherwise, and the greatest encouragement we
have derived in the practice of this anxious branch of our profession, has
been the success which has attended upon a large scale, the well con-
sidered and judicious management of both public and private asylums.
Let us, however, now leave the New York State Lunatic Asylum, and
while upon our arrival trip, visit another of these admirable institutions,
the Bloomingdale Asylum?the history and statistics connected with
which, we noticed at some length in the second volume of this journal.*
This asylum is delightfully situated, about four miles from New York, a
quarter of a mile, or thereabouts, from Hudson's Biver, and commands a
magnificent prospect over the surrounding country. When this establish-
ment was opened there were in the United States only four other institu-
tions exclusively devoted to the reception and treatment of the insane.
The building is constructed of brown freestone; and in its rear are two
detached lodges for the more violent and noisy patients. The interior archi-
tectural arrangements, considering the premises were built thirty years ago,
are excellent; the corridors wide and lofty, with sleeping apartments
opening into them on either side, capable of holding from one to four
patients. But the majority of these are single rooms. In each hall there
is a dining-room, sitting-room, bath-room, en suite, and the apartments
are for the most part heated as at the New York State Asylum, by hot
air sent from furnaces on the basement story. Each sitting-room, how-
ever, has an open coal fire during winter, which, if less economical
and convenient in some respects, is certainly more cheerful, which is a
more important consideration than might cursorily be supposed. The
apartments in which patients are assembled heated by any other con-

The Journal of Psychological Medicine and Mental Pathology," vol. 2, p. 189,1819.
trivance than an open fire-grate, must be, morning, noon, and evening,
during the dreary days of winter, miserably gloomy. The poor insane,
conscious many of them that their malady has imposed upon them a
species of temporary imprisonment, are very sensible of all external
impressions; they should be surrounded with everything that has a
cheerful aspect; the very colour of the walls of the apartments has an
effect upon their mind. To return. The airing courts are spacious, and
tastefully planted with trees, among which seats are distributed, and on
the men's side is a " ten pin alley," a favourite game in America, which
affords healthy exercise as well as recreation for patients. The whole
establishment is well supplied with water derived from the Croton "Water
Works, the source of the city supply.

The internal government of this institution?which is a branch of the
New York State Asylum?is vested in a committee of six officers, who
are appointed by the board of governors of the general hospital, from
among their own numbers; tlie proceedings of this committee being sub-
ordinate to those of the general board. The resident officers are the
physician, warder, matron, and apothecary. There is no assistant physi-
cian, as in nearly all the other American asylums. The following table
shows the number of admissions, discharges, and deaths during the year
1849:?

Number of patients in the house, January 1,1849..
Number admitted during the year
Whole number of cases in the asylum ..
Discharged during the year, recovered .,.
? ? improved ...
? ? not improved.
Died
Males.
59
117
20
17
11
13
Females.
CO
37
97
18
10
2
119
95
214
41
33
13
21

Ten of the above cases were from intemperance; eight having been
admitted during the year, and two old cases being already in the asylum.
Seven of the recoveries were of this description, leaving only thirty-seven
cases of recovery from insanity proper. Of these the following returns,
showing the duration of the attack, may be read with interest:?

27, at the time of admission, had been insane less than 0 months
7 ? .. ? 1 year
? 2 years
? 1 month
between 1 and 2 months
2 and 3
3 and 4
4 and 5
5 and 0
0 and 9
9 and 12
12 and 15
35 and 30
We observe by this return, the larger number of recoveries took in
those who were admitted into the asylum while the attack was yet recent,
and evinces, as so frequently lias been proved, the expediency in all cases
of insanity, of early treatment. The present talented pliysician of this
asylum, Dr JNicholls, has frequently occasion to lament the premature
removal of a large number of patients, owing to their friends being in
narrow circumstances and unable to continue their support in the asylum.
The number of cures-is hereby greatly reduced; and it is observed that
those who are thus prematurely discharged often become absolutely incur-
able. The mistaken kindness of relations and friends who are apt to
listen to the entreaties of persons who are only partially recovered, leads
to the same unhappy result; prematurely discharged, such patients when
all moral restraint is removed, speedily relapse, and return either to this,
or are sent to some other asylum, with the chances of recovery consider-
ably diminished. Such cases are marked as having been discharged
improved.

The deaths were twenty-one, or 9? per cent, for the whole number
under treatment during the year, and the causes of death in these cases
were as follows:?
Apoplexy  4
Typo-maniacal delirium  2
Delirium tremens   1
Dysentery  3
Diarrhoea  4
Cancer    1
Suicide  2

Cause not stated in the report  4

This asylum escaped the cholera, which was prevalent in the neighbour-
hood, the city of New York having suffered greatly from the ravages of
this pestilence.

Only private patients are now admitted into this asylum; formerly
pauper lunatics were received, but these have been transferred to the city
Pauper Asylum, on Blackwell's Island, and the State Asylum, at Utica.
The charge for private patients varies from four to fifteen dollars per
week. The amusements consist in lectures, evening parties, occasional
balls; which are always conducted with great spirit and decorum. The
majority of patients belonging to .the upper and middle classes are not
accustomed to bodily labour, therefore few are willing to work in the farm
or gardens; the former consists of fifty acres, the latter are large and
well laid out, with an excellent conservatory. A carriage and horses are
kept for the use of the patients. Restraint is occasionally, but very
rarely, had recourse to, and in such cases Wyman's bed-strap is the appa-
ratus used, which has simply the effect of keeping the patient in bed and
preventing violence to others.

Bidding adieu to the excellent and well-conducted asylum, let us direct
our course towards Blackwell's Island, one of those small oases with which
Long Island Sound abounds. Here we find a pauper asylum, erected by
the corporation of New York, for patients belonging to that city, which
was opened in the year 1839. The island upon which it is situated is five
miles from the city hall, and has the advantage, from its insular position,
of being isolated yet of easy access. The building is constructed of stone,
and consists of two wings radiating from a centre; which central portion
is appropriated to offices and apartments for the resident staff. There are
also two detached buildings, or lodges, as they are termed, for refractory
and dirty patients. The following table exhibits the number of admissions,
discharges, and deaths, during the year 1849.

Number of patients, January 1, 1849
Admitted during the year
Discharged
Died
Remaining in the asylum, January 1, 1850
Males.
187
229
145
85
181
Females.
250
230
138
127
215
Total.
437
459
283
212
401

The number of deaths here is very large, nearly 24 per cent.; but 86 of
these died from Asiatic cholera, and 48 from diarrhoea, showing how
severely this asylum suffered from these diseases. Those among whom
the greatest fatality occurred were demented and of dirty habits. The
largest number of deaths occurred iu the months of June and July ; espe-
cially on the 9th and 16th of July, the preceding days having been exceed-
ingly damp and unpleasant. Eight per cent, of those who died had been
in the asylum more than ten years, and probably more than one-half had
been insane from ten to twenty-five years. The subjoined table shows
the causes of death in 212 cases
Congestion of the brain   12
Apoplexy  5
Epilepsy   5
Paralysis  2
General paralysis  3
Delirium tremens   3
Softening of the brain    1
DISEASES OF THE CHEST.
Phthisis   21
Typhoid pneumonia      1
DISEASES OF THE ABDOMEN.
Asiatic cholera    86
Diarrhoea  48
Dysentery  4
Albuminuria    1
Chronic peritonitis  1
SEAT OF DISEASE UNCEBTAIN.
Scrofula   1
Scurvy      1
? Suicide    1
Typhoid fever  8
Erysipelas     2
Dropsy    1
Old age  4

Exhaustion from exposure to cold before admission  1
Total deaths from all causes  212
Of the 283 patients discharged, 212 had recovered, and 60 were suffi-
ciently improved to return to their friends ; thus giving nearly 50 per cent,
of recoveries on the admissions, and a little under 25 per cent, on the
whole number under treatment during the year.
The following table shows the form of the disease in the 283 patients
discharged during the year;?

Mania
Mania, partial
Mania, puerperal
Mania, moral
Dementia
Dementia senile
Delirium tremens
Hysteria
Febrile delirium
Improper subjects for the asylum
Recovered.
132
30
8
1
1
36
X
3
Improved,
31
16
1
12
Not improved.
303
46
8
3
16
3
36
1
3
4

By this table it will be perceived that 40 of the cases of recoveries "were
not, strictly speaking, cases of insanity, which, being deducted, leaves only
37-2- per cent, of recoveries on the number of admissions of insanity proper.
The following is the term of residence of those discharged:?

Less than 3 months
From 3 to 6 months
From 6 to 12 months
From 1 to 3 years ..
From 3 to 6 years ..
130
47
23
11
1
Improved
34
10
7
6
3
Not improved. Total
169
61
30
19
4

The medical staff of this asylum is composed of two visiting physicians
?Drs. Ogden and Williams ; a resident physician and superintendent?
Dr Eoxney and two assistant physicians, the three latter gentlemen being
resident officers. Originally, four visiting physicians were appointed ; the
other two were Drs. Pliny Earle and Macdonald. The former was pre-
vented from acting by being appointed physician to the Bloomingdale
Asylum. The latter gentleman died in May, 1850. These vacancies have
not been filled up, and the duties, therefore, of visiting physicians, devolve
entirely on Drs. Ogden and Williams. It should be mentioned, that there
is a larce library in this asylum, with a good selection of works on history,
biography, and general literature, to winch the patients at all hours of the
day have free access.

Having completed our survey of Blackwell Island, we had some idea of
winging our way over to the Ohio Lunatic Asylum, and the Pennsylvania
Hospital for the insane, and afterwards visiting the establishment of idiots
at the Massachusetts; but the weather was cold and stormy; pressing
engagements awaited us at home; so, thanking our industrious ana
talented guide for his friendly services, we steered southward, promising
him that we should avail ourselves of his information in the present num-
ber of The Journal of psychological Medicine.
