Sleep, Dreaming, and Insanity
==============================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
OCTOBEE 1, 1851.
Art. I.?

If a man were always to enact liis dreams he would not consider
sleep to be
" Tired nature's sweet restorer."

It is the perfect repose of all cerebral action that constitutes sleep, in
the strictly philosophical acceptation of the term; hence even the
" stuff our dreams are made of" has a material influence on the cere-
brum, and prevents a total cessation of its functions. It is true that
perfect sleep is rare in this sense; and it is therefore characterized,
when it occurs, as deep sleep, ?profound slumber, and by other phrases
significative of that total cessation of cerebral activity which is its great
characteristic and object.

We have said that sleep is the perfect repose of the encephalic me-
chanism. The merely vital mechanism goes on as usual: in some of its
parts more slowly, but perhaps in others more vigorously?the repose
of one system helping the activity of another. It is true that it has
been called the image of death by writers of various classes, but, physi-
ologically, it is a state of life as vigorous in its immediate sphere as the
* Sleep and Dreams. Two Lectures delivered at the Bristol Literary and Philo-
sophical Institution. By John Addington Symonds, M.D., Consulting Physician to the
Bristol General Hospital. 8vo. 1851.

Sleep Psychologically considered, with Reference to Sensation and Memory.
By Blanchard Fosgate, M.D., Physician to the New York State Prison at Auburn.
8vo, pp. 188. 1850.
What is Mesmerism? An Attempt to explain its Phenomena, &c. By A. Wood,
M.D., &c. Edinburgh: 1851.
The Mesmeric Mania of 1851, &c. By J. Hughes Bennett, M.D., &c. &c.
Edinburgh: 1851. waking state. It seems very probable that, during sleep, tlie reparation
and nutrition of tlie organism go on much more actively than during
the waking state, consequently organic or vegetative vitality is more
energetic. To facilitate these objects, the active machinery of the body
is stopped, or moves more slowly all that mechanism which is simply
the agent of the spiritual element of our nature standing still absolutely;
while the great wheels of life?those of respiration and circulation?
move proportionately more slowly, and only to that extent which the
activity of the organic functions requires.

It seems to be a universal law of animated nature, that repose shall
follow activity. Even in vegetable life we find sleep is the rule, and in
animal life we know of no exceptions. So universal a law must needs
be considered to be a necessary law; hence we conclude that periodic
repose or quiescence is necessary to the healthy action of organisms.
There are apparent exceptions observed when Ave come to examine the
details of special organs. Thus, for example, the heart never ceases to
beat unless under abnormal circumstances. In this and other cases
there is probably some compensation in the rhythmical action of the
machinery; but, anyhow, during sleep the heart beats much more
slowly, and there are instances on record in which its nerves became
torpid with the cerebro-spinal system, so that the sufferer began to
sleep the sleep of death so soon as his eyelids drooped, requiring a con-
stant watcher at his bedside to awake him from his perilous slumber.
We do not think it necessary to detail the ordinary phenomena of
sleep seriatim, but rather prefer to occupy our pages with an investiga-
tion of the nature of the changes which occur in the cerebral system
during sleep, with reference to the phenomena of dreaming in particular,
and with the object of applying the results of our investigations to the
elucidation of insanity. It has long been matter of observation that
the delirious and the insane appear to be in a dream; with this differ-
ence, that they act their dreams; whereas, in ordinary dreaming, the
motor system never participates in the changes which the sensorial
system undergoes. It is obvious that a knowledge of the state of the
cerebrum in dreaming will very much facilitate a better understanding
of the state of the cerebrum in insanity, and help to elucidate the much
disputed question as to the pathology of that disease.

Two works have more particularly attracted our attention lately in
reference to this subject, the titles of which we have given; they are
both interesting publications. They have a further interest beyond
this special subject, from the fact that two 01* three of Dr Fosgate's
countrymen have been journeying through this country for the purpose
of lecturing 011 a pseudo-philosophy termed "electro-biology," and
inducing a temporary condition in the cerebra of certain of their
audiences closely analogous to, if not identical with, that more perma-
nent condition which constitutes insanity on the one hand, and som-
nambulism on the other. It is not a little characteristic of the gulli-
bility of the people at large, that numbers of individuals have been
found, in our principal towns, willing to have their brain and mental
powers subjected to the control of these itinerant strangers before
numerous audiences, without any inquiry as to the probable results of
these empirical proceedings on the delicate organ subjected to experi-
ment. We have reason to think that the evil results of these practices
are little known or even suspected. To tamper with the functions of
so delicate and important an organ as the brain, simply for the gratifi-
cation of a foolish curiosity, or the purposes of gain, is hardly less than
criminal, and cannot be too strongly reprobated; nevertheless, the folly
having been committed, we think it right to make the bane serve as the
antidote, by also drawing some illustrations of the condition of the
brain in sleep, dreaming, and insanity, from the acknowledged pheno-
mena of this pretended science, as well as from the general literature of
the subject.

In the first place, let us inquire"what portion of the brain is involved
in dreaming and in insanity; then, what is the mode of action of that
portion, what are the phenomena manifested when its normal mode
of action is distui'bed, what are the agents of the change, and what
practical conclusions may be deduced. We believe that there is no
difference of opinion amongst physiologists as to what portions of the
brain are affected in dreaming. Dr Symonds, in his able and philoso-
phical lectures, very concisely states the present views of the leading
British neurologists. The abolition of sensation in profound sleep, and
its modifications in dreaming, point to the nerves of sensation as being-
involved primarily in the change. These are connected, (as Dr.
Symonds observes, in accordance with the views of Dr Carpenter and
others,) either directly, or through the spinal cord, with certain portions
of the brain termed the sensory ganglia, the chief of which are the
corpora quadrigemina and tlialami optici. To these centres of sensa-
tion are conveyed the impressions made by outward agents, and here
they probably become objects of consciousness. These sensory ganglia,
therefore, have their functions modified in all those states of the cere-
brum in which sensations, as such, are no longer felt?or, in other
words, when the changes induced ordinarily in the sensory ganglia by
impressions, are either not produced, although the impressions reach
them, (and even pass through them,) or, if produced, do not become
objects of consciousness. It is necessary to bear this principle well in
mind, if we would perfectly comprehend the phenomena to be subse-
quently noticed?namely, that the impression is one thing, and the
change induced in the sensory ganglia another?the two being as dis-
tinct as cause and effect; that if the faculty of sensation be abolished or
modified, it is from some functional change in the sensory ganglia;
that, nevertheless, the impressions may reach the ganglia, and the
changes may be induced by them, yet the latter may not become objects
of consciousness, as sensation.

Now, there are numerous animals which appear to have nothing
superadded to these sensory ganglia; these constituting, in fact, the
whole of their cerebrum. They live, therefore, simply a sensational
life, and have probably little more knowledge of cause and effect than
those animals who have only the sympathetic system of nerves. They
have more extensive relations to external things?to the undulations,
for example, of ethereal matter, which, reaching the auditory or optic
nerve, cause auditory and visual sensations; and they may have a
quicker perception of pleasure and pain; but their conservative and other
instinctive acts are as mechanical and automatic as in the lowest tribes
of animals. Their cerebral senses are superadded to strengthen and
widen their instinctive life; they have no manifest mind, whatever
may be the nature of that which regulates their actions so wisely and
adaptively; and they have no true organ of mind. If a man is
deprived of the organ of mind, or, what is the same thing, if its func-
tions be abolished, those of the sensory ganglia continuing in activity,
he would be, for the time, a sensational animal only, and his actions
would correspond.

Now these sensory ganglia lying along at the base of the brain,
are, in fact, only the portals to the portions of the brain resting upon
tlieiu, and with which they are in intimate connexion. The mechanical
apparatus?the mere organ of sense?collects and communicates the
right impressions to the nerve, (for every nerve of sense has its own
class of impressions, which alone it can receive, and none other,) and
the nerve transmits them to the ganglion in virtue of certain changes
induced in it by the impressions. Arrived at the ganglion, they begin from
a new starting-point, as it were, and the ganglion is to the cerebral matter
beyond what the nerve is to the ganglion. This is exactly the arrange-
ment which exists inferiorly in the spinal cord, with reference to the
nerves of touch and common sensation. Entering the grey matter of
the cord, they carry impressions to it which excite changes therein?
sensational in their character if the result of those changes is trans-
mitted upwards as from a new starting-point ? and automatically
motorial, if, instead, of so passing upwards, they are transmitted across
the spinal cord into the motor tracts.

Where then, in this arrangement, are we to locate sensation? The
more recent views of Dr Carpenter are adopted by Dr Wood, and
have the merit of simplicity. Dr Wood observes that there exist several
centres,?namely, first, of muscular action in the spinal cord; secondly,
of volition seated in the corpora striata and adjacent parts, having*
ample communications with the spinal cord downwards, and the
cerebral hemisphere upwards; thirdly, a centre of sensation, inde-
pendent like the others, but at the same time closely connected with
the centre of volition; this is seated in the tlialami optici and corpora
olivaria, with which all the nerves of sense are more or less connected.
These conjointly, Dr Wood remarks, appear to form a ganglion for the
sensations communicated by the nerves of touch, and therefore
destined for the reception of sensitive impressions. The close associa-
tion between them and the proper optic ganglia is explained by the
close association between the senses of sight and touch, which is appa-
rent both from the manner in which our ideas of external objects ara
communicated to us, and also from the joint operation of those senses
in directing muscular movements. Fourthly, a centre of emotions,
which is to be found in the mesocepliale, its influence extending
upwards to the hemispheres, backwards to the cerebellum, downwards
to all the nerves of sensation and motion. Fifthly, another independent
centre, seated in the cerebral convolutions, and the instrument of mental
operations?namely, perception, memory, judgment, imagination, etc.
In addition to these five centres (Dr Wood only counts them as four)
there is a centre for the combination of muscular movements, and
another for respiration and deglutition. According to these views,
(which are substantially those of Dr Symonds,) sensation is seated in
the olivary bodies and optic tlialami. But what are Ave to understand
by the term sensation, as used by Dr Wood? This he nowhere defines,
and we are inclined to think he has not a very exact notion of the
sense in which he uses it, further than that sensation consists in " our
ideas of external things." Let us take an example. Dr Symonds
states, that he remembers once in his sleep witnessing a prolonged
storm of thunder and lightning, which he was afterwards able to trace
to the light of a candle brought suddenly into the dark room where he
had fallen asleep, and to the noise made in opening a door, the lock of
which was never turned without a good deal of grating and rattling.
Now, it is obvious that in instances of this kind there is no sensation
in the true meaning of the term, whether as restricted (with Dr Car-
penter, Dr Bennett, and others) to the consciousness of an impression,
or as including " ideas of external things." The impression of light
and sound reached the sensorium, it is true, but not to excite sen-
sations, inasmuch as a combined result followed, and series of asso-
ciated ideas were excited, constituting the one idea of a thunder-storm.
It was this idea of which the mind became conscious. Psychological
phenomena exactly analogous are often observed in the delusions of
the insane, as when pain in the epigastrium or uterus excites the
delusion of a wolf, or fire, or serpent, being contained in the stomach
or bowels, and the like. In all these cases the sensation is contained
in the idea; and since the hemispherical ganglia are the centres of ideas
of this class, Ave conclude that they also are amongst the seats of
s ensation.

Dr Symonds thus points out the connexion of the nervous centres
with sleep. When it is healthy and perfect, action is suspended in the
sensory ganglia, the corpora striata, the cerebellum, a considerable por-
tion of the hemispherical ganglia, or cerebral hemispheres, (some portion
being employed in dreaming,) and those parts of the spinal cord which
are used in the transmission of sensational impressions or volitional
impulses. The medulla oblongata must not sleep, or respiration would
stop. When the sleeper talks, the nerves which animate the vocal
muscles are awake, and answer to the ideas and emotions developed in
the hemispherical ganglia. In simple sleep-walking, or the minor
degree of somnambulism, (the senses being still asleep,) the cerebellum
is awake, and perhaps also the corpora striata in some degree, together
with the related portions of the spinal cord. But in that form of som-
nambulism in which the subject of it sees and hears, though under the
influence of the dream, the parts awake are the sensory ganglia, the
corpora striata, portions of the cerebral lobes, the cerebellum, and the
related portions of the spinal cord. This is an ingenious hypothetical
organology, but a moment's consideration shows that it leaves a very
large number of residual phenomena.

How is it, for example, (to mention one of many,) that the somnam-
bulist sees and hears only in relation to his dream1? Dr Fosgate
mentions an instance of this kind with which he was familiar. The
subject, a merchant's clerk, was of a sanguineo-nervous temperament?
irritable and timid. It was a favourite amusement with his fellow-clerks
to commence a conversation with him (as soon as he was sufficiently
asleep not to be easily aroused) relative to robbers breaking into the
store-house. From his timorous disposition, this subject was undoubt-
edly on his mind when he retired to rest, and therefore could, by skilful
management, readily be made tlie theme of his thoughts in sleep. By
this management he could be induced to converse, leave his bed, dress,
go into the street, and combat any person who should oppose him in
the feigned character of a robber. On awaking he could relate nearly
the whole transaction. Now, in this and similar examples the senses
cannot be said to be shut, or sensation abolished. Touch, hearing,
sight, are all open, but only to a certain class of impressions?namely,
those which are in relation to the series of ideas constituting the dream.
It is evident, from all these considerations, that the writers before us
have not attained to a true theory of sensation. Their views are, how-
ever, of a suggestive character, and in that respect useful. In the cases
just mentioned an interesting analogy may be traced. It is well
established that only certain kinds of impressions can be made on the
sensory apparatus. Light and visual objects have no influence on the
sense of hearing; simple or combined sounds cannot reach the sensorium
through the nerves of vision. In like manner, when the right impres-
sions have reached their respective ganglia, something more is wanting
to the completion of the mental act which they excite, and they must
go on or forwards to another portion or other portions of the nervous
centres adapted for their reception, and ready to be influenced by them.
No one sense is solely in operation during our waking state, except at
the moment of the act of attention; the normal ideas which pass through
the mind are seldom, if ever, compounded solely of the changes excited
through one nerve of sense; unconsciously to ourselves we bring two
or more into operation, and it is the combined or conjoint result in the
brain which is presented to the mind, or of which, in other words, we
become conscious. Hence if it so happen that this conjoint operation
is prevented, by any change whatever in the cerebrum sufficient for the
effect (as occurs in sleep, somnambulism, and insanity), the ideas are
incongruous and imperfect; consequently the external world is not
placed before the mind in its conjoint relations, and the perceptions are
erroneous.

Where, then, we again ask, is the seat of sensation ? To answer this
question, let us more strictly define what is meant by the term. We
have just used the term perception. Now perception is continually
confounded with sensation by physiological and popular writers, and,
without doubt, they are so closely allied, or so intimately connected
with each other, that sensation and perception constitute one mental
act. Still, philosophically, they must be discriminated. Sensation is
applied to feelings irrespective of the cause. Perception includes not
only the feelings, but the external object or thing causing the feelings.
When the higher faculties of the mind are in operation on abstract
ideas, the perceptions of them are conceptions, notions, &c. If an
animal feel, it has been long supposed that it will manifest its faculty of
sensation by corresponding movements; it was therefore an established
proposition, that as certain adapted movements always followed the
application of a stimulus to the nerves, those movements necessarily
proved that the animal felt when the stimulus was applied. Hence an
abundant source of error; for it has long been known to physiologists
that certain movements of an admirably adapted character inva-
riably result from simply acting upon the material organ of mind, or
upon a portion of it, by physical irritants. For want of a better
phrase, or from a reluctance to coin a new phraseology, this property of
the organism was termed corporeal sensation?a contradiction in terms;
nevertheless the doctrine was adopted by a metaphysical school, and
the term sensation was used to indicate this corporeal sensation, or, in
other words, to indicate the adapted and, apparently, rational respond-
ence of the organism to certain impressions made on the nervous
system independently of consciousness. It made no difference whether
the impressions were made directly on the nervous centres, or, in other
words, were centric; or whether they were peripheral?that is to say,
reached the nervous centres from the surface of the body along the
continuous nerve-fibrils running thence inwards.

Now, it has been fully shown, that these reflex movements are alto-
gether independent of mind 3 that, in fact, the will and consciousness
have nothing whatever to do with them. They not only go on when
both the consciousness and will are abolished, but even after the head is
separated from the body, and all mental action (if it be granted that
the mind is seated in the brain) is rendered impossible. It has also
been fully shown, and, indeed, is a matter within the sphere of any
one's observation, that although the sensation or the feeling of pleasure
or pain may accompany a movement thus excited, and occur coinci-
dentally, the movement is not caused by the sensation, for we find that
the sensation often induces us to exercise an act of intellectual will?or,
in other words, to control the resulting movements. What really
occurs when simple impressions are made on the nerves is this; if they
be such as the impressed nerve is adapted to receive and transmit, they
are received and transmitted to the ganglion or mass of grey matter in
connexion with that nerve: by virtue of an innate property of the gan-
glion, certain movements result, which are such as are adapted to fulfil
one or other of the instincts of the animal?namely, the preservation
and well-being of the individual, the propagation of the species, and
the protection of the young creature. The impression may be indica-
tive of what will aid in the fulfilment of these instincts; in this case, if
felt, it will excite the sensation of pleasure, or, if not felt, will excite
movements which are observed to accompany the sensation of pleasure.
On the other hand, should the impression be indicative of what will
obstruct the fulfilment of those instincts, it will, if felt, excite the sen-
sation of pain; or, if not felt, the movements which are known to
accompany that sensation. In both cases, the movements or vital acts
thus excited are conservative either of the organism or of the species?
aiming to obtain that which is beneficial, or avert that Avliicli is inju-
rious ; but the whole takes place in the simplest forms, without any
reasoning, or perception, or conception?there is no intellectual act?
simply the feeling of pleasure or pain.

There can be no doubt whatever that in this series of vital changes
there is a change or changes in the central ganglion, differing accord-
ing as pleasure or pain is excited, and reacting on the motor appa-
ratus in accordance with the changes?which (as we have seen) corre-
spond to the necessities of the organism. The individual organism is
not conscious of any change?it does not even know that there is a
ganglion?it may not even be endowed with semiconsciousness?yet
the act of consciousness takes place; it becomes sensible of pleasure
or of pain; and its vital mechanism is duly and properly put into
motion. If Ave analyse the stages of this process we find that for its
integrity it is requisite that the impression complete a circle?namely,
from the surface to the sensory portion of the ganglion, thence through
the ganglion to the motor portion, and from the motor portion to the
vital apparatus or mechanism of the periphery. Now, the act of feeling
takes place at the moment of centric action, or midway in the stage,
when the adapted action is excited by the proper changes in the motor
portion of the ganglion, and the impression passes over to it from the
sensory portion, occupying but one moment of time. The proofs of
these views are to be found in pathology and experimental physiology ;
we need only, as to the latter, refer to Grainger, Yolkmann, Stilling,
Van Deen, and others; as to the former, the works of numerous recent
writers on diseases of the nervous system. In sleep, this circle is
interrupted.

What, however, most merits the attention of the psychologist, is the
great and fundamental principle of life, that all vital acts are adapted,
that is to say, display the operation of that mental force which in man
is termed reason, in animals, instinct. It is a remarkable circumstance
that this principle and its laws of action have been almost altogether
neglected by neurologists, by psychologists, and by the greater number
of the students of metaphysics. This was not the method of the
ancient philosophers, nor even of the fathers of modern metaphysics.
To them, as well as the ancients, it was known as the hylozoic prin-
ciple, or as phusis, (hence the primary meaning of the term physiology
differs from the common meaning;) by the true Atheists, as the govern-
ing essence of the universe; by certain schools of Deists, as God, &c.
We are satisfied the greatest elucidation of what are now impenetrable
mysteries in mental philosophy may be derived from this quarter, so
soon as physiologists have attained to the height of the great argu-
ment; and we may here observe, that henceforth it will be found
impossible to limit the investigation of neurological phenomena to a
study of the structure and functions of the nervous system?for this
reason, that the phenomena we have just analysed take place in the
same order or sequence in animals totally devoid of a nervous system,
in germs of every kind, in vegetable life, and, in short, in every form of
organism. The same great law is evidently in operation throughout
animated nature; we see it in the laws of life; in the operations of
instinct; in the works of reason. There is hardly an art or science
which dignifies humanity, or ministers to the comfort and well-being of
mankind, which is not to be traced in the operations of the blindly
working "vital principle," or of the wonderful manifestations of
instinct. Unconscious of the hidden bearings of his argument, Pope
touches admirably on this connexion of reason with instinct.
" Learn from tlie birds what food tlie thickets yield;
Learn from the beasts the physic of the field;
Thy arts of building from the bee receive;
Learn of the mole to plough, the worm to weave;
Learn of the little nautilus to sail,
Spread the thin oar, and catch the driving gale;
Here subterranean works and cities see ;
There towns aerial on the waving tree.
Learn each small people's genius, policies,
The ants' republic, and the realm of bees."
Universal science is pre-existent in nature; every branch of
physics is practised by vegetable and animal organisms; not without a
regard to the beautiful: hence our conviction that the whole range of
psychological phenomena must be studied before we can lighten and
enlighten
" the burden and the mystery
Of all this unintelligible world."

Now, the process, the analysis of which we have given, contains in
it not only the basis of sensation and perception, but also of volition.
In reasoning animals, the impression passes upwards to the hemi-
spherical ganglia, and the act of will takes place at the moment the
consequent movement is determined. At the same moment the act of
perception also occurs, and the idea or consciousness of causation and
the adaptation of the acts take place. At the same moment there is
also sensation; but the sensation thus excited in combination with a
perception, differs from what we may term a primary or fundamental
sensation. To have what is termed the sensation of hardness or soft-
ness, it is requisite that the tactile apparatus be brought firmly in
contact with a hard body, as marble?of roughness, or smoothness,
that they should be brought firmly in contact by means of a similar, yet
different adaptation of the muscular apparatus; and so the automatic,
but conscious use of the muscular system must take place; otherwise
there could be no perception of hardness or roughness, or the con-
trary. But the perception having taken place, the sensation which
accompanies it may be resolved into a feeling of that which is con-
gruous or incongruous with the well-being of the organism?the
rough and hard being likely to be injurious, the smooth and soft the
contrary.

As all perceptions may be pleasing or the contrary, there must be
some mechanism in the cerebral hemispheres, as well as in the simpler
central ganglia, whereby they are felt to be pleasing and displeasing;
and this is another reason why Ave think sensation cannot be limited to
the basilar ganglia of the encephalon. It is sufficient that there be
already a condition of the cerebral hemispheres, such, that when new
ideas are excited, the changes which accompany their excitation are
found to be congruous or incongruous with the substrata already
existent. This condition has been theorized on by various writers, but
its true nature is not yet understood. All we can do to illustrate it is
by the way of analogy. Just as we find creatures born into the world
with their nervous system so constituted that certain impressions are
painful, or the contrary, so from various causes the nervous system
may become so constituted that certain ideas become painful, or the
contrary. Amongst these causes are acquired habits, prejudices, esta-
blished modes of thought?in short, all modes of mental and vital
action, by which new substrata are developed. Ideas, if congruous with
such, give pleasure, if incongruous, are painful.

Having thus cleared the ground, we are in a better position to
understand what a sensation is and is not. Obviously, it is not merely
the consciousness of an impression neither in theory nor in fact; equally
obviously, it is the consciousness of a change, or of changes, produced
in the organ of consciousness, directly or indirectly, by impressions,
one or more. The point of consciousness is, in fact, that point in the
general organ in which the changes take place, and may differ accord-
ing to the nature of our sensations and perceptions. Hence it is
possible to have a double and treble consciousness; to have also at one
time pleasing, at another displeasing, sensations and conceptions from
the same source. We are also in a better position to understand what
consciousness is, and what relations it bears to the encephalic ganglia
generally. We have said that it is necessary to sensation and motion
that a circle in the nervous system be completed. Now, the body is a
unit?it is indivisible?literally, an individual. It is true that limbs
may be removed, and even the nervous system partially destroyed;
still it is without injury to the unity of the consciousness, and simply
from the fact, that the completion of the circle is in the sensorium.
There every part of the body is represented, as it were, and although
the mere mechanical apparatus may be removed, the vital unit remains
intact, until the destroyer, entering the sanctuary of thought, crushes
the admirable mechanism of the divine mind contained within, and the
circle is rendered incomplete.

And so when deep sleep falls upon man, and he has dreams and
visions of the night, the machine is thrown out of gear, and the circle
is imperfect. The substrata of past thoughts are awakened into activity
by various causes?sometimes ideas hid deeply in the caverns of
memory arc again developed, and vivid phantasms pass before the con-
sciousness in infinite variety, the dreamer wondering whence he has
got them, and puzzled with the fantastic tricks his memory and
imagination play him. Impressions reaching the central axis from
every point of the periphery, excite a thousand ripples (if we may be
permitted the analogy) in the cerebral sensorium, each of which passes
before the consciousness Avitli inconceivable rapidity?undulating on
ever, sometimes in well-ordered series of waves, so that connected
thoughts arise in the mind with the precision of instinct, or in mar-
vellous and incongruous combinations, with the effect to the mind's
eye of a psychal kaleidoscope. That the cerebral matter is endowed
with properties, such, that it is capable of these changes, is manifest
enough from a consideration of the fact, that not only does the nervous
?organisation of perfect insects and vertebrates manifest phenomena
equally wonderful, but even the amorphous microscopic germ contains
within it, and dependent entirely upon the integrity of its organisation,
that property whereby in well-ordered and admirably adapted sequence,
the whole subsequent acts of the organism is performed.

Now what is the nature of the changes which occur in the cerebrum
during dreaming, and its allied state, insanity l To determine this,
we have to refer to the nature of the changes which occur normally in
thought; and if we would ascertain this again, we must turn our atten-
tion to the changes which occur in the central axis of animals endowed
only with instinct, and in the spinal cord during reflex acts. Now
it is only by analogy we can in any way carry out these inquiries.
Professor Gregory, indeed, hopes that, very shortly, clairvoyants will de-
termine these identical questions by simple visual observation ; that is
to say, will be able to sec the changes which occur in the brain in acts of
thought; to us, however, this short and ready road is utterly closed ;
and as the microscope cannot aid us, and vivisections are useless, we have
110 other method than the method of analogy. Let us, then, pursue it
in as simple a manner as we can. When the foot of a headless frog is
irritated it is retracted, and the animal will even leap; if it be put into
water, (provided the necessary conditions are attended to,) it will
move its limbs as in swimming, and, in reality, the decapitated animal
will swim. Now it is certain that, to perform these acts, a certain
combination of numerous muscles is requisite, whereby their contrac-
tions are adapted to move the levers, (the bones to which they are
attached,) so that the acts of retraction of the leg, and of swimming
and leaping, will take place. It is equally certain that the volition or
consciousness of the animal is not the power by which this necessary
combination is effected; while it is also equally certain, from multitudes
of experiments, that the power (whatever it may be) is in the nervous
system, and particularly in the central ganglia, inasmuch as the inte-
grity of that system is necessary to the production of the movement at
all. In a conscious being, (as man,) an act of volition is the same,
in one important point; for when a person withdraws his limb from
an irritating agent, or leaps, or swims, he has no knowledge whatever
of the muscles which he combines, or, indeed, of the fact that he has
muscles at all. Muscular action has been likened to a performance on
the pianoforte, and the mind has been represented as playing on the roots
of the motor nerves, or their prolongation into the corpora striata,
just as a performer plays upon the keys of a piano. How erroneous
and useless the analogy is apparent enough; the mind simply wills
the act, and it is done, provided the mechanism be in order; if that
be deranged, it is not done. In like manner, when we reason, or, in
other words, deduce the cause from the effect, the mind acts with the
rapidity of instinct, and we even draw our conclusions, provided we
have a perfect knowledge of the data, with the precision of instinct.
This is almost paradoxical, but it is the fact, and so much so, that the
mind thus acts even still more instinctively in its method, for it will
pass through a whole train of thought, examine the premises, and draw
conclusions, and yet the individual be quite unconscious of this opera-
tion of his own mind; so great is the analogy between the workings of
instinct and of reason.

Although our views hardly bring us nearer to a knowledge of the
nature of reason, will, and consciousness, they widen, to an infinite extent,
the analogies by which we can determine their relations to the material
organisation on the one hand, and the spiritual organisation on the
other. The changes taking place in the central axis in the ordinary
and multitudinous operations of instinct, have a distinct correlation
with the changes which take place in the same axis in the multitudi-
nous operations of thought.

If the mind begins to contemplate the results of an inquiry into the
psychological nature of man from this point of view, and, ranging
freely through natural history, collates the phenomena of mind as dis-
played in animated nature with the phenomena of the human will and
consciousness, it is quickly lost in the infinite grandeur of the thoughts
which the contemplation excites, as it wanders amidst that
"Vast chain of being! which from God began,
Natures ethereal, human, angel, man,
Beast, bird, fish, insect, what no eye can see,
No glass can reach. "

The common source of the two great classes of rational and instinc-
tive phenomena will strike the mind, and it will he led to the convic-
tion, that by the most rigid induction man is shown to be made in
the image of God, and is in very deed and truth a reflex of the Divine
mind; that as immortality is the portion of his spiritual nature,
and he will endure to all eternity, so the essence which constitutes his
spiritual nature has been formed and developed from all eternity;
that the faculties of instinct, acting blindly and without the self-con-
sciousness of the individual, constitute the foundation and origin of
the faculties of the reasoning mind; and that as they spring from the
direct operation of the Divine mind, so also the conscious mind evolved
from instinct, and rendered more and more perfect in intelligence and
freedom of volition, springs from that direct operation also, and becomes
finally conscious of its origin, and claims God as its Father. Having
attained to this knowledge, with the same certainty of conviction as to
the knowledge of its own existence, and of the fundamental axioms of
physical and mathematical science, it has reached its highest know-
ledge.

All this may seem very foreign to our theme, but it is not so; for it
is obvious, that as the phenomena of dreaming and insanity are of cor-
poreal origin, or, in other words, result from changes in the functions
of the cerebrum, it was necessary to hint what were the relations of
the material organ to animated nature, on the one hand, and to mind,
on the other. When persons speak of matter in relation to mental
phenomena, they forget that the material organ is not made up of
sticks and stones, and brute stuff, but is a most exquisite piece of
mechanism, which no created thing can equal, and which it has
been the work of ages to perfect. Without a due appreciation of
this wonderful mechanism, all proper comprehension of mental aber-
ration is impossible; unless the premises we have laid down be
granted, all practical and useful inquiry into its laws of action is im-
possible.

Sleep depends on an altered condition in the functions of the cere-
brum, whereby the impressions which reach it from all parts of the
organism cease to excite those changes which constitute the material
portion of the act of consciousness. Nevertheless, changes do occur in
sleep; and these are of different kinds, according as sleep is more or
less perfect. If consciousness be entirely abolished, the phenomena of
the organism are those of vegetative life, and the man is simply a living
machine, like animals devoid of feeling or consciousness. If, however,
the sleep be imperfect, there is a very different condition, accordingly
as the mind is conscious of the various changes going on, or according
to the mode of action of the hemispherical ganglia. Perfect sleep, or
the reduction of the animal to a vegetative mode of existence, is a great
part of the scheme of Divine Providence, whereby animated nature is
maintained in health and happiness. Dr Symonds observes that little
is known of the phenomena of sleep in the avertebrata; periods of
inactivity with them are, perhaps, periods of sleep. But do, not vege-
tables sleep 1 If we use the term in the wider sense of periodic inactivity
of vital function, we cannot but agree with Linnaeus on this point.
In plants with compound leaves, at the approach of night the leaflets
fold together, while the petiole is recurved, and the leaflets again expand
and raise themselves at the return of day. The Hedysarum gyrans has
ternate leaves, the terminal leaflet, which is larger than those at the
side, does not move, except to sleep; but the lateral ones, especially in
warm weather, are in continual motion, both day and night, even when
the terminal leaflet is asleep. Plants are not only like animals in the
general fact, but also in the details. Thus, as some animals sleep in
heat and some in cold, some in the day and some in the night, so it is
also with vegetables. The flowers of the crocus and similar plants
expand beneath the bright beams of the sun, but close when they are
withdrawn. So, on the contrary, the CEnotlieras unfold their blossoms
to the dews of evening, and wither away at the approach of day. The
Victoria Regia sleeps during the day and wakes up at night, taking,
like tropical animals, its siesta. During the late almost total eclipse of
the sun, one of the specimens, now grown in England, awoke up and
opened out its flower, as if it were night, imitating the reputed doings
of animals under similar circumstances. These vital movements in
plants are, perhaps, not all of the nature of sleep. Thus, the crocuses
may shut up to protect the organs of reproduction from the cold and
dews of night; but the day-sleep of the Victoria Regia lily, and of
numerous other plants, appears to be a true sleep, having for its object
repose from vital action. The sleep of tropical animals during the day
is probably of a similar nature, as is also the prolonged torpidity of
serpents during the heat of the tropical summer, and which seems to be
a true hybernation, if the paradoxical phrase may be permitted. In
the dormant condition of animals which are torpid during the winter,
we have, perhaps, an exact illustration of perfect sleep. Not only are
the animal functions brought into a state of complete inactivity, but
even tliose of organic life are reduced to tlie lowest ebb compatible
with the continuance of vital action. The respiration can scarcely be
detected, and the circulation is wonderfully slackened. The pulse of
the hamster beats in the ordinary condition at the rate of 150 strokes
per minute; but in the liybernatory sleep it is only 15. Marmots
make 500 respirations in an hour; when torpid, the rate is only 15.
How nearly all bio-chemical action ceases during this state is shown by
the fact that the temperature of the animals very nearly foil to that of
the atmosphere; in ordinary sleep the temperature of the body is less
from the same cause.

Trance-sleep is a morbid form of sleep, and has been frequently and
fatally mistaken, it is to be feared, for death. In trance-sleep there
seems to be the same suspension of the animal and organic functions as
takes place in hybernation, but the hemispherical ganglia continue in
intestine activity; and if all external perception be abolished, and the
mind be exclusively conscious of the intestine changes, the thoughts and
imaginations appear to the sleeper as perfect lealities, and phenomena
are manifested to the mind's eye which perhaps approximate as closely
to the phenomena of the spiritual world and the realities of pure thought
as any terrestrial phenomena can. The condition of the enceplialon is
very remarkable in all the forms of trance, (for there are several,) and is
very worthy of special investigation. When the torpid state partially
extends to the motor system, the cataleptic condition is induced?that
is to say, the muscles contract automatically upon any slight impression
being made on the surface, as on the muscles themselves by flexure of
the limb, so that a l'mb or the whole body will remain for a prolonged
period in the same position, or, in fact, until an impression from with-
out alters the condition of the motor portion of the central axis. This
is cataleptic trance. A more frequent form is that in which the mus-
cular system is either entirely paralyzed, and the body is motionless, or
else the motor system is in full activity, and the limbs and organs of
motion generally respond to the ideas passing through the hemispherical
ganglia: this latter form is somnambulism, the former is true trance.
The so-called magnetic trance is simply somnambulism excited arti-
ficially by acting on the sensorium by a prolonged act of attention.
There are several varieties of this form of sleep, from the profoundest
insensibility to impressions, to a temporary and slight condition little
differing from the waking state. The great difference between true
trance and its modifications is this: that while the body is deprived of
motor power, or, in other words, while the motor portion of the nervous
system is not acted upon by the sensorial, the sensorial itself is fully
active; and there are not only coherent dreams passing through it, as
visions, &c., but the individual is conscious of his dreams on awaking,
and can relate them. Trance, too, implies that the dreams have a
special reference to the unseen world, in a religious sense.

In ordinary sleep there is also a difference of this kind observed.
Persons on awaking may remember their dreams, or they may talk
loudly, and appear much disturbed in their sleep, and yet have 110
recollection of the cause of their bodily movements, if awoke in the
midst of the dream. In the latter instance, we must look upon the
muscular acts as reflex cerebral phenomena. It is essential, perhaps,
to the completion of our idea of a dream, that it be remembered; a
somnambulist may enact a dream, and yet have no recollection what-
ever of anything he has done, although he may have been at work for
an hour or two, or even more. In this case, he cannot correctly be
said to dream; if, however, he recollects all that he has done, as if it
liad been a dream, then we may properly describe his condition as that
of dreaming. The difference is not generic; nevertheless, it is of
importance to remember these slight modifications of consciousness, in
the form of acts of memory.

Dr Symonds observes, that the simplest form of memory is the mere
reproduction of a sensation, or the return of a thought, or of a former
creation. When these occur by an effort of the will, the act of mind is
termed recollection; when the past returns unbidden, 01* spontaneously,
it is a remembrance. Both these states of the mind are dependent upon
what is termed the association of ideas. As no change in the hemi-
spherical ganglia can occur without an antecedent change as the
agent, it is obvious that the association of ideas, considered physiologi-
cally, is dependent upon some impression made on the material organ
of mind, of such a nature that it is adapted to re-excite the previously
existing material ideas?a term that has often been used to charac-
terise the material basis of the true, or metaphysical ideas. Now, of
these re-exciting impressions there are at least two kinds, corresponding
to the two forms of memory; the one dependent on the will, and
arising immediately by its operation on some portion of the hemi-
spherical ganglia; the other coming from without, and passing through
the sensorial ganglia?the portals of the mind. In these two kinds of
mnemonical impressions we have the analogues of the two kinds of
material impressions?namely, that kind which excitcs movement
immediately either with or without an accompanying sensation, and
that which is exerted immediately by an act of volition, and is
accompanied by a perception, or conception. In other words, the
impressions in acts of memory are excito-sensorial, 01* volitional-
sensorial; but (just as in reflex acts) they require a pre-existent sub-
stratum, or otherwise the act of memory never takes place. The re-
excitement of sensations, in remembrance, is a curious illustration of tliis analogy; for not only will tlie ideas be reproduced in connexion
with it, hut also the muscular acts and other changes which the original
sensation excited. Instances of this kind are very familiar, as
when vomiting is excited by the recollection or remembrance of a dis-
gusting object, drug, &c. Mere acts will often be re-excited in this
way, with hardly any consciousness of the impression, if they have been
so often performed as to become habitual?and sometimes habitual
movements will be re-excited by almost any impression. We have
occasionally experimented on a costermonger, who sells sugar-plums at
the corner of a street we pass daily, and who continually repeats,
"ha'penny an ounce?two a-penny." If, when he is quiescent, we
excite his attention by a stare, or a frown, or a peculiar smile, he will
immediately utter his cry. Analogous to this is the case of the
merchant's clerk we have quoted from Dr Fosgate's work, whose
fellow-clerks, acting upon his known habits of thought, excited a dream
at will, and made him enact it.

The suggestion of dreams may therefore be dependent upon internal
or external impressions, or upon both combined. The internal impres-
sions may either be ideas, or trains of ideas, excited by the intestine
changes in the hemispherical ganglia, or sensations excited by impres-
sions derived from the viscera and sensorial nerves. The external
impressions may be derived from various objects that excite the organs
of sense, not causing, however, either sensations or perceptions, but re-
exciting conceptions only, or trains of ideas. The larger proportion of
our revived conceptions have reference to visual objects, and these re-
excite other conceptions in sequence, or association. "When the friend
of bygone times, Dr Symonds observes, revisits us in sleep, we do not
recognise his form merely as one that had been seen before, but with
its presence return some, at least, of the occui-rences in his life, the
points in his character, his sentiments, and his familiar talk. For, so
far is it from being true, that visual images alone are produced in dreams,
that it often happens that the remains of several sensations are simul-
taneously renewed.

There is a great variety in the mode of reproduction of ideas in
sleep. They may arise in their exactly pre-existent form, or they may
have a kaleidoscope arrangement; and fragments of many may be
patched together in a mosaic, which to the dreamer appears perfectly
natural and possible, but to the waking reason is nothing but the
grossest absurdity. It is a remarkable circumstance, that this state
occurs in insanity as well as in dreaming. The wildest incoherences,
the confounding of personal identities, the mingling of material and
mental properties, the most miraculous violations of the best ascertained
laws of nature, excite no more surprise or wonder than the commonest
SLEEP, DREAMING, AND INSANITY. 4=79

events of life. In the following example, mentioned by Dr Symonds,
the practitioner experienced in insanity will recognise delusions
which occasionally occur to the insane. " A gentleman to whom this
institution is largely indebted, gave me the following experience :?
' I have several times appeared to read a portion of an imaginary work,
as regularly as if it had been real. I have also dreamed that I was
dead, and that I carried my own body in a coach to bury it ; and that
when I reached the place of burial, a stranger said, 11 would not advise
you, sir, to bury your body in this place, for they are about to build so
near it, that I have no doubt the body will be disturbed by the
builders.' 'That,' I replied, 'is very true; I thank you for the infor-
mation, and I will remove it to another spot;' upon which I awoke.' "
We were informed by a friend that he had a dream of a somewhat
similar kind. Keturning, much fatigued, from a ball, where he had
taken an unusual amount of liquids, and, finally, some diuretic cham-
pagne, he quickly fell asleep, and dreamt that he was in a large ball-
room, and that one of the company created a considerable disturbance
by his wandering about the reception-rooms for a convenient place to
relieve a pressing want, and attracting the notice of the company to
his unusual conduct. He behaved so improperly, that the dreamer
found it necessary to remonstrate with him very strongly on the impro-
priety, not to say immodesty, of his behaviour, and was in the act of
doing this, when he awoke to find that it was himself upon whom
nature callcd so imperatively for relief. When conversations are held
with persons in dreams, there is the same duplicate consciousness; and
in insanity and delirum no phenomenon is more common. We have a
curious case under our notice at present, of an epileptic youth of
eighteen, whose paroxysms occur at intervals of four weeks, and are
accompanied for two or three days by a particular form of delirium ap-
proaching insanity. He wanders hither and thither after the fit, appa-
rently without an object; and on being asked the reason, says there is
a man in his head, who says he must do so and so, and he is obliged to
do it. If he reads while under the epileptic influence, he says the man
in his head repeats everything he reads, "loud up;" and often when he
is not reading, the man will " talk a deal of nonsense about Kentucky."
In this case there is, doubtless, a double consciousness,'"one portion of
the cerebrum being in a dream.

A very curious thing is, to dream that one is dreaming; but we
believe it is not so very uncommon. Dr Fosgate relates a dream of
this kind which occurred to himself on the night which followed the
committal to paper of certain views of his touching mysterious and
prophetic dreams :?
" Not long since," he observes, " I was examining the Croton
I I 2

Waterworks, in New York city, including some pits which were
open in the streets Avhere the great iron trunks were exposed,
and on the occasion alluded to, my mind was in part occupied with
this subject. On falling asleep, I dreamed that in passing one of the
pits, I jumped down upon a tube about three inches in diameter, for
the purpose of inspecting the work more minutely; but when in this
position, on casting my eyes below, an awful chasm presented itself,
crossed in various directions by huge iron water-tubes, but the bottom
?was invisible. However, the depth was ninety feet. In what way the
information was imparted was indistinct, but such appeared the awful
depth under my slippery footing. I could just barely reach the surface
above, but could lay hold of nothing, and therefore attempted to leap
to the top. I failed, and in falling, lodged upon the place I just left.
This fall will never be forgotten, so long as excessive fright, com-
mingled with horror, can leave an impression on my mind. I then
thought to cry for help, but dared not, lest my feet should slip, and
precipitate me down the dark chasm beneath. After reflecting long
upon my perilous situation, I commenced feeling around the platform
surrounding the top, and finally succeeded in fastening my fingers in a
crevice between the planks, by which means I drew myself up. The
dream, ordinarily, would have ended here; but my mind now turned
upon the subject which had occupied my attention the preceding even-
ing until a late hour. I thought, in my dream, that what had just
transpired was a prophetic dream, and to what it might point my
reflections were directed, as well as to what would be the best course to
elude the impending danger. During these reflections I awoke, exces-
sively exhausted. In this instance, in a dream, I dreamed that I was
dreaming."

It will be seen that there were two distinct dreams in this instance,
and the analysis of tliem is not without interest. The exciting
cause of the dream was, probably, that state of the cerebrum which is
induced by looking from a height in the waking state, but which will
occur in the insane, and especially as a monomania, or as a passing
symptom, in persons who have severely exercised the organ of thought.
This had probably been the case with Dr Fosgate; during sleep, the
intestine changes in the cerebrum had produced the idea in an organ
already predisposed from excessive action, and the material idea, so
excited, led to the train of ideas constituting the dream. But the
sensation of danger of falling from a height Avas only momentary in
duration, and ended with the supposed fall; when it ceased, the mind
became occupied with the means of escape, and, finally, the whole
passed away into a new association of ideas, namely, that which had
already occupied the mind in reference to the prophetic character of
dreams.

Dr Fosgate's dream was at the commencement simply incubus, a form
of dreaming respecting which we are surprised to observe that writer
remarks, that " no satisfactory explanation of the phenomena lias been
given, all being mere speculation, not founded on facts." "We always con-
sidered that many of the various forms of incubus originated in disorder or
disease of the thoracic and abdominal viscera, but principally of the heart
and lungs. The instinct of love of life, or self-conservation, is most
usually excited by a painful sensation, originating in a morbid condition
of the blood dependent on disease of these viscera, and indicating, in
fact, a state in which life is really imperilled. The whole series of phe-
nomena usually resolves itself into an imperfect depuration or aeration
of the blood. Now this may take place from various causes. There
may be disease of the kidneys or liver, causing retention of urea or of
bile in the blood, or there may be disease of the heart; an overloaded
stomach may press upon it, or upon the lungs; or the bedclothes or
part of the dress may be pressing upon the mouth or throat, so as to
interrupt respiration; or there may be functional disturbance of the
heart's innervation by disease or predisposition to disease, of the
medulla oblongata; or the fibres of the heart may have undergone the
fatty degeneration, so that the paralysis of the voluntary motor system,
which characterises true sleep, and which implicates also the cardiac
movements so much as to render them slower, absolutely takes effect
upon the weakened fibres, so as to seriously impede the circulation.
Without doubt, fatal fits of apoplexy, induced in this way, have been
preceded by incubus; and its frequent recurrence must be considered to
be a very serious symptom.

Incubus attacks children of a nervous temperament and irritable
fibre, and is well known to nurses as "the megrims." In these it
seems to be connected with gastro-intestinal irritation, remotely and
primarily?and, secondarily and proximately, with slight spasm of the
glottis, or a momentary and imperfect attack of laryngismus stridulus.
It is probable that any painful sensation, or even morbid impression,
originating in the viscera, and influencing, by incident excitor action,
the circulation, so as to interrupt the due aeration of the blood, or any
sufficiently toxic condition of the blood of a depressing kind, will induce
one or other form of incubus or frightful dreams. It is noticeable, too,
that whatever may be the cause of the sensation of horror, the dream
has almost always reference to danger to life. In the case of Dr.
Symonds' friend, who " awoke one morning desperately clutching and
tugging at the strings of his night-cap, having been dreaming that a
viper had fastened upon his throat, and he was doing his best to tear it
away," it is probable that the strings had not only irritated the skin of
the throat, but compressed the larynx, so as partially to interrupt
respiration. The dreamed cause of danger, and the accompanying
scenes of horror, will depend entirely, as to their character and spe-
cialities, upon the idiosyncrasies of the individual?his habits of
thought, of study, of life. A lady under our care, with cancerous
disease of the uterus and appendages, who suffers much from pain in the
hypogastric x'egion, describes her dreams as being of the most horrible
description. Being religiously disposed, and having been long a mem-
ber of a strictly religious society, her dreams of horror most frequently
turn upon religious phantasms; spectral images, clothed in white yet
with black faces, groaning horribly, sulphureous smells, fearful thunder-
ings and flashings, and even hell itself, in all its horrible realities,
disturbing ber nightly rest Avith terrors indescribable.

" The dreamer," Dr Fosgate observes, " often believes himself ship-
wrecked, and left to the fury of the winds and waves; or he is fast
approaching the brink of a dreaded precipice, without the power to
turn aside, and over which he must unavoidably fall; or he is pursued
by wild beasts intent on devouring him, and through all lie feels spell-
bound, and unable to help or defend himself; he struggles with all his
power to be released from this frightful situation, but apparently to no
purpose, until at last, when he considers his destruction inevitable, a
sudden bound frees him from his condition, and a dream is disclosed,
which he believes to have been the cause of his sufferings."

A very interesting fact is, that the same cause will produce a similar
incubus-pliantasm in the dreams of several persons, thus setting aside
the marvellous points in the coincidences of so-called prophetic dreams.
Thus Ave read lately of a Avliole regiment starting up in alarm, declaring
that they Avere dreaming that a black dog had jumped upon their
breasts and disappeared, which curious circumstance Avas explained by
the discovery, that they had all been exposed to the influence of a
deleterious gas generated in the monastery in Avhich they Avere
sleeping.

We might quote from Dr Fosgate's description of incubus, as a
disease (for such it is), Avith satisfaction to our readers, for the Avriter of
it has suffered from its attacks since his earliest remembrance, and most
graphically depicts its course. In his case it appears to be connected
with centric disease, and hence, probably, his exclusive pathology.
" This disease," he remarks, " avc consider to be purely nervous. The
attendant dyspnoea and congestion are its consequence, and not the
cause, as has been believed and supported by pathologists"?a proposi-
tion much too general, as the fact just mentioned shows.

It is interesting to observe, that the imperfect respiration and
obstructed aeration of the blood Avliich accompanies advanced phthisis
and intense or extensive bronchitis, rarely induces incubus. Still, in
those states of the lungs the respiratory mechanism has a peculiar and
characteristic action, for the patient moans physically or automatically,
and sometimes so loudly as to excite a sympathising dream in his own
mind, or even to awake himself. The sound is peculiarly distressing,
being the tremulous moan of intense grief or sorrow, and often causes
a harrowing conviction in the mind of the affectionate watcher, that the
mental and physical sufferings of the patient are great. Yet they are
not; for the sound depends on reflex action, and is only the mechanical
groan of suffering nature; no sensations of pain are excited, and con-
sequently the hemispherical ganglia are not thrown into dreams and
terrors of the night. Incubus (in this wide sense of a painful modi-
fication of the conservative instinct) is allied, on the one hand, to two
peculiar forms of epilepsy, on the other, to the varied forms of melan-
cholia. Certain epileptic patients raise a cry of terror just previously
to the convulsions, which is certainly automatic and reflex, since they
are not aware themselves that they raise the cry, nor feel any particular
dread. Again: epileptics will occasionally start off in the greatest
terror, and run as if escaping from a fearful pursuer, (exhibiting the
form termed epilepsia dromica,) until arrested by the convulsions; yet
they also are usually without knowledge of the sensation which induces
the flight, except, in some instances, they observe that they are seized
with an indescribable dread. Hippocrates seems to have been aware
of this relation between incubus and epilepsy: in his " Treatise on
Epilepsy" (" the Sacred Disease") he observes, " I have known many
persons in sleep groaning and crying out, some in a state of suffoca-
tion, some jumping up and fleeing out of doors, and deprived of their
reason until they awaken, and afterwards becoming well and rational as
before, although they be pale and weak," &c. *

There is a form of painful dream which may be confounded with
incubus, and, without doubt, is allied to it?namely, that which
depends upon pain in some part of the body, (an illustration of uterine
pain, as a cause, has been given,) although it is especially pain in the
skin to which we allude. In this, also, the conservative instinct is roused
into action, yet with a difference. Dr lleid relates of himself that the
dressing of a blister which he had applied to his head becoming ruffled
so as to produce pain, he dreamt that he had fallen into the hands of a
party of North American Indians, who were scalping him. Dr.
Beattie states that once, after riding thirty miles in a very high wind,
he passed a night of dreams, which were so terrible that he found it
expedient to keep himself awake, that he might no longer be tormented
with them.

The relation of incubus to melancholia is less direct and will have
our notice further on. We will rather consider the relations of painful
instinctive or emotional sensations to our dreams. It has often been
* The Genuine Works of Hippocrates, p. 843. Sydenham Society's edition.
noticed, that under certain conditions, not always well understood, the
complexion of the dreams is diametrically opposite to the waking
thoughts in persons suffering in body or mind. The prisoner for life
enjoys freedom, happiness, and home in his dreams; the famished man
feeds to fulness; the thirsty man drinks to satiety. Mr. Moffat thus
describes his dreams after toiling through the deserts of Africa:?
"We continued our slow and silent march. The tongue cleaving to
the roof for thirst, made conversation extremely difficult. At last we
reached the long wislied-for waterfall; hut it was too late to ascend the
hill. We laid our heads on our saddles. The last sound we heard
was the distant roar of the lion ; but we were too much exhausted to
feel anything like fear. Sleep came to our relief, and it seemed made
up of scenes the most lovely. I felt as if engaged in roving among
ambrosial bowers, hearing sounds of music, as if from angels' harps.
I seemed to pass from stream to stream, in which I bathed, and slaked
my thirst at many a crystal fount flowing from mountains enriched
with living green. These pleasures continued till morning, when we
awoke speechless with thirst, our eyes inflamed, and our whole frames
burning like a coal."

Intense grief and other emotions will excite the opposite states; even
" Joy has its tears, and transport has its death." Sir W. Scott felt
this on the death of Lady Scott. Describing his state, lie remarks?
II Gay thoughts strangely mingled with those of dismal melancholy;
tears which seemed ready to flow unbidden, smiles which approached to
those of insanity."* The same antagonistic condition takes place in
persons given to strong devotional exercises, of whatever sect they may
be. Hence the temptations of Romish ascetics and ecstaticci; hence
the "bufferings of Satan" of many of Wesley's converts; hence their
paroxysms of involuntary laughter during their religious exercises,
their maniacal oaths and blasphemies during the fit. This polarity, if
the phrase may be permitted, which is thus operative in dreams, is seen,
in a simpler form, in the waking dreams of the so-called clairvoyants
of the mesmerists, or the '?'sensitives" of the Baron Yon Reichenbacli.
We find such persons repeatedly describing objects in an inverted or
wrong position, mistaking the right side for the left, speaking of a
river flowing north to south, instead of south to north, describing the
points of the compass erroneously, &c. In certain dreams this perver-
sion of the ideas is seen in the wrong notion the sleeper has of his
position, imagining he is upside down, and seeking to rectify the error
by placing his head at the foot of the bed and his feet 011 the pillow.
This is by no means an unusual circumstance in nurseries. Occasionally
an analogous condition occurs in delirium. We lately met with a case
* Memoirs, by Lockhart, vol. vii. p. 10
SLEEP, DREAMING, AND INSANITY. 483-

of this kind in the fourteenth volume of the l: London Medical and
Physical Journal," in the person of a female subject to paroxysms of
hysterical delirium, who, during the attacks, could not resist the im-
pulse to place the chairs upside down, which she did because in their
ordinary position they appeared to be inverted. She also laughed
heartily, and expressed her surprise at seeing the attendants, as she
thought, standing on their heads. The polarity of insane notions is the
most interesting, however, in connexion with this subject. It has long
been a matter of common observation how completely the moral cha-
racter of the individual is changed, or certain of his ideas monoma-
niacally perverted. Thus, the man who " rolls in wealth" goes about
wringing his hands, under the impression that he is a pauper, and will die
in a workhouse; or, vice versa, the pauper calmly dispenses untold gold
and estates of infinite extent to his attendants, or such of his brother
patients as have won his esteem. In like manner the gentlewoman of
highly cultivated manners, irreproachable modesty, perfect truthfulness,
and the sweetest temper, under certain forms of functional disease of
the cerebrum, will become absolutely the reverse; that is to say, coarse
in manners, immodest, singularly deceitful, cruel, malicious. We
cannot but hope that the closer study of the phenomena of dreaming
may throw some light on these interesting cases; and we indulge a
hope that some intelligent student of psychology will work out the
instructive analogies we have mentioned to a full elucidation of the ques-
tion. Dr Symonds takes a passing notice of the analogy, in this respect,
between insanity and dreaming?of " that curious suspension of the
moral sense which is sometimes experienced" in dreaming. " Deeds'
from which we should shrink with horror when awake, are performed,
not only without the least remorse, but even without any question in
our mind as to their propriety."

The state of the intellect in dreaming is the next point to consider.
The late Dr Binns well and graphically describes the state of the
mind in dreaming. It becomes inventive, and discovers new places,
new forms of things, and novel modes of sensibility. It conceives,,
fancies, or creates, associates and combines objects; sometimes incon-
gruous and discordant, sometimes natural and normal; often exquisite
and beautiful; but more frequently horrible and repulsive. We see
huge monsters, vast plains, innumerable armies, indescribable creatures,
transcendent beings, unimagined forms, inscrutable chasms, stupendous
mountains; or we witness astounding prodigies. We perceive the sun
and moon on our right hand, the stars on our left, the elements, fire,
air, earth, and water, at our feet, and the glory, and the brightness,
and the brilliancy of ten thousand thousand meteors above our heads.
We hear, we talk, we move; walk, run, swim, fly. No obstacles
arrest, no impediments obstruct, our progress; space, time, and pro-
bability are annihilated.*

Well may Dr Binns remark,
" We believe that dreaming and insanity are nearly allied; for maniacs
are inundated with a flow of thoughts, a superabundance of ideas, and
a catenation of impressions, Avhich invert order, escape arrangement,
and defy control, exactly similar to images in dreams. Their cerebral
organs riot in confusion; they exhibit brilliant and burning flashes of
wit, but they are lost in the coruscations which follow; they enjoy
glimpses of elevated genius, but the prospect is soon obscured; they
sometimes reason acutely, but their premises are confounded; they
talk eloquently and write vigorously; but their images are unconnected
by detail, their reasoning unsupported by evidence, and their argu-
ments unrestrained by any rule of precedent, mode of thought, or law
of logic. Is not this the case in dreams T

It will be practically useful to notice in detail some points in the
intellectual state during dreaming, with reference to the more per-
manent and morbid, but analogous condition in insanity. We have
already noticed the curious suspension of the moral sense during the
dreaming state, but, in reality, the whole of the instinctive and
emotional faculties are perverted; and if we were to go through the
various forms of moral insanity and melancholia, we should find a
perfect parallelism. " The pacific," Dr Symonds remarks, " become pug-
nacious, the gentle and open-hearted entertain strange suspicions and
animosities; and the pure give utterance to sentiments which should
be like the snatches of old songs that fall from the innocent lips of
Ophelia." Doubtless, this abolition of the moral sense depends upon
the same cause as the total want of perception, that the acta of the
dreams are utterly incongruous. The ideas themselves seem to
originate in the same way that various fleeting ideas of the same kind
occur in the waking state, and are known popularly as " temptations
of the devil," and are premonitory of impulsive insanity. To have
dreams of a vicious and wicked character, is no proof that the indivi-
dual is vicious or wicked, secretly or openly, as some have supposed.
A general sense of vivacity and pleasure, or a feeling of depression,
is felt in health by many persons. Hardly any one, indeed, is exempt
from an alternation of these states. They are reproduced or felt in
dreams; and often an individual will awake cheerful and happy, or
oppressed with an indescribable sense of oppression, without being able
to remember any particulars of the dreams, or the dreams themselves,
except that a dream has been dreamt.

* The Anatomy of Sleep. By Edward Binns, M.D. 2nd edition, p. 39.
+ Ibid., p. 180.
SLEEP, DREAMING, AND INSANITY. 487
" Dreams in their development have breath,
And tears, and tortures, and the touch of joy;
They leave a weight upon our waking thoughts,
They take a weight from off our waking toils,
They do divide our beiug. ******
? * * * They have power,
The tyranny of pleasure and of pain."

That these feelings are less dependent on the dreams than by a
"bodily condition on which the waking feelings of sadness, or the con-
trary, depends, is proved by the facts?that very often what would be
distressing events to us if really occurring, excite no emotion when
dreamt to occur; and that the state of mind felt during dreaming con-
tinues after waking, and can be traced to functional or structural
disease of one or other of the viscera.

A very remarkable circumstance, and an important point of analogy,
is to be found in the extreme rapidity with which the mental operations
are performed, or rather with which the material changes on which the
ideas depend are excited in the hemispherical ganglia. It would appear
as if a whole series of acts, that would really occupy a long lapse of
time, pass ideally through the mind in one instant. We have in dreams
no true perception of the lapse of time?a strange property of mind! for
if such be also its property when entered into the eternal disembodied
state, time will appear to us eternity. The relations of space as well as
of time are also annihilated, so that while almost an eternity is com-
pressed into a moment, infinite space is traversed more swiftly than by
real thought. There are numerous illustrations of this principle on
record. A gentleman dreamt that he had enlisted as a soldier, joined
his regiment, deserted, was apprehended, carried back, tried, condemned
to be shot, and at last led out for execution. After all the usual pre-
parations a gun was fired; he awoke with the report, and found that a
noise in an adjoining room had, at the same moment, produced the
dream and awakened him. A friend of Dr Abercrombie's dreamt that
he crossed the Atlantic, and spent a fortnight in America. In embark-
ing, on his return, he fell into the sea, and awaking in the fright, found
that he had not been asleep ten minutes.

"The rapidity of mental action occurring in dreams," Dr Fosgate
observes, " where events, which in their actual development would
occupy hours, days, nay, even years, are comprossed and comprehended
in a few minutes, or even seconds, is finely illustrated in the dream of
Count Lavalette:"?

"' One night,' he says, 1 while I was asleep, the clock of the Palais
de Justice struck twelve, and awoke me. I heard the gate open to
relieve the sentry, but I fell asleep again immediately. In this sleep I
dreamed that I was standing in the Rue St. Honore, at the corner of
the Rue de 1'EclielIe. A melancholy darkness spread around; all was
still. Never tli el ess, a low and uncertain sound soon arose. All of a
sudden I perceived, at the bottom of the street, and advancing towards
me, a troop of cavalry; the men and horses, however, all flayed. The
men held torches in their hands, the flames of which illuminated faces
without skin, and with bloody muscles. Their hollow eyes rolled in
their large sockets, their mouths opened from ear to ear, and helmets
of hanging flesh covered their hideous heads. The horses dragged
along their own skins in the kennels, which overflowed with blood on
both sides. Pale and dishevelled women appeared and disappeared at
the windows in dismal silence; low inarticulate groans filled the air,
and I remained in the street alone, petrified with horror, and deprived
of strength sufficient to seek my safety in flight. This horrible troop
continued passing in rapid gallop, and casting frightful looks at me.
Their march, I thought, continued for five hours, and they were fol-
lowed by an immense number of artillery waggons, full of bleeding
corpses, whose limbs still quivered. A disgusting smell of blood and
bitumen almost choked me. At length the iron gate of the prison
shutting with great force awoke me again. I made my repeater strike:
it was no more than midnight; so that the horrible phantasmagoria had
lasted no more than ten minutes?that is to say, the time necessary for
relieving the sentry and shutting the gate. The cold was severe and
the watchword short. The next day the turnkey confirmed my calcu-
lations. I, nevertheless, do not remember one single event in my life,
the duration of which I have been able more exactly to calculate.' "
This remarkable relation of the lapse of time to the intestine changes
of the hemispherical ganglia in thought, is a tempting subject for spe-
culation. We forbear, however, preferring to note an analogous rela-
tion which occurs in certain morbid conditions of the brain, of equal
interest psychologically. It lias been noticed in cases of impeded aera-
tion of the blood from strangling or drowning, and occupies that short
moment of vital action between the commencing transmission of car-
bonized blood to the brain and the abolition of consciousness. It may
also be of emotional origin, and there are toxic cases of a similar kind
on record. Dr Fosgata has very judiciously directed attention to this
analogy, as it regards the emotional cause, and illustrated it by cases.
He says?

This " rapidity of mental action is often experienced on occasions of
great personal danger, and almost always turns upon a review of the
jxist life of the individual, in which incidents the most trifling are
brought distinctly before the mind, which occurred at remote periods,
and each circumstance in the order of its occurrence. This has often
been experienced in falls from elevated positions, as the roofs of build-
ings, which could have occupied but a very few seconds of time in the
descent. An old sea-captain once related to me that during a fall from
the rigging of a vessel, from which he barely escaped destruction, he
distinctly remembered every act of his life, even the purloining of fruit
from the neighbouring orchards, and the depredations upon hen-roosts,
as well as the maternal admonitions inflicted for liis juvenile delinquen-
cies."

Dr Binns relates a very interesting example of this kind of rapid
mental .action, and (of course) molecular change in the material organ;
it has, indeed, a double interest, inasmuch as it also illustrates the
analogy, on the one hand, between ordinary dreaming and that
condition of the brain alleged to be mesmeric, which is the proximate
cause of " clairvoyance," as it is termed, and the so-called higher pheno-
mena, and, on the other, between these states and ecstatic trance, mono-
maniacal visions, and mania.

"We are acquainted," Dr Binns states, "with a gentleman, who
being able to swim but little, ventured too far out, and became
exhausted. His alarm was great; and after making several strenuous
but ill-directed efforts to regain the shore, he shouted for assistance,
and then sank, as he supposed, to rise 110 more. The noise of the
waters in his ears was at first horrible, and the idea of death, and such
a death! terrific in the extreme. He felt himself sinking, as if for an
age, and descent, it seemed, would have no end. But this frightful
state passed away. His senses became steeped in light. Innumerable
and beautiful visions presented themselves to his imagination. Luminous
aerial shapes accompanied him through embowering groves of graceful
trees, while soft music, as if breathed from their leaves, moved his
spirit to voluptuous repose. Marble colonnades, light-pierced vistas,
soft grassy walks, picturesque groups of angelic beings, gorgeously
plumaged birds, golden fish that swain in purple water, and glistening
fruit that hung from latticed arbours, were seen, admired, and passed.
Then the vision changed, and he saw, as if in a wide field, the acts of
his own being, from the first dawn of memory to the moment when
he entered the water, grouped and ranged in the order of the suc-
cession of their happening, and he read the whole volume of existence
at a glance; nay, its incidents and entities were photographed on his
mind, limned in light, and the panorama of the battle of life lay before
him. From this condition of beatitude?at least, these were the last
sensations he could remember?he awoke to consciousness, and con-
sequently to pain, agony, and disappointment."

In Everett's life of Dr Adam Clarke, the Wesleyan commentator,
and a great linguist, there is an auto-biographical account of his sen-
sations when drowning; and it is remarkable that there was the same
feeling of tranquillity and pleasure as described above:?

" At first, I thought I saw the bottom clearly, and then felt neither
apprehension nor pain; on the contrary, I felt as if I had been in the
most delightful situation; my mind was tranquil and uncommonly
happy. I felt as if in Paradise. * * I cannot recollect that any-
thing appeared defined, nor did my eye take in any object, only I had
a general impression of a green colour, as of fields or gardens. But
my happiness did not appear to arise from these, but appeared to con-
sist merely in the tranquil, indescribably tranquil, state of mind."
Dr Adam Clarke does not describe that rapid perception of past
events, or, in other words, that comprehensive act of memory, whereby
the actions and doings of the individual in days long gone from the
recollection, are vividly recalled to remembrance; the condition of his
nervous system was, in fact, analogous to that induced by hachisch,,
opium, nitrous oxide, &c., of which this vivid memory is but an acces-
sary part. The English opium-eater mentions an instance in which
this most remarkable psychological phenomenon was fully developed.
" I was once told," he observes, " by a near relative of mine, that,
having in her childhood fallen into a river, and being on the very
verge of death, but for the critical assistance which reached her, she
saw in a moment her whole life in its minutest incidents arranged
before her simultaneously, as in a mirror, and she had a faculty deve-
loped as suddenly for comprehending the whole and every part."
A literary friend, objecting to our views, directs our attention to
Clarence's dream in King Richard III., as described by Sliakspeare.
The immortal dramatist is almost always true to nature, and is so most
particularly in this particular instance. It is a dream of drowning,
and not the reality; hence the phenomena are described as those of
incubus, because the conservative instinct is aroused. Still, there is
the dreaming similarity between the reality and 'the illusion kept up
with admirable tact and truth to nature. Clarence is in prison, and
dreams of escape:?

"Methought tbat I had broken from the Tower,
And was embarked to cross to Burgundy ;
And in my company my brother Gloster,
"Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
Upon the hatches; thence we look'd toward England,
And cited up a thousand heavy times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster,
That had befall'n lis. As we paced along
LTpon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloster stumbled; and in falling
Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard,
Into the tumbling billows of the main.
0 Lord! methought what pain it was to drown!
What dreadful noise of water in mine ears !
What sights of ugly death within mine eyes !
Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks,
A thousand men that fishes gnawed upon;
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
All scattered in the bottom of the sea."
Then, when Brackenbury asks him if he were not awakened " with this
sore agony," Clarence replies (and herein Shakspeare shows his match-
less art and powers of observation) in terms which indicate that there
was the act of memory, like that described above, but dream-like, and.
SLEEP, DREAMING, AND INSANITY. 491
not tinged with pleasure, but with pain, such as must necessarily accom-
pany incubus in all its forms:?
"O no! my dream was lengthened after life;
0, theu began the tempest of my soul!
1 passed, methouglit, tlie melancholy flood,
With that grim ferryman which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger soul,
Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick,
Who cried aloud, ' What scourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence V
And so he vanished. Then came wandering by
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair,
Dabbled iu blood; and he shrieked out aloud?
' Clarence is come?-false, fleeting, perjured Clarence?
That stabled me in the field by Tewlcsbury ;
Seize on him, furies ! take him to your torments !'
With that, methouglit a legion of foul fiends
Environed me, and howled in my ears
Such hideous cries, that with the very noise
1, trembling, waked; and, for a season after,
Could not believe but that I was in hell;
Such terrible impression made my dream."
This whole description is true to nature, even to the last line. The
impressions of a vivid dream often dwell in the mind for some time
after waking, and leave the individual in doubt whether they are phan-
toms or realities.

This recal of past events to the memory, in dreams and in morbid
conditions of the brain, is a singularly suggestive fact. It indicates
the power of mind, in the abstract, to comprehend, with a faculty little
short of omniscience, the meaning and significance of those minute
mysterious changes in the material organ which constitute the physical
basis of dreams. It indicates, also, the immense capabilities of matter,
in being rendered subservient to such remarkable spiritual phenomena.
But when we pass from the creature to the Creator; when we contem-
plate the endowments of the Supreme Mind,?of "the Father of the
spirits of all flesh,"?as manifested in His offspring, we feel that we can
almost understand how, just as the physical changes in the material
organ, passing through their phases, in one moment reveal the doings
of years, so, also, the doings of all created things, past and present, may
be revealed to the glance of the Infinite, in virtue of the minute physical
changes His will directs; and so we get a glimpse of the possibility of
omniscience.

On the other hand, the mind is struck with wonder at the singular
powers with which creative mind has endowed matter. The micro-
scopic?the infinitely minute?changes which it passes through in acts
of thought, and especially in the acts of memory we have described, are
more utterly beyond our comprehension, and, indeed, more grand,
because more inexplicable, than the vast changes in the relations of the
masses which roll through infinite space in " cycle on epicycle." They
reveal to us phenomena belonging to matter when it is conjoined with
and the instrument of mind, which alter and decompose all our ordinary
ideas of its properties, to the development of entirely new conceptions.
Lamartine must have had reflections of this kind when he wrote the
following, on watching the insect life and motes and particles of matter
rendered visible in a sunbeam?" D'insectes colores, d'atomes bleus,
?et d'ailes." It is amongst the grandest touches of philosophical
poesy.

"Comrae ils gravitenten cadence!
Nouant et deuouant leurs vols harmonieux!
Des mondes de Plalon on croirait voir la danse,
S'accomplissant aux sons des musiques des cieux.
L'ceil ebloui se perd dans leur foule innombrable;
II en faudrait un monde a faire un grain de sable;
Le regard infini pouvrait seul les compter.
Cliaque parcelle encore s'y poudroit en parcelle.
All ! e'est ici le pied de l'eclatante eclielle,
Que de l'atome a Dieu l'infini voit montei*.
Pourtant cliaque atome est un etre!
Cbaque globule d'air est un monde habite!
Cliaque monde y regit d'autres mondes peutetre,
Pour qui l'eclair qui passe est un eternite!
Dans leur lueur de temps, dans leur goutte d'espace,
lis ont leurs jours, leurs nuits, leurs destins, et leur place,
Ln pensee et la vie y circulent a flot;
Et pendant que liotre oeil se perd dans ces extases,
Des milliers d'univers out accompli leurs phases.
Entre la pensee et le mot!"*
Nor are these reflections, as to the nature of mind on the one hand,
and of matter on the other, in what may be termed their physical or
natural relations, less interesting than the moral considerations of the
subjcct. Dr Symonds notices these by a passing remark, observing?
" It is a fearful liability of our nature to have the past summoned
before us, when we have fondly hoped that it was hid for ever in deepest
night?to anticipate what is to occur hereafter?
'Eacli faintest trace that memory holds
So darkly of departed years,
In one broad glance the soul beholds,
And all that was at once appears.'"

When the condition of the cerebrum, which is the proximate cause
of these phenomena, occurs permanently and morbidly as insanity, it
must be a fearful state of suffering, if the dark side?the painful
instead of the pleasurable?be developed. Fortunately, the painful is
rare, or temporary, and only when there is concurrent corporeal disease
of some part of the body, giving the character of incubus to the re-
excited or newly developed images; the pleasurable condition is the
* Jocelyn, torn. i. p. 190, 12mo. 1838.
more frequent, as if Providence mercifully tempered the wind to the
shorn lamb.

Another remarkable circumstance in dreaming is, that often all our
fundamental ideas become infinite, as it were, for hardly another word
will characterize those which pass through the mind. This fact as to time
has been already fully shown; it is exactly the same with space, number,
extension, &c. In one of the dreams described by De Quincey, he felt that
" The sense of space, and, in the end, of time, were both powerfully
affected. Buildings, landscapes, &c., were exhibited in proportions so
vast as the bodily eye is not fitted to receive; space swelled, and was
amplified to a sense of unattainable infinity. This, however, did not
disturb me so much as the vast expansion of time. I sometimes
seemed to have lived for seventy or one hundred years in one night;
nay, sometimes had feelings representative of a millennium passed in
that time; or, however, of a duration far beyond the limits of any
human experience."

It has occurred to ourselves to experience this expansion of the
fundamental ideas during dreaming. Being feverish one evening, we
saw innumerable rows of tinsmiths or blacksmiths, hammering furiously
in row upon row, each row prolonged apparently ad infinitum into
space, and each individual hammering with might and main most inde-
scribably swift. The cause of the dream was the fall of a fire-iron in
another room. When Ave dozed again, the shadows thrown on the
wall of the room gradually shaped themselves into gigantic forms, and
even the figured stripes on the Marseilles quilt assumed the appearance
of the most beautiful classic statues, so that the whole appeared like
Parian statuary of exquisite proportions, only the lower extremities
were indefinitely prolonged into a rounded mass. "We know a gentle-
man who has occasionally analogous ideas in the waking state?
a species of delirium?only he is quite conscious and rational at the
time. Poisons of the narcotic kind have occasionally a similar influ-
ence. This is particularly the case with hachisch, or extract of hemp.
To the individual who has taken it for the purposes of pleasurable
intoxication, minutes seem hours, and hours are prolonged into years.
M. Moreau (who has investigated the psychological relations of the
drug*) mentions, as an illustration, that when under the influence of a
moderate dose, it seemed to him as if two or three hours had passed
when he had made but a few steps in the passage of the opera-house,
and as he advanced, the passage seemed interminable, its extremity
receding as he pressed forwards. Frequently, when walking along the
Boulevards, persons and things at a certain distance presented the
same aspect as if he had viewed them through the large end of
* Da Hachisch et de 1'Alienation Mentale, Etudes Psychologies. Paris: 1845.
an opera-glass, thereby suggesting the idea of increased distance. The
Amanita Muscaria, an intoxicating fungus, causes the person under its
influence to take a stride sufficiently long to clear the trunk of a tree,
when he wishes to step over a small stick; alcoholic drinks have
occasionally the same effect.

These phenomena may all be x*ecognised in various forms of insanity.
Ideas of untold wealth, of estates comprising tens of thousands of
acres, and the like, are very common. So, also, ideas of space and
time are modified, inducing the most singular delusions. Coleridge's
" Kubla Khan," although a dream, is just what an insane person might
have written, and manifests the expansion of the ideas of space and
number very clearly. It also shows other curious points in psychology
?as, for instance, rhythmical alliteration.

" In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
A stately pleasure-dome decree;
Where Alpli, tlie sacred river, ran,
Through caverns measureless to man,
Down to a sunless sea.
So twice five miles of fertile ground
Willi walls and towers were girdled round;
And liere were gardens bright with sinuous rills,
Where blossom'd many an incense-bearing tree;
And here were forests, ancient as the hills,
Unfolding sunny spots of greenery.
But, oh ! that deep romantic chasm which slanted
Down the green bill, athwart a cedarn cover!
A savage place! as holy and enchanted
As e'er beneath a waning moon was haunted
By woman wailing for her demon-lover!
And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething,
As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing,
A mighty fountain momently was forced;
Amid whose swift half-intermitted bursts,
Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail,
Or chaffy grain beneath the thrasher's flail;
And 'mid these dancing rocks, at once and ever,
It flung up momently the sacred river.
Five miles meandering with a mazy motion,
Through wood and dale the sacred river ran;
Then reached the caverns measureless to man,
And sunk in tumult to a lifeless ocean;
And 'mid this tumult Kubla heard, from far,
Ancestral voices prophesying war."

The dream-poem of Coleridge reminds us of two other striking and
most interesting peculiarities of dreams?namely, first, that they are
sometimes prophetic, and, secondly, that they are occupied with acts of
pure reason and intellect. These two occasional peculiarities of dreams
are, indeed, but variations of the same fundamental condition, as a few
observations will show. The assistance supposed to be furnished in
sleep towards the solution of problems which puzzled the waking
reason, or to the sleeper in anticipating some coming event, or attain-
ing to some knowledge unattainable wlien awake, has given rise to
various superstitions and psychological theories. A modification of the
same condition in hysterical women, and somnambulistic and cataleptic
persons generally, constituted the psychological basis of pagan oracles,
and the various forms of divination by crystals, &c.?a subject which
merits special notice. Some philosophers, struck by the remarkable
nature of the phenomena, (as Sir Thomas Browne and Addison,) have
been induced to suppose that the soul in this state is partially disen-
gaged from the body, and therefore more intelligent ? a doctrine
which (as Locke observes) " every drowsy nod shakes." Illustrations
of the general fact abound. Franklin stated to Cabanis, on several
occasions, that he had been assisted in his dreams in many affairs.

Condillac, while writing his " Cours d'Etudes," was frequently obliged
to leave a chapter incomplete, and retire to bed; but on more than one
occasion he found, on awaking, that it was finished in his mind.
Condorcet, upon leaving his deep and complicated calculations unfinished,
after having retired to rest often found their results demonstrated to
him in his dreams. Voltaire, like La Fontaine, composed verses fre-
quently in his sleep, which he remembered on awaking. Johnson
states that he once, in a dream, had a contest of wit with some other
person, and that he was very much mortified by imagining that
his opponent had the better of him. In the late Dr Wigan's work on
the " Duality of the Brain," there are some excellent illustrations of
this morbid state, as it occurs in the insane. Dr Fosgate justly
observes, that the wonderful clearness of the mind in dreams must
have been observed by all who have given attention to the subject.
This lucidity is particularly observable in imaginary conversation,
public speaking, and composing, the minutiae of which the mind sel-
dom retains on awaking. It is certainly probable that this mental
clearness depends upon the passive condition of the external senses,
which modifies the impressions of external things that would otherwise
divert and divide the attention. We have, in the state of abstraction,
or deep thought, a condition not far dissimilar from sleep, inasmuch as
the mind thereby avoids all disturbing impressions, and so follows more
closely the current series of ideas,?which, moreover, are developed in
more direct and more connected sequence, than when waves of con-
fusing ideas excited by various external impressions impinge upon
them. It is for this reason that the student seeks undisturbed quiet,
and rejoices in a freedom from the distraction of mind which externals
excite. When the icleageiious changes in the hemispherical ganglia
go freely on in regular association and sequence, all external impres-
sions being shut out, except those which are congruous with the ideag
in connexion with the changes, the tissue is in a state analogous to that
in which instinctive operations take place. Now we have already
referred to this state, and have observed, that even when we reason,
the mind acts with the rapidity of instinct, and we often draw conclu-
sions before we have any conscious knowledge of the premises; in
short, that in the ivaking state we often think, and yet not become
conscious of the course, or even the result, of our thoughts.

Any one may ascertain the truth of this statement for himself by
carefully analysing his own thoughts. On investigation, he will also be
astonished how little attention has been directed to a careful observa-
tion of the more minute phenomena of mental action. One illustration
we may mention by way of example. Often a person will feel unhappy
and depressed, he knows not exactly why; only he has an uneasy
anticipation of something disastrous or unpleasant. If, in this state,
he analyse his corporeal and mental condition, he will either find that
bodily disease excites the " thick-coming fancies," or, what is more
usual, some circumstance has happened which is likely to influence his
future unfavourably,?being unconscious all the while that he had
already weighed the probably disastrous or unpleasant results. Dr.
Symonds quotes a very fitting illustration of these views, from the
autobiography of Captain John Crichton.

From all these considerations it is obvious, that in a prophetic
dream a person may have the conclusions of waking thoughts (he
having deduced them unconsciously) re-excited and made manifest to
his consciousness in a dream, under which circumstances they will
appear new. Or the thoughts may actually occur during the dream,
as if in the waking state, at the same time becoming objects of con-
sciousness?yet instinctively and automatically, and therefore with the
precision of instinctive reasoning.

It is in this way, we suspect, that dreams have proved prophetic.
Prescience,?one of the most striking and inscrutable of the instinctive
faculties,?is also that which is most commonly in operation in instinc-
tive life. Hence it is not remarkable that that faculty which domi-
nates amongst all the instincts of irrational creatures, should re-appear
in the human organism when it is thrown by suspension of the cerebral
senses into the irrational condition. It seems strange that organized
matter should have this innate prescience, but it is manifest throughout
nature, from the evolution of the germ and the anticipatory formation
of the organs necessary to successive phases of existence, to the prudent-
foresight of adult life. We may well ask, with Pope,
" Who taught the nations of the field and wood
To shun their poison and to choose their food?
SLEEP, DREAMING, AND INSANITY. 407
Prcscicnt, tlie tides or tempests to withstand,
Build on the wave, or arch beneath the saud?
Who made the spider parallels design,
Sure as De Moivre, without rule or line ?
Who bid the stork, Columbus-like, explore
Heavens not his own,and worlds unknown before?
Who calls the council, states the certain day?
Who forms the phalanx, and who points the way ?"
If, then, this anticipation of the future be so universally manifest in
organized matter that there is no exception, can we, with any inductive
propriety, except the organism of man from the universal law? We
apprehend not. The simple fact that all nature anticipates a real future,
is, indeed, the strongest argument in natural theology for the reality of a
future state; because, since that anticipation is innate in organisms as a
law of their being, so it must needs be innate in man as a law of his
being. And in what clime or region is man without a hope of a future
life 1
" Lo the poor Indian ! whose untutored mind
Sees God in clouds, or hears him in the wind;
His soul proud science never taught to stray
Far as the solar track or milky way;
Yet simple nature to his hope has given,
Behind the cloud-topp'd hill, an humbler heaven."

The apparently prophetic anticipation of events in dreams is, then,
a natural phenomenon, and so far from being closely allied with the
purely spiritual world in causation, it depends upon the special exercise
of one of the most common, if not the most universal, of instincts. Our
knowledge of the inner workings of organisms in reference to apparently
rational prescient acts, and of the relations of the cerebro-spinal or
central axis to the instinct, in animals endowed with nerves and central
ganglia, is so utterly imperfect, that we can advance no further, hypo-
thetically, than the principles we have laid down. In a vast majority
of prophetic dreams, the whole of the facts are not stated; consequently,
it is not possible to trace the dream-ideas to their sources; and even
if they were, it would still probably be impossible, because (as we have
already shown) the mind may compare and deduce, and establish a
conclusion, of which it does not become conscious until the whole
series of ideas are acted in the dream. Consequently, results and
events may be thus unconsciously anticipated in the waking state
which reappear as things done in a dream. For this reason, dreams
of this kind should not be always neglected.

Certain forms of delirium are analogous to prescient dreaming; and
in certain states of the cerebrum the prescient instinct seems to be
developed, as, for example, during the closing scene of life. Aretseus
describes this state as supervening on the delirium of kausos or brain-
fever. He states, that on the subsidence of the violent excitement,
there arises a state in which the patient's mind becomes clear, and all his
sensations exquisitely keen; that he is the first person to* discover that
he is about to die, and announces this to his attendants; that he seemg
to hold converse with the spirits of those who have departed before
him, as if they stood in his presence, and that his soul acquires a pro-
phetic power. With all the appearance of conviction as to the truth of
these statements, Aretseus observes that although the bystanders fancy
the patient to be rambling and talking nonsense, they are afterwards
astonished at the fulfilment of the prediction. It was a notion enter-
tained of old, and has been transmitted down to us from the earliest
records of mankind, that a prophetic power attends man's last hour.

We find instances in Holy Writ, as of the dying Jacob. In the
sixteenth book of the " Iliad," Patroclus prophesies the death of Hector,
and in the twenty-second, Hector prophesies the death of Achilles by
the hand of Paris, at the Scsean gate. Sliakspere also makes John of
Gaunt prophesy, in Richard the Second, who exclaims?
" Methinks I am a prophet new inspired,
And thus, expiring, do foretell of him."

In this instance, and in others of poetic origin, the prophecies have
no speciality of detail; they rather point out probabilities as deduced
from past events. It is the wisdom of a sound judgment, exalted in
its manifestations by the morbidly exalted condition of the organ of
thought, which we see in action?it is simply a state?
" When old experience doth attain
To something like prophetic strain."

Allied to this is another class of phenomena. It is probable that those
sudden perceptions of truth, and long sought-for-relations, which often
come upon the mind like inspirations, are due to an action of the
cerebrum in thought, analogous to that which occurs in dreams. We
more particularly refer to instances of this kind like that which
occurred to Archimedes, when he ran from the bath crying eureka,
after the sudden solution of the problem which had occupied his
thoughts. Such sudden perceptions of hidden relations, or of truths,
most frequently occur immediately on awaking from sleep, before the
senses are quite open to external impressions.

These modes of cerebral action and the concomitant spiritual acts?
like the acts of memory which take place during sleep, or under certain
cerebral states, and like the development of infinitely grand ideas under
like circumstances?are singularly suggestive to the psychological
inquirer. What, he will ask, if it be the lot of man to attain to a pre-
science in the moral and spiritual world, similar to that which is mani-
fested by irrational beings in the animal and instinctive world? What
if in a higher stage of development the future be presented to his
mind's eye with the vividness and omnipresence with which he occa-
sionally regards the past 1 Strange, indeed, it is, that the marvels
of instinct-mind, have never been considered to be typical (as we
believe they are) of the true and ordinary laws of the human mind,
when, emancipated from the chrysalis state of this life, it has attained
to its perfect stage of growth.

Special faculties appear to us to attain to an extraordinary degree
of development in dreams; this, however, is no proof that such degree
is attained. Dr Symonds very justly observes, referring to the want
of taste in our dreams, " the most miserable doggerel may then pass
before the mind as exquisite poetry. Orations may seem to be uttered
worthy of the lips of Demosthenes, and arguments may be maintained
which seem as irrefragable as the demonstrations of Euclid; and yet,
were these reasonings and declamations uttered by a waking person,
they would sound little better than the incoherent ravings of a maniac.
Yet, even to this general rule," Dr Symonds adds, " there have been
remarkable exceptions. Cases are on record of judges, who in their
sleep have delivered decisions of the weightiest kind; and of poets,
who in that state have composed verses of great power and beauty,
though they were by no means exempt from a certain degree of
mystical indistinctness. The most striking instance is Mr. Coleridge's
poem, entitled Kubla Khan, which he himself characterised as a
psychological curiosity." We have already quoted this curious poem,
but we do not think it by any means a solitary example. Eminent
composers have composed very sweet airs in their sleep. The best
proofs, however, of this remarkable development of special faculties
are presented in certain forms of somnambulism, in hysterical delirium,
and in the so-called clairvoyant state. Dr Fosgate mentions specially
that form of somnambulism in which there is sleep-talking, rather
than sleep-walking, and the subjects of which are familiarly deno-
minated " sleeping preachers." In this class of cases it is only that we
have one kind of dream acted, instead of another; the individual
delivers a sermon or an oration, instead of writing a book, or enacting
some busy scene of active ordinary life. The case reported in the
great French Encycloptedia, and which was observed by an Archbishop
of Bourdeaux, is of this kind. It is that of a young ecclesiastic who
was in the habit of getting up during the night, in a state of somnam-
bulism, of going to his room, taking writing materials, and composing
and writing sermons. He also wrote pieces of music in this state.
Mr. Spencer met with a young female whose paroxysms of somnam-
bulism were modified by the prescient instinct, so that she prophesied
in them. One of John Wesley's assistants used to preach in his sleep.
From phenomena not widely dissimilar from these, ancient nations
were led to the induction that the insane were inspired by the
Divinity, and revealed the future, or were possessed of a wisdom not
their own. It is from this notion, traditionally handed down from the
earliest ages, that in the East to this day the wandering maniac has a
certain reverence and kindness shown to him. The psychiatric practi-
tioner cannot fail to have met with numerous examples of this special
development of the faculties, one or more, in the insane; indeed, the
instances are so numerous and common, that we need not further refer
to the fact.

"What is the state of the brain in sleep, dreaming, and insanity?
We have already referred to the anatomy and physiology of the cere-
brum in relation to this question; we have now to examine the
metaphysical side. In the first place, it is of primary importance to
observe, that the consciousness of the individual is variously modified
in the three conditions. This is a fundamental fact in the inquiry.
In addition to the ordinary phenomena of sleep and dreams, we have
those morbid analogous states, induced by so-called mesmeric, or electro-
biological agencies, and the morbid modifications of the will, and
consciousness induced therein. No one can peruse Dr Bennett's and
Dr Wood's statements without noticing the great similarity between
these states, on the one hand, and insanity, delirium, and dreaming, on
the other. The various processes by which these conditions are induced
are now well understood; they all essentially consist in inducing a
continued act of attention, more or less prolonged, in proportion as the
cerebrum of the individual is more or less predisposed to be acted
upon, or, in other words, fatigued. It has long been known to
physicians and metaphysicians, that during each act of attention the
consciousness (for attention is an operation of the consciousness) is
directed solely to the one object which is the subject of the act, so
that, for the time, the individual is insensible to all other impressions
whatever. Now total insensibility is profound or perfect sleep; hence
consciousness is abolished during that state; if, then, we could, after
concentrating the consciousness upon a single object, permanently fix
the necessary changes in the cerebrum which render the perception
existent or present to the mind, impossible, Ave abolish the conscious-
ness. It follows, therefore, that the morbid abolition or modifications
of consciousness x-eferred to, are not dependent upon a morbid condition
of the spiritual element, whatever that may be, but upon a morbid con-
dition of the organ. Dr Fosgate has touched upon this view of the
etiology of sleep. After mentioning the various modes recommended
for inducing sleep, he observes, that they all depend upon some
plan whereby the mind is ultimately brought to a single idea, mono-
tonous in character, and there steadily held until sleep is induced by a
normal act of our constitution. An act of attention withdraws the
mind from external impressions; but external impressions are with-
drawn from the mind. Thus quietude and darkness are usually sought
by the sleeper; and abstraction of mind from the current of thoughts.
Rhythmically recurring impressions will also so modify the cerebrum,
that the consciousness is changed. Undulating sounds and sights, a
droning voice, gentle friction, " mesmeric" passes, and the like.
The best methods of inducing sleep, however, are those by which
the individual withdraws the consciousness from external impressions ;
for, practically, the means are in his own power. " If I could arrest,"
says Catlow, " the attention of any of my audience, so that he would
think of nothing but what I was doing at the moment, I could prick
him with pins without his feeling it. And if the act of attention were
continued too long?longer than is compatible with the individual con-
stitution of the mind?I could suspend the sensibilities altogether,
and produce sleep, which varies according to the impressions on the
senses through which I isolate or monopolize the attention." This is
precisely the method of causing mesmeric sleep, or the sleep of hypno-
tism. All that is wanted is a long-continued act of attention?either
continually gazing at an object?any object, or listening to the same
sound, or rather, to the same sounds continually repeated, or repeating,
continually, the same words, according to Macnish's method, namely,
repeating internally any well-known rhyme, or repeating the alphabet
backward, or feeling the same frequently-repeated touch, as a stroking.
If it be wished to produce somnambulism or trance, the method must be
modified. In this case the attention must be withdrawn from external
objects, just as when it is wished to induce sleep, but the mind must be
kept active, in a given course of thought. Thus, if spectral illusions
be wanted, the individual must first be prepossessed with the idea that
he is about to see spectral appearances ; and if they are wanted to be
of a definite character, the mind can be directed in the principle of
suggestion and association to the appearance desired; this being done,
he should look intently at something adapted to the excitation of the
visual sensorium, as brightness, or its opposite, blackness. For the
former, crystals, glass, mirrors, water, the reflection of the sky in
water; or, for the latter, any black thing, as a drop of ink, will be the
best. To attain to the so-called higher phenomena, a training of the
hemispherical ganglia is all that is necessary, provided the individual
be already predisposed to irregular nervous action: this is attained
simply by frequent repetition of the process, and when the proper
morbid condition is excited, the infinitely various modifications of
mental phenomena which belong to dreaming, delirium, somnambulism,
trance, &c., may, one or other, be induced.

And insanity may also be thus induced?not temporary insanity
alone, but the reality?a sad reflection! On this point we cannot do
better than quote Dr Bennett's observations:?
" The great object of all who seek proper self-education is, to control
the emotions and passions, and regulate the imagination by the severer
faculties of judgment?comparison and attention. Hitherto, medical
men, so far from exciting, have done all in their power to prevent such
phenomena; but now it has been clearly shown that they may be pro-
duced in numbers of people by the ignorant and mercenary, there is
too much reason to fear that nervous disorders will increase among us.
It is well known that cases are on record of individuals who, com-
mencing by the imitation of hysterical or epileptic convulsions, have at
length found themselves really labouring under these diseases; nor is it
unreasonable to suppose, that the mental faculties will be greatly
injured in persons who frequently surrender up their own wills, and
act in accordance with the extravagant ideas suggested to them.
After all, the pleasure of excitement principally consists in feeling that
it can be regulated, and is under command. The moment it ceases to
be so, a sense of the imperfection becomes most agonizing to the mind,
and gives rise to that despondency so common among the insane."
Without doubt, the sleeplessness which precedes an outburst of
insanity is a cause of morbid cerebral action, as well as an effect.
Opiates have been found very beneficial in arresting the progress of the
disease; but all practical men must acknowledge, that they give them
with some fear lest the desired result may have substituted for it, an
additional degree of morbid action. In a better knowledge of the
physiology of sleep and dreaming, we may find a better means of
throwing the brain into repose, than in the administration of narcotics.
Now, the modifications which the cerebrum undergoes in acts of atten-
tion are allied to sleep, and recent investigations, conducted as well by
enlightened physiologists as by ignorant empirics, tend to show that
we may be able to acquire such a knowledge of the physiology of
attention and of consciousness generally, as to apply the knowledge
easily, pleasantly, and safely, to the treatment of cerebral disease, more
particularly as manifested in the various forms of insanity and
delirium.
