Report of Committee of Clinical Section of American Psychological Association
==============================================================================

In 1931 a committee representing the Clinical Section of the
American Psychological Association was appointed for the purpose of undertaking a survey of the training and duties of clinical
psychologists in the United States.

In proceeding with this survey the committee prepared a questionnaire which was sent out to about one thousand psychologists
who were engaged in psychological work of a clinical nature. The
returns from this questionnaire were presented in a report made
at the meeting of the American Psychological Association held in
Ithaca in September, 1932, and a brief summary of the survey was
published in the Psychological Exchange in August, 1933. The report contained no suggestions or recommendations, but in summary
the survey indicated:

1. That there are about eight hundred psychologists engaged in psychological
work which they themselves would define as clinical.
2. That there was doubt in the minds of a few psychologists about the use
of the term "clinical" as applied to psychology. According to these
the term "clinical" was borrowed from another field and did not
describe the nature of the work.

3. That there was no uniform understanding or agreement as to the meaning
of the term "clinical" psychology. The term was used by some to
indicate a field of work; by others to indicate a method of approach.
4. That there was no common standard either of training or of experience
which was generally recognized for clinical psychologists.
5. That there was no agreement in regard to the types of problems or cases
a clinical psychologist should study. Some were of the opinion that
clinical psychologists should confine themselves to the study of those
traits which could be objectively determined and defined. Others believed that a clinical psychologist should be qualified to diagnose and
treat any behavior disorder of a psychological nature.
The discussion of this report led to a realization of the need for
further clarification of the terms "clinical psychology" and "clinical psychologist," of the need for definite standards of training
for clinical psychologists, and of the need for definite knowledge
concerning the number and location of psychological clinics in the
' - BETHESDA J4, MO.
United States, as well as facts concerning their organization, staffs,
clientele, methods of procedure, and training offered in clinical
practice.

The committee was continued and authorized to formulate a
report clarifying the meaning and scope of the terms "clinical
psychology" and "clinical psychologist" and suggesting standards
of training for the personnel in the field, and also to collect the
material for and to prepare a Guide Book to Psychological Clinics
in the United States.

The result of the committee's work is here reported. That portion of it concerned with definitions of the terms "clinical psychology" and "clinical psychologist" and standards of training in
the field is presented in Part I, and that part of it constituting a
study of existing psychological clinics, in Part II of this report.
