Introduction to Group Analytic Psychotherapy
==============================================

:Author: S. H. Foulkes, M.D. William Heinemann. 21s.

This book is a very straightforward and practical
exposition of the " group-analytic" technique
which the author employs. There is just sufficient
discussion of the rationale underlying his theratherapeutic approach to stimulate the reader's
interest, and, at the end, there is a useful comparison of this procedure with those described by
other authors. The bulk of the book consists of
an account of the technique, together with a commendable array of illustrative examples from actual
cases and group situations. In particular, the
accounts of aspects of the " Northfield Experiment " make fascinating reading.

The author expressly disclaims that his method
is meant to supersede orthodox psychoanalysis:
it is rather a complementary approach which
touches upon the patient's adjustment to social
realities in a way which the privacy of the individual
analytic procedure inevitably misses. The method
employs, in a group setting, the same " tools "?
free association, understanding of unconscious
mechanisms and motives, and understanding of
interpersonal relationships (=transference)?as does
orthodox psychoanalysis. In addition, however,
the therapist is faced with the necessity of becoming
a member of the group as well as its leader or conductor. He has to bring himself into a more
socially real and less artificial relation to his patients
than does the ordinary analyst. The three practical
principles on which the method is based are {a)
active participation by the members: (b) communication in a permissive atmosphere: and (c)
observation in a social setting. It is on the significance of the third of these that Dr Foulkes
claims that his method has scientific as well as
therapeutic value?a claim which must be regarded
as well founded.

The emphasis laid on the importance of communication, as the essential therapeutic desideratum,
suggests that this procedure is in the direct line of
therapeutic advance and will stand the test of time.
Barriers to communication, both intrapersonal and
social, have a wide significance for mental health,
and the lessons to be learnt from the group-analysis
of neurotic patients will certainly be found applicable in wider fields of human relations.

There will, no doubt, be resistance on the part
of some therapists to the use of the group method.
Inasmuch as the therapist unconsciously accepts
those neurotic dissociations which the community regards as normal, he will find himself
faced with " barriers to communication" in a
group. For as a group develops a capacity for
free communication among its members, it becomes
healthy, and is led to gain insight into the social
neurosis pari passu with the gain in insight and
adjustment of the individuals composing it. A group
will challenge " normal " social assumptions with
inescapable force and compel the therapist to
reflect on his own unconscious acceptance of
normality. Dr Foulkes does not draw this distinction between normality and health. He says
that a basic law of group dynamics is that " collectively (the members) constitute the very norm
from which, individually, they deviate" : and
that the community " itself determines what is
normal, socially accepted behaviourBut is
it not this unconscious " social acceptance " of
taboos, a barrier to communication, which is one
of the ultimate causes of individual neurosis ?
A group, progressing along the lines indicated in
this book, is reaching toward a much higher degree
of mental health than is " normal " in our society.
Such a criticism as this, however, obviously
contains more praise than blame: an " Introduction ", focussing on a practical therapeutic approach,
would have become unbalanced by any more
detailed discussion of the work's implications,
many of which will be evident enough to the
interested reader.

Apart from its intrinsic interest as a contribution
to social psychiatry, the book will provide a fund
of reassurance and encouragement to therapists
who are new to the practice of group techniques?
even if their personal experience of psychoanalysis
is less than the author would regard as ideal. It
is modest, in spite of the author's obvious enthusiasm.
It is not difficult to read. And if, in the end, one
is left with a suspicion that one has been invited
to make a personal re-orientation towards problems
of neurosis, apart from learning a new therapeutic
method, doubtless the author will be satisfied.
J.R.M.
