Went the Day Will?
==================

Editorial

The aftermath of any party is a time for
appraising its success, and it is inevitable that
each English delegate to the International
Congress on Mental Health?however little
he or she may have been concerned in organizing
it?should feel some degree of responsibility for
its success; we were in the position of hosts.
It is inevitable too that good hosts feel some
dissatisfaction and regret after any party;
they would be smug indeed if it were not so,
and it is easy enough to indulge in preoccupations with the mundane matters of accommodation and fare. We must have expected then
that we should feel some slight uneasiness on
this score as our visitors departed.

This should by no means blind us to the very
real success of the Congress, and we can
congratulate the real hosts?the small band of
Congress organizers?on their magnificent
organization. Preparatory work, arrangements
for accommodation, interpreting services, recreation and leisure facilities?all were carefully
arranged parts of an excellent whole. That
so much can be accomplished now merits the
highest praise.

However indispensable a foundation, they
were only a foundation; the structures built
on top were the essentials. We are still too
close to see clearly what their whole shape
may be, but we can at least discern the style
of the building. The credit for the understanding arrived at between so many individuals
of different race, creed and background must
be placed largely on the painstaking preparatory
commissions. It was then possible to go straight
to frank discussion of outstanding sociological
problems without wasting time in clearing the
ground of misunderstanding and ambiguity
first; and the views of experts on their own
subjects must have started many minds off
on trains of thought to be later pursued on their
own. Besides the set sessions, there was much
value to be obtained from the informal meetings
with old friends and new in the intervals;
perhaps the only criticism was that there were
too many sessions, too few intervals for this
purpose.

Finally, there was the formation of the
World Federation for Mental Health. There
is thus the means for maintaining the goodwill
and collaboration between workers in mental
health throughout the world. This organization may have been born in a critical hour,
but it could ask for no better godparents than
its executive council, and if we all realize our
personal responsibilities for its health, wisdom
(and wealth), it may play its part in world
history before too long?and before it is too late.
