Juvenile Delinquency
======================

:Author: J. D. W. PEARCE, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.E., D.P.M.

Co-Director, Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency; Hon. Psychiatrist, Queen Elizabeth Hospital
for Children ; Hon. Physician, Tavistock Clinic
Delinquency is not in itself a disease but is only
an indication of some mental variation in the
individual. That delinquency occurs means more
than simply something the matter with the individual ; it signifies also some malady of society.
There is a tendency among some workers to regard
social conditions as embracing the whole causation,
but to adopt such a point of view is to be in error.
There are nearly always several causal factors, as
almost any delinquency points to a problem, both
in the individual and in the environment in which
he lives. There are many ways in which the
psychiatric social worker is able to help in
the treatment of delinquent situations and in the
prevention of their development ; in fact, her
greater opportunity is perhaps in the latter field.
All psychiatric social workers in their day-to-day
work deal with family situations which may very
well lead to delinquency in one or other of the
children.

The main varieties of delinquent conduct are
sexual misconduct, acts of aggression, stealing,
truancy from school and running away from home.
Each case presents an individual and unique
problem and must be approached as such.
The great majority of delinquents come from the
slums. The social factors are protean, and, as such
conditioning circumstances are beyond the control
of the child and originate in defects of society,
there is a danger of assuming that the child himself
is hardly part of the problem. However, only a
minority of the children who are exposed to such
stresses do in fact become delinquent. With
delinquency as with many other medical problems
it is often far less important to know just what is
the nature of the disturbed behaviour or of the
disease process than it is to recognize just what
kind of person is afflicted thereby. It is only by
such a comprehensive approach to the problem
that any success in remedial or preventive measures
will be achieved. As a corrective to any tendency
to attribute all delinquency to environmental
factors it is well to recall the work of Healy and
Bronner. These workers made a comparative
study of a series of delinquent children and their
non-delinquent siblings. One cannot do better
than quote the following from their report :
" Unsatisfying human relationships form obstructions to the flow of normal urges, desires and wishes
in the channels of socially acceptable activities.
The deflected current of feelings of being inadequate,
deprived or thwarted in ego or love satisfactions,
turns strongly into urges for substitutive satisfactions. The obstructive relationships are mainly
those within the family group where the attitudes
and behaviour of parents and others are influenced
by their own personal dissatisfactions. Ideas of
delinquency are derived from companions, the
observation of special temptations, reading, etc.
These sources of ideas constitute environmental
pressures. Through the acceptance of such ideas
the deflected portion of the current of feelings and
activities finds expression in delinquency. Underlying all these are current attitudes, beliefs, local and
group ideologies?the ideas and practices of
asocial individualism. These in turn are stimulated
by local conditions and by early observed exploitations, unfairnesses or dishonesties in business, law,
politics, officialdom."

Healy and Bronner also stress the fact that
ethical concepts which have no personification have
little force in the lives of young people. Such
personification is dependent on the emotional
tie-up with the parents and where this is inadequate
the character tends to be ill-developed. As one
digests the full implication of these conclusions by
Healy and Bronner?and it is to be remembered
that they are based on very careful and controlled
observation and research?the scope for valuable
work by social workers will become quite obvious
to the reader. The psychiatric social worker
in her routine social surveys will, if she has the eyes
* Our fourth article on special problems.?Ed.
with which to see, come across many situations in
which one or other child in a family is subject to
just such frustrations, the ultimate response to
which may very well be delinquency, which in
itself may sometimes end in a persistently antisocial, criminal character and personality. Though
the whole problem at times seems so vast that one
may feel somewhat overwhelmed by it, every
individual action taken to relieve such miseries
is well worth while.

A more detailed discussion of the social factors
significant in delinquency can now be made. Dr.
Emanuel Miller classifies gross environmental
anomalies as follows :

(1) Delinquent " habits " of a group.
(2) Economic and social degradation.
(3) Change of mores?evacuation and immigration and failure to adapt.
(4) Educational environment unsuited to certain
dullards, superiors, and neurotic types.
(5) Developmental, psychically-abnormal patterns due to gross disturbances of parent-child
relationships, etc.

Ire S. Wile considered maladjustments in the
happiness and behaviour of children to have grown
out of customs, laws, regulations and ordinances,
rather than wholly out of ignorance, misunderstanding and inherent frailties. In his view the
main general sociological causes fall under the three
headings of social sanction, social tolerance and
social indifference. I think the reader will agree
that though differently expressed these two writers
are very much in accord in this matter, and that
simply to amend a variety of specific faults in the
social setting without considering the underlying
basic social defects is much the same as treating
symptoms in sick persons rather than attacking
the basic disease processes. This does not mean
that it is not useful and indeed essential to deal
with those specific environmental stresses in each
case ; in fact it is often very important to do so ;
but if the incidence of delinquency is to be reduced
it is necessary also to deal with the larger underlying
causes.

In investigating specific environmental factors and
their significance in delinquency it is best to begin
with the home life and to work outwards from this.
With delinquents it is much more common to find
a broken home than with non-delinquents. All too
often it is the internal family situation which is
seriously at fault, e.g. divorce, desertion, stepparents, illegitimacy, cruelty, defective discipline
and example, war separation and war reunion.
Poverty is also very prevalent, causing overcrowding and hence sexual temptations ; and
hunger which leads to other temptations ; and lack
of opportunities for play and other outlets for the
normal energy of the child, leading in some cases to
compensatory gratification in delinquency.

The neighbourhood may be a major factor.
Certain districts are much more heavily loaded
with delinquency than others. Such districts are
those in which there is much opportunity of contact
with vulgarity, vice and crime ; where bad companions and evil example abound ; where no
recreational facilities exist; where temptations
such as pin-table saloons and the display of attractive
but honestly unobtainable goods abound. Another
factor in some districts is the current phenomenon
of the landlord who will have children in his socalled furnished rooms only under protest. Such
landlords insist that children must be kept entirely
quiet, failing which the family will be evicted. In
a case recently dealt with a mother had to take
her child, not more than three years old, out of
the house every day before 8.30 in the morning,
and she was not allowed to return until six o'clock
at night. The alternative was eviction. This is
not an isolated case. A series of cases have been
seen in which the children have to bottle-up all
their natural energy and to keep quite quiet all day
long, resulting in a variety of serious psychiatric
reactions. They are not allowed to run about in
the house, and in fact in many cases boots have to
be removed in order to insure quiet, the constant
threat hanging over the parents being eviction.
Many difficulties arise in school life and the
common situations requiring exploration are the
personal relationships with the teachers and the
other children, and the success or otherwise which
the child has with his school work. The other
common miseries of school life are all too frequent
among delinquent children ; a common example
is inferior clothing. Most children who play
truant are either unhappy or bored at school.
Non-co-operation of parents with teachers is not
unknown, and the psychiatric social worker can
do a very great deal to improve such relationships.
Many delinquents have as a background a bad
employment record, having too often got into
dead-end jobs with all their resultant frustration.
The attitude of many delinquents towards hard
work is often very poor and at the present
time this is linked up with the fact that during the
war years many youngsters were able to earn very
high wages in return for very little service. In
some cases their attitude to dishonesty and slackness is not helped by the employers who, when
adolescent employees embezzle funds, e.g. the
message boy who collects money as he goes on his
rounds?do not bother to take any action about it
One must not condemn such employers out of hand,
as to take action may very well mean a serious loss
of time on the part of the employer, who frequently
has to spend one or two days in Court, for which
he gets no compensation. Employers often feel
that the loss of a pound or two is a smaller hardship
than the dislocation of their work by the loss of so
much time. Nevertheless, such failure to discharge
their social responsibilities is to be deplored. The
black market too provides much temptation for
children, who are enticed into it by adult operators.
This applies to a large number of delinquents, and
constitutes a real social problem.

The rapid decline in religious training and
religious interest inevitably means a less healthy
conscience. In many delinquents it is very common
to find an almost total lack of any religious knowledge, interest, or belief. When one comes to
consider the attitude of society in practice to lawbreaking, birth control, and illicit sexual relationships, as is so clearly apparent in certain sections
of the press and entertainment world, one cannot
but conclude that such attitudes exercise an adverse
influence over the development of socially healthy
consciences.

This admittedly superficial survey of social
factors commonly involved is by no means complete,
and many other instances of conditions and attitudes
in and of the community will occur to the reader.
In considering the problem of delinquency it is
at least equally important also to study the children
who become delinquent. Juvenile delinquents
are in many ways relatively inferior to their nondelinquent brethren. This inferiority may be
physical or intellectual and sometimes both. Frequently it is slight but none the less significant.
Inferiorities are sometimes constitutional, but
perhaps usually the result of faulty nurture. Such
faulty nurture is in itself due to various social
deficiencies. Examples of such physical inferiorities
are poor bodily development often complicated by
old rickets, and specific defects such as poor sight
and hardness of hearing. Intellectually delinquents
by and large are of lower intelligence than nondelinquents. Many delinquents also appear constitutionally to lack stability of temperament.
Such disability prevents the person affected from
being able to compete on equal terms with his
better endowed or better developed rivals. The
ways in which such a principle can work in human
relationships and activities may profitably be left
to the reader to tease out for himself. Certain
classic types of reaction to any such disability are
that it may be regarded by its possessor as something calling for compensation ; or as a reason for
giving up altogether in face of difficulties ; or as a
useful attribute which can be exploited. Some of
the ways in which delinquency can be the product of
such a situation will be apparent to every psychiatric
social worker.

In each case it is essential to make a careful
physical survey of the child, not only to determine
if any disease processes are present, but also to
assess the functional capacity of the individual.
Similarly, one cannot get far in any problem of
delinquency without knowing the level of intelligence and of educational attainment of the child
in trouble. It is well to remember that an important
though very small group of cases of disturbed
conduct are the direct result of physical disease,
such as encephalitis lethargica and epilepsy ; though
the presence of the latter in any case does not mean
that it is necessarily the main cause. It is important
to keep one's eyes open for possible mental deficiency, as all too frequently this condition is for the
first time discovered only after a considerable
career of crime. Where mental deficiency is
pronounced, it will probably over-rule all the other
causal factors with regard to disposal.
In the final analysis delinquency does seem to be
dependent on a trait of character, and unless this
delinquent trait of character can be modified the
conduct will not change. It is useful therefore to
view delinquency as due to a trait of character
which may be the result of various circumstances.
One important trait is that which is dependent
essentially on a state of mental deficiency, and the
treatment will be that of mental deficiency. For
example, many a child plays truant from school
and then gets into all kinds of secondary delinquent
habits because, being mentally deficient, he cannot
understand or enjoy his work. The proper treatment may then be classification as educationally subnormal under the Education Act of 1944 whereby
he will receive suitable education either at a special
day school, or, if other conditions point to it, in
a special residential school for such children.
Very often, with such treatment the delinquent trait
of character disappears.

In quite a large number of cases the delinquent
trait of character develops because of the child's
instability of temperament ; this is often referred
to as a temperamental character trait. The very
fact that this is the main underlying cause of the
delinquency will suggest to the social worker the
lines of treatment necessary. It will also be obvious
that no sudden or dramatic result from treatment
can be looked for in such cases. One has to rely
mainly on prolonged careful training and re-education, often supported by a considerable measure of
external supervision and control. Such cases may
require to be bolstered up for many years to come.
The classic example of this is the boy or girl who
gets into trouble time and time again and who
seems to be unable to learn from experience or to
look ahead, qualities typical of the psychopathic
personality. Many such children end up in
approved schools where they often behave fairly
well and get along all right. Far too often, however,
on being set loose in the world without continued
supervision and guidance these individuals quickly
relapse into delinquency. This particular group,
as all psychiatric social workers well know, constitutes one of the large problems confronting
society. It does look as if special provision will
have to be made for the proper supervision and
control of such persons. It should be observed
that punishment is unlikely to have any prolonged
deterrent effect on such individuals.
A third delinquent character trait develops from
the influences of the environment, e.g. bad companions leading a child into bad habits. It is in this
third group of cases that there lies the main scope
for sharp disciplinary punishment, and one's
personal point of view is that corporal punishment
administered by the child's parents or by the school
teacher may be a useful remedy. Sometimes a
short separation from home which is clearly recognized by the child as a punishment, or the application
of the principle of restitution will be effective. It
is important also to provide such children with
really good alternative social outlets ; such measures
as club membership and adequate recreational
facilities are helpful. In this particular group the
imaginative psychiatric social worker can play a
very useful part.

In those cases where the trait of character is the
direct or indirect outcome of some organic disease,
the treatment is obviously that of the latter, of which
the conduct disorder is only a symptom.

Another important variety is known as the reaction
character trait. In these cases the person acquires
a delinquent anti-social character as a result of
suppressing the opposite tendency. An example
of this is where a child who is denied affection and
love so persistently and severely that he gets to the
point when he cannot stand such deprivation any
longer, will react to this by putting all thought of
it out of his conscious mind and by becoming
independent and self-sufficient. In order to keep
the unsatisfied tendency properly suppressed he has
to maintain this attitude of independence ; hence
it is very persistent and rather overdone. He
becomes hostile to everyone and very much against
all law and order. Such persons have little or no
feeling for others ; they are lonely and up against
the world. Their anti-social character is very
apparent to the community as is only to be expected
with such a mental mechanism ; and they have
no conscience with regard to what they do. Once
this transformation has taken place it is very
difficult or even impossible to reverse it. In order
to react to early adversity in so strong a fashion,
these persons require to have a certain robustness
of temperament which, had it only been canalized
in socially useful ways, would have made them
into really good citizens with considerable qualities
of leadership. They are also usually of good
intelligence. The psychiatric social worker will
come across many children exposed to just the
kind of deprivation which may be the stimulus for
the development of this particular type of reaction.
If such cases are encountered it is most important
to take steps to correct the unfortunate family
situation or to provide opportunities for substitute
gratification of the thwarted tendency, usually
the need for affection. In this way the hard core
of persistent, clever, adult criminals will be reduced.
A classic instance of this would be the following.
A school boy is not only unloved but actually
despised and hated by his father. There is a younger
brother who is the apple of father's eye. Father's
hatred is carried to the extent of severely thrashing
the boy at least once a week as a routine. The
boy for some years does his utmost to win father's
regard, but gradually becomes discouraged and,
after going through a phase of despondency and
suppressing his yearnings for parental affection,
turns not only against his parents but against all
figures of authority. He may then start stealing
cars and get into trouble with the police. Gradually he may become more and more delinquent
in his conduct, and may end up in Court on some
charge of a very grave type, such as armed robbery,
coupled with rape. The importance of the mental
mechanism underlying many such histories as this
indicates the need to identify such situations in
the early stages. Unhappily, by the time they
reach the hands of the psychiatrist these people
are on a par with so many cases of cancer coming
to the surgeon in that they are beyond any treatment. The best one can do very often is to provide
prolonged training and re-education as in Borstal ;
but unless someone succeeds in winning the affection
and devotion of the sufferer, for such he is, all this
is of little avail. In some cases the old suppressed
longing will emerge into the person's awareness to
the extent of his becoming, for no reason known
to himself, very melancholy and depressed. That
some such persons commit suicide is not to be
wondered at.

Another important trait of character is known as
a psycho-neurotic character trait. In such cases
the mental mechanism at work is that of a psychoneurosis and the delinquency is due to the emergence of what is repressed. The outstanding feature
of such cases is that the disturbed conduct is quite
foreign to the normal day-to-day character and
personality of the individual. The classic example
is the best pupil in the school who is detected stealing
from his teacher or from the other children. Very
often' the delinquency seems to be without any
immediately useful purpose, and indeed it may be
so designed that detection is inevitable and punishment ensues. These are the cases in which psychotherapy is the correct treatment. It is by dealing
with and clearing up the psycho-neurosis that the
conduct disturbance will disappear and the unconscious delinquent trait of character be eradicated.
Finally, there is what is called a psychotic character trait. In these cases the delinquent person
is suffering from a psychosis, usually schizophrenia, and his usual conduct is only a part of
his disordered mental state. Treatment is obviously
that of the psychosis. This is a small group but
one in which the experience of the psychiatric
social worker, who may be the first trained person
to meet the case, will be very helpful as the sooner
identified the sooner remedied.

When one considers the practical measures
which one can employ in dealing with delinquent
persons, one quickly finds that they are rather
limited in scope. The Juvenile Court can make a
variety of disposals. For example the Court can
place an accused person on probation, and this in
many cases is sufficient. The work of the probation officer and the psychiatric social worker overlap to some extent, and the more they co-operate
and get to know one another the more fruitful will
be their measures in dealing with their case material.
The whole range of residential disposal with the
Courts can apply, from foster homes and approved
hostels to Home Office schools and Borstal, have
their uses in different cases.

The psychiatric social worker may find it necessary
occasionally to advise parents to bring a child
before the Juvenile Court as being " beyond
control This is reserved, of course, only for
cases where the situation cannot really be satisfactorily resolved without recourse to the Court.
The enlightened magistrate may then be able to
order the type of disposal required. To deal with
all the weapons which the Court has at hand would
occupy far too much space, and in any case the
social worker will discover all she needs to find
out about these matters if only she will make the
necessary contact with the probation Officers in
her district.

The Education Act of 1944 has also improved
the facilities for the adequate treatment of some
of these conditions. In particular, the class of
problem child known as the " maladjusted pupil "
has been recognized. Provision for special hostels
at which such children can reside and have the
necessary psychiatric treatment is made in the Act,
though many local authorities have been rather
slow to do anything about this.

Perhaps the main outstanding problem for which
practically nothing has yet been done is that of the
large group of psychopathic persons, i.e. the
temperamental character trait cases, a problem
which has not yet even been fully thought out, and
certainly for which there is as yet but little adequate
constructive provision. In their work psychiatric
social workers will have many opportunities of
urging forward the growing edge of public opinion
and interest in this as in other social problems.
The local telephone directory will usually give the
address of the probation officers under the heading
of Probation Service. The probation officer has
in his possession all the information about special
hostels, clubs and other facilities. The Institute
for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency, 8
Bourdon Street, Davies Street, London, W.l,
has carried out much research into various
problems of delinquency and is a useful source of
information on any problems related with this field
of work.
