Mental and Scholastic Tests
=============================

Revised Edition. 
:Author: Cyril Burt. Staples. 35s.

This volume, one of vital importance to all interested
in the problems and implications of mental testing,
makes a timely reappearance in a second and enlarged
edition. Here we have a detailed description and
analysis of the investigations carried out by the author
during his years spent as Psychologist to the London
County Council. The appointment of Dr Burt to that
post in 1913 marked the beginning of a new era in the
assessment by scientific methods of children's intelligence and educational attainments. His own words,
give in the preface to the volume, show what were the
duties expected of him. "To assist teachers by developing means both for the examination or ascertainment,
and for the education or training, of the various types
of children needing special provision or attention."
This covered the study of subnormal pupils of all types
(backward, dull, mentally defective, delinquent and
nervous) as well as of the supernormal. But here, as
in other spheres, the study of the normal and deviations
from the normal complement each other and form part
of the same investigation. To Dr Burt falls the distinction of having been the pioneer in introducing in
this country, the now generally accepted methods for
the assessment of intelligence and educational attainments of children of all types.

The volume is divided into three main sections or
memoranda?the first dealing with Burt's revision for
English children of the original Binet-Simon Scale of
Intelligence Testing ; the second with the theoretical
validity of the results, and the third with Burt's own
tests of educational achievement.

In the new edition of this book, the main bulk of the
work is unchanged, but-several additions or appendices
of great importance and interest to present day practice
have been inserted. In the first appendix the author
discusses the nature of intelligence, with special reference to the distinctions between various types of theories.
In the second appendix he gives a detailed factor analysis
of the Binet-Scale. In the remaining ones he deals
with such valuable topics as the accuracy of his own
supplementary tests ; the contribution of schooling
to the scores on the Binet Test ; the concept of mental
age and some of the difficulties inherent in it ; and the
vexed and very pertinent problem for present day
psychologists and educationists of special abilities
and the extent to which such abilities can be assessed
in mental tests, and at what specific ages this assessment
can be most accurately carried out.

It is a pity that Professor Burt has not yet been able
to complete his revision of the Terman-Merrill Scale,
and to include his results in the present volume. Let us
hope that by the time the next edition appears, this will
have been completed, for it will form a very valuable
addition to what is still the most outstanding treatment
of the whole subject of mental testing.

This is a book which should be in the hands of all
teachers, school medical officers, education officers,
psychologists and those concerned in the present day
problem of " educating the child according to his age,
ability and aptitude
G.H.K.
