72 Mental Health
================

Three Bills, all with important mental health aspects
and all giving opportunities for the development of
mental health service to the community, are now before
Parliament, viz. the National Assistance Bill, the
Children's Bill and the Criminal Justice Bill. The two
former link up at several points with each other and
preceding legislation, particularly the National Health
Service Act, the Disabled Persons (Employment Act),
and the Education Act, and for efficient administration
will involve a large measure of co-operation between
the various Central and Local Authorities concerned.

The National Assistance Bill
----------------------------
This Bill, introduced in October, 1947, and referred
to Standing Committee C. in December, finally brings
to an end the old Poor Law and the mixed workhouse.
Whilst County and County Borough Councils are to
continue to be responsible for providing residential
accommodation for persons in need of it (other than
the sick who will be dealt with under the National
Health Service), financial assistance is to be the responsibility of the National Assistance Board, acting through
local officers, with local Appeal Tribunals to which
dissatisfied applicants may appeal.

For " persons in need- of re-establishment through
lack of instruction or training the Board is empowered
to provide Re-Establishment Centres, and in certain
circumstances maintenance in such a Centre may be
laid down as a condition of help. The National Association for Mental Health enlisted the help of sympathetic
members of Parliament in bringing before the Standing
Committee, when considering this clause, the importance
of recognizing that persons dealt with in these Centres
are likely to fall into three categories: (1) the " workshy (2) the mentally disabled, e.g. psychopaths and
neurotics, (3) the mentally subnormal?and that any
attempt to apply to all three groups the same methods of
training and handling will be, as experience has amply
shown, doomed to failure from the outset. This point
was ably made by Colonel Elliott, and it is hoped that
when the time comes for issuing Regulations in connection
with Re-Establishment Centres due regard will be paid
to it.

Clause 28, empowering local authorities:
to make arrangements for promoting the welfare
of persons . . . who are substantially and permanently handicapped by illness, injury or
congenital deformity or such other disabilities
as may be prescribed by the Minister,
makes no specific mention of the mentally disabled or
subnormal, and this point was also raised by the Association. It is understood, however, that the phrase is
considered to be sufficiently all-inclusive as it stands,
and that no further elaboration is required. Under
this clause, much constructive work can be carried out
by means of home teaching, hostels, the provision of
recreational facilities, etc., and voluntary organizations,
if suitable, may be employed by local authorities as their
agents?a proviso of which advantage may well be taken
in many areas.

A serious defect in this part of the Bill is, that no
mention is made of requiring that personnel used in
carrying out the new community care services shall be
required to have any specific qualifications or training.

In bringing this matter before members of the Standing
Notes on Recent Legislation
Committee, the Association drew attention to Section 66
of the National Health Service Act, which empowers
regulations to be made in regard to qualifications of the
workers engaged in the Service, as being a useful
precedent, and urged' its importance. During the
debate on the clause in question, a promise was made by
the Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry, that the
matter would be duly considered.

The Children's Bill
------------------
This Bill, introduced in the House of Lords in January,
implements the main recommendations of the Curtis
Report and must be read in conjunction with the Assistance Bill, in that it provides for children formerly in the
care of the Public Assistance Authorities (of whom no
mention is made in that Bill) and for other children who
are orphans, deserted or homeless or whose parents
are unable to look after them, either temporarily or
permanently by reason of " mental or bodily disease
or infirmity or other incapacity err any other circumstances ". It is to be the duty of Local Authorities
in respect of such children (if under the age of 17), to
receive them under their care by a definite resolution
and to keep them under care " so long as the welfare of
the child appears to them to require it and the child
has not attained the age of 18
Children may be dealt with by local authorities in
the following ways:

(a) By being boarded out.
Ib) By being placed in a Home provided either by
the Local Authority itself or by a voluntary
organization.
(c) In the case of a child over compulsory school
age, by being placed in a Hostel (which may or
may not be provided by the Local Authority ?
itself), catering for young people under 21 in
employment or undergoing further education
or training.

Local Authorities are further required to provide
After-Care for a child formerly in their care, up to the
age of 18 (unless satisfied that it is unnecessary) or to
see that it is provided by any voluntary organization
responsible for such a child.

The Bill contains provisions dealing with the registration and regulation of Voluntary Children's Homes
and empowers Treasury grants to be made to voluntary
organizations responsible for such Homes. Local
Authorities also may, with the consent of the Secretary
of State, make contributions to voluntary organizations
in their areas whose primary object is to " promote the
welfare of children ".

Attention may also be drawn to Part V of the Bill
extending the measures in regard to Child Life Protection, hitherto applicable only to children under the
age of 9 years, to all children of compulsory school
age and, in the case of those still with foster-parents
after leaving school, until the age of 18. Clause 5 makes
it obligatory upon Local Authorities to act as "fit
persons" under the Children and Young Persons
Acts, if the Court makes an order to that effect.

To carry out their duties, Local Authorities are
required?either separately or in conjunction with
neighbouring Authorities?to establish Children's Committees and to appoint Children's Officers. For this
purpose, the names, ages, experience and qualifications
of the selected candidates, must be submitted to the
Secretary of State, and if he is of opinion that any such
candidate is unsuitable he may prohibit the appointment.
In the case of Officers already employed, however, the
Secretary of State, may dispense with this requirement.
The necessity of training for persons employed in
connection with the care of homeless children also
receives recognition in Clause 43 of the Bill, which
empowers the Secretary of State to make grants to
students undergoing training and to any organization
providing training courses.

The provisions of the Bill undoubtedly constitute a
great step forward in social legislation and the speed
with which action has been taken on the Curtis Report
is a notable achievement. From those who have
supported the view that the Ministry of Education,
rather than the Home Office, should be the Government
Department responsible for all children, and that their
care locally should be undertaken by Education Authorities rather than by new ad hoc Children's Committees,
some criticism may justifiably be forthcoming on the
scanty references to education that are to be found in
the Bill, particularly in regard to the special needs of the
handicapped children, who will inevitably be amongst
those coming under care. Presumably Clause 12(2)
(which enacts that a local authority shall make such use
of " facilities and services available for children in the
care of their own parents " as appears to be reasonable)
will include special educational treatment, and the
supposition is that children in Homes are to be educated
in the schools of the area. There is, further, Clause 21,
authorizing the Secretary of State and the Minister of
Education to make regulations for providing (where
a local authority under the Children's Act and a local
Education Authority " have concurrent functions")
by which authority these functions are to be exercised,
but there is a somewhat disquieting vagueness and
absence of precision about such phraseology.
In this Bill?as in other contemporary legislation?
the scaffolding erected is to be filled in by subsequent
Regulations. Those provided for, as the Bill stands
at the time of writing, are on the following subjects:
Boarding Out, by Local Authorities and Voluntary
Organizations, Conduct of Homes and Hostels run
by Local Authorities, Conduct of Voluntary Homes,
Emigration arrangements of Voluntary Organizations,
and the allocation of functions between the Local
Education Authorities and Children's Committees
referred to above. The National Association is therefore
making a close examination of the Bill with a view to
submitting points which should find a place in such
Regulations.

Criminal Justice Bill

The introduction of this Bill?substantially on the
lines of its predecessor which was one of the earliest
war casualties?fills an urgent need, and, from the
mental health point of view, no serious criticism appears
to be necessary.

The amendments proposed by the National Association are designed principally to ensure that the "duly
qualified medical practitioner", on whose evidence
an offender may be required to submit to treatment
for his mental condition, or by whom a report as to
suitability for Borstal sentence is made, shall have had
special experience in psychiatry. It is further recommended that Detention Centres should be in buildings
which are not parts of a prison, and that they should
be staffed by trained personnel?also that the age
groups, 14 to 17 and 17 to 21, should be segregated.
The Bill assumes that mental treatment will be obtained
free, but it is suggested that Local Authorities should
be empowered to pay for patients attending Voluntary
Clinics in view of the present shortage of facilities, and
that where possible part of the payment should be
recovered from the patient. Finally, where young
offenders released from prison on licence are placed
under the supervision of a voluntary society, it is submitted that the use of such societies should be limited
to those which employ trained Social Workers.
Education (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, 1948
This short Bill contains two provisions of importance
relating to mental health.

First, it will now be possible for the report made by
an Education Authority to a Local Health Authority,
that a child is incapable of receiving education at school
by reason of mental disability, to be cancelled, if it
appears that, as the result of, e.g. training in an Occupation
Centre, he should be returned to school.

Secondly, maladjusted children undergoing treatment
as voluntary patients under the Mental Treatment Act,
are no longer to be withdrawn from the aegis of the
Education Authority, but may, if considered desirable,
continue to attend school.
