School for Educationally Subnormal Junior Boys
===============================================

:Author: EARLE L. DAVISON, F.L.S., M.Coll.S.S.T. ^
Headmaster, Special (Junior Boys) School, Hillsborough, Sheffield
We have in our school about 100 boys, whose
Intelligence Quotients range from 50 to 70 and
who are aged 7 to 11 years. They are sent to us at
all ages as they are " classified " from the ordinary
schools. We pass them on to a senior boys'
school, where they stay until they are 16.

Although our building is in a large city, we are not
far from its " golden frame " and, we feel, we are
within easy reach of a very varied environment??
of which we try to make full use, as will be seen
later.

Our first aim, like that of a good home, is the
character training of each boy. We try to provide
suitable opportunities to enable every single boy
to grow into a happy, healthy and useful lad,
giving him a " conscious awareness " of what is
required of him to prepare for a full life of useful
service for other people. As these boys are educationally subnormal, it is our special endeavour to
try to train each to be active, self-reliant and to
make him feel that he can succeed; while, at the
same time, he is practised in careful use of material
and time and he is taught also to make good use
of his spare time. As ours is a Junior (Primary)
school, we try especially to utilize or, if necessary,
revive natural observation and lively curiosity
and to develop certain necessary skills. Every
single boy is studied in detail, his characteristics
and details noted, looking for what is good and
particularly his possibilities ; treatment being
made accordingly and work set to suit him.
Simultaneously, he is taught to fit himself in with
the other boys and grown-up persons with whom
he comes in contact.

We try to make the building bright and attractive
in every part at all times to arrest attention: the
instruction that is imparted is so formulated as to
arouse interest: while what each boy does in and
out of school, now and later, we make our concern
to show he puts into practice what he has learned.
We think of our curriculum in terms of experience
rather than knowledge to be acquired, and we
encourage each boy to attain gradually to that
control and orderly management of his energies,
impulses and emotions which, we feel, is the essence
of intellectual discipline. Our school, more particularly than others, is not a community " set
apart " ; although of course we realize that the
adjustment of these backward boys reacts more
slowly. We do all in our power to keep hopeful
and to strengthen our determination to succeed,
and we attempt to imbue each boy with the spirit
to do his best at all times.

We have tried to establish a code of good conduct,
to form useful habits and to develop personality.
Realizing that behaviour is influenced by the school
" tone " we have as the keynote, self-discipline.
And the discipline is taught through example and
the interest of the boy in his tasks, also by being
honest with every boy (particularly those with whom
it is difficult to be so) and by trusting each boy and
letting him feel that he is expected to discipline
himself. The useful habits are personal and those
of social adjustment, including safety training.
The last named, we feel, is vital, as it is essential
that accident prevention with these boys must
become habitual and cover all the common causes:?
fire, traffic, misuse of tools, etc.

Religious instruction is of a wide and practical
kind. The instruction is based upon everyday
experiences : Nature, well-known customs, Holy
days, the Bible (particularly the New Testament),
the Great Church throughout the world, suitable
characters, incidents, etc. Corporate Worship is
taken daily with hymns and prayers selected with
regard to joy of living, Nature, praise and conduct
worthy as example (not child's sin and inborn
wickedness). Appropriate music and readings
accompany and the wireless service is taken.
Observation of development of commendable
personality is noted (in writing) and attention is
drawn to this with the individual concerned and,
where desirable, before others. An attempt is made
to eliminate undesirable traits of character by
carefully substituting better traits and by stimulating conscious effort to happy adjustment. We try
to let each boy experience success in achieving
useful ends and by giving him real purpose all the
while for his life in and out of school, both now and
later. We encourage frequently, and restrain
only when absolutely necessary. We attempt to
make each boy feel that each of us is interested in
him. We call him by his Christian name, let him
talk, listen to him and allow him to develop his
individuality. We realize that character training
cannot be taught, it can only be caught; it cannot
be tested but it shows results; it develops unconsciously but we can consciously try to develop
it.

Our methods vary from time to time, as found
necessary and desirable. The interest of the boy
decides. We find out what each is capable of learning, how best he can learn it and then let him
proceed to do so. We teach through natural
activities such as Play, Sense impressions (seeing
illustrations, hearing stories, touching the real
things, etc.) and Activity. A large part of the
curriculum is centred round units of work, based
on the capacity of the class, the interests of the class
and the needs of the community, utilizing the child's
motives.

The intellectual needs of our boys are based on
their experiences?they explore the people and
materials of their environment?these arouse
problems to try to solve and instruction grows
out of them. The boys are curious about where
they live, we find, when we select dynamic topics
and follow these through to other parts of the
country, and other parts of the world and " backwards " in time. We utilize real experience of the
real world, the " here and now" of concrete
contacts until the child is capable of reaching
beyond.

" Treasures are to be found everywhere, on the
hilltops, in the valleys and in the nooks and corners
of towns?but it is only those who search for them
who find them.''''

Each teacher finds out what his boys are interested in?most boys are curious about themselves,
people generally, their coverings (clothes and homes),
their immediate environment (natural and artificial,
also mechanical) and their links with the greater
world, also present-day events and, to a lesser
extent, " links with the past ". We develop these
through projects from time to time; these are not
over-ambitious and embrace various aspects of
the curriculum. They also link together occasionally groups and even classes. Observation is
cultivated at all times and in all sorts of ways.
Curiosity is stimulated and searching is encouraged
after what is not known or not understood.
Visual and auditory aids are used frequently.
We find immense value from using the episcope
and cine and we have recently tried the film-strip.
The gramophone and wireless are very useful and
even the sound-projector at times. By these means
we try to bring alive or give a breath of reality to
what would otherwise be far from either of these
states to these boys.

As the boys progress through the school, we find
we can allocate some of the work in suitably
graded assignments. Even some of the younger
ones are settling to this method in dealing with
some of the skills.

Health training looms large in our school?health
of body and of mind. These boys need hygienic
habits. The work must be practical and each boy
must feel the need of his training. We have regular
inspections of hands, nails, ears, hair, etc., in
interesting and helpful ways. Cleanliness is not
regarded as a fetish but as a necessity after dirty
work or play. Training in neatness and tidiness
is done so as to lead each to take a pride in his own
appearance. Some of the health habits are:
correct breathing, the need for fresh air and sunlight, the value of outdoor exercise and ventilation
indoors, satisfactory and sufficient rest, care of
eyes, ears and teeth, wholesome food (e.g. school
milk and midday meal), correct eating and clothing
(cleanliness and tidiness?repairing damage, such
as sewing on buttons and darning holes), neat,
clean and tidy appearance of surroundings at school
and, we hope, home. Although our building is
only a single-storey one, we feel it is very essential
training for our boys to have fire drill. This is
taken in progressive stages but still kept very simple,
trying to inculcate the self-discipline necessary
should an emergency ever occur to any of them
either at school or elsewhere.

There are certain health practices which it is
extremely useful for these boys to know but which
we cannot see at school if they are carried out at
home. These include helpfulness at home, correct
sleeping, teeth cleaning, simple cooking?but
these we try to " get across " at suitable opportunities and our camps last summer provided
chances for practical teaching of many of these.
Bodily activity is necessary for youngsters and for
ours we feel this must be allowed for frequently.
There is a fair amount of movement about the class? room, and the school and physical education
follows along natural lines. Games, remedial
exercises and preliminary training attempt to lead
to correct breathing, chest expansion, correct
growing of the various limbs, balancing, skipping
and catching. Healthy general exercise is aimed
at rather than specialized development. We are
trying to teach every boy to swim (unless there is a
very good reason why he should not learn). Rhythmic work, with and without music, appeals to them
and we use this a good deal.

The first-aid treatment of common accidents to
self and others is taught to accustom the boys to
overcoming repugnance at the sight of blood, to
encourage them to attend correctly to simple cuts,
burns, etc.

Sex topics are taught as they arise?and they do
arise (some of them saw a calf, born while at the
summer camp, and this resulted in many questions
concerning the differences between male and female
creatures, etc.). Physiological facts and conventions of human society are discussed naturally.
Individual boys observed to have sex problems or
worries are dealt with separately.

Health training is linked wherever possible with
other work, not only in school, but also out of
school. A healthy use of own spare time is encouraged. A Wolf Cub Pack has been formed at
school and the Cubs are taken and advised to join
with other Cubs (and later Scouts). Boys not only
tell us but bring along examples of their spare-time
activities. Some of these they have exchanged
with other similar boys, even as far away as New
Zealand; this has not only encouraged them, but
made them pleased with their efforts and results.
Social Training, or training in living together,
now and after school, is part of the general school
method rather than instruction. We are trying
to introduce gradually self-government to train the
boys to feel that each helps to direct the social life
about him. All lessons provide for this training
but special attention is drawn to it in the following
directions:

Games, both outdoor and indoor ; natural play
is directed so that there is harmonious occupation.
Reasonable quietness, no interference, honest
competition and abiding by decisions, particularly
results, are insisted upon always.

Library. Although many of these boys cannot
yet read and take a long while before they can do
so, many library books are procured and the whole
issue and utilization of these provide valuable
social training.

Leisure. We feel that training and suggestion
for active and healthy use of spare time is most
beneficial to the boys.

Social studies are not attempted with these junior
boys but some projects are undertaken which elicit
social procedure in various ways, showing how we
human beings live together in groups. Some of our
local studies show how people have developed or
are modifying natural surroundings.

Re-creation, or appreciation, periods are special
times for this social training. The boys are taught
to listen to good reading of suitable extracts and
they learn to recite some of these. Listening to
and joining in with suitable music are also encouraged. As previously mentioned, visual aids are
found to be very helpful. The social value of silent
reading is being attempted with the few who really
do acquire this skill.

Thrift training is taught always and in all ways,
more by example than precept; teaching the careful
use of all materials, time, money and other people's
property.

Our boys " learn by doing" a good deal.
Activity is a method, not an isolated subject. There
is copious oral work which includes narration,
description, discussion, conversation, spontaneous
and prepared dramatization, puppetry and miming.
The boys' natural collecting propensities are used
in various ways. " Art and Craft " are stimulated
in as many ways as possible, and the expressions
studied and developed along individual lines, much
illustration, design and making being performed
in connection with all sorts of aspects of the work.
Any individual or group, with a special " flair
develops this as far as possible, even to the extent of
allowing the work to overlap from one class to
another, if required.

To meet the needs of everyday life, now and in
their future, these boys will require a minimum
essential of certain Skills. These will chiefly
consist of what is usually known as the " 3 R's
The instruction is individual, the boys being regrouped from their age-classification to an ability
group for Language and again for Arithmetic.
In the former, spoken work comes first and an
attempt is made to stimulate in each boy the desire
to read. We try to discover what is handicapping
him, such as innate deficiency, non-literary home
background or unfavourable emotional attitude.
We use oral exercises of many kinds, and also a
variety of material is provided to create situations
which demand the use of language. The Language
work is carefully graded, linking oral, reading,
spelling, writing, miming and dramatic work.
It would take too long to explain in detail our
methods and matter in teaching the Skills. The
Arithmetic is, to put it briefly, " Arithmetic in
Action " ; there is always practical everyday
foundation for the exercises and the calculations
are kept within the boys' own ordinary experiences.
Diagnostic tests are set periodically and all the
work is individual, although the boys co-operate
rather than compete by working in groups. Oral
and mental exercises and games are used throughout,
as also are the practical weights and measures.
Arithmetic is linked with the boy, his own life and
events and also with projects, specially started or
as found necessary. "Telling the time" is a
Wolf Cub test and therefore not thought of as
"hard lessons". In similar ways, Skills are
acquired by stimulating and maintaining interests
until achievement is possible.

The school is organized, as is usual in schools of
this kind, in classes of 20 and the boys are placed
in these according to their chronological ages.
As explained above, they are regrouped for the
Skills, but it is clearly understood that any boy who
progresses beyond his group is promoted to the
next above and any who retrogress are demoted.
At the same time, careful observation is made for
any emotional effects. It may be of special interest
to note that one boy improved so much that recently
he was transferred back to a normal school. The
Head and Class Teachers meet regularly to discuss
individual boys and also different aspects of the
work. Each has a copy of what we call " Suggestions for the guidance of the Staff", and after
meetings we add to this after deciding developments in any particular way. For instance, when
the Curtis Report was published we selected the
portions applicable to our work and after comparing
our views incorporated the suitable statements.
The work is planned under the headings: Training,
Interests, Activities and Skills. Each is subdivided. The Training covers character, social
and health training, each with various aspects. The
Interests include project, centre of interest,
visits, incentives. The Activities cover oral,
written,art and modelling, each with various aspects.
The Skills are subdivided into the different Language
and Number work. A record is made each week
of what has been done. Very full notes are kept
regarding each boy under the same headings,
except that of course the sub-headings need to be
different in some cases for the compilation of
information for the reports. One of these is sent
to the parents of each boy at Christmas and summer,
with a special note of suggestions concerning good
traits to be encouraged and bad habits to be discouraged. Once a year before going into the next
age-group, a summary is made under similar
headings in the Progress Record book which covers
the whole of a boy's Special Educational career. The
time-table is approximately thus: assembly for
corporate worship and brief instruction of religious
or character training type, Language groups, milk
drinking and break, open period, Arithmetic
groups, washing (practical hygiene is carried out
by individuals in whatever form is necessary and
whenever necessary), Lunch, Wolf Cub practices
and Free Play, Activities (Outdoor, Expression, etc.),
break, Social, Re-creation. Adjustments are made
between teachers for Physical Education, Music and
use of Wireless and Visual Aids to avoid clashing.
This time-table is elastic and flexible, and adjustments are made from time to time for individuals,
groups and classes when required.

Reading matter appertaining to our work is
collected for the use of all the Staff. In the Head
Teacher's room is kept a copy of each of the
standard works and also new publications relating
to surveys of the problems and methods, characterstudy and training, time-table and general principles,
methods, subjects and lessons, project and local
work, educational recording of the school child
together with the issues of helpful periodicals
such as: The Special Schools Journal, Mental
Health, Parents of Backward Children Journal,
School Nature Study, etc. In the Staff room suitable
books are collected for lessons use, for example,
The Children's Encyclopaedia, religious, health and
games books, and also books on varied activities
including outdoor work. Copious supplies of
suitable illustrations of all kinds are obtained and
used for wall decoration, episcope projection, and
individual purposes, and these are stored in the
Staff room for common use. Specimens and
materials, such as those relating to stages in the
development of the manufacture of pottery, and
also living creatures of many kinds, are obtained
for use. These are exhibited on one of the exhibition tables, either in the hall for all in the school,
or in any one of the classrooms.

Arising out of our work at school, we took during
last Whitsuntide holiday a small party of the boys
for a ramble in Derbyshire. We were away for
nearly a week and stayed at Youth Hostels. This
experience was, we felt, most valuable, in many
ways; so much so that we immediately planned
a further development for a part of the summer
holiday. This time we took, a much larger party
camping at Castleton: the senior boys had one
week and the juniors had another. We got to
know those boys then and they got to know us, each
to the advantage of the other, as would never have
been possible in the ordinary school life.
By our various activities we are going further than
the boys, for we are reaching their parents. These
come along in most encouraging numbers to talk
to us, at the outings, at celebrations, upon invitation
after each report, at frequent calls, and we are
learning more about our " problems " and their
lives. We and they, from the remarks which we
hear, are finding this connection most beneficial.
Our Staff is a most willing team and all pull
together. By this means our difficulties are surmounted and to counterbalance what is called
subnormal in the boys we must surely describe as
supernormal the enthusiasm and team spirit of the
Staff. The cheerfulness, hard work and co-operation
of every one is what is improving the life,
appearance and future for each of the boys who is
sent here.
