The International Congress on Mental Health
===========================================

London, August 11th to 21st, 1948.
Two-and-a-half years have passed since the.
National Association for Mental Health was asked
to run international conferences in London by three
separate bodies?the International Committee for
Mental- Hygiene, the International Committee for
Child Psychiatry and the International Federation
for Medical Psychotherapy.

After over two years of preparation, it seems
hard to realize that the work of the Congress came
to a successful conclusion last August and that the
main task was accomplished. Comparatively little
need be said about the two technical conferences
on Child Psychiatry and on Psychotherapy. They
both of them produced some useful papers and
discussion which helped to clarify the main themes
of aggression and guilt which they had selected.
Those who attended them were, in the main, the
same people as those attending the Conference on
Mental Hygiene, and this meeting, which was the
longest of the three, was also by far the most
experimental and interesting.

The Preparatory Commissions, of which there
were some 350 in 27 different countries, were
perhaps the most important part of the whole
Congress activity. The reports from these interprofessional discussion groups were edited and
integrated for the use of the International Preparatory Commission which met at Roffey Park for a
fortnight prior to the Congress. Something of
real importance has been done in bringing together
people from different professions who hardly knew
each other in many cases, who have now learnt
to work together for a common goal and are in
a great many instances continuing to do so. The
International Preparatory Commission produced
an agreed statement for the Congress, which
also was a considerable achievement since it was
hammered out by 25 mature men and women from
ten countries and from ten different disciplines.
The Congress therefore started with a certain sense
of a common objective, and the Mental Hygiene
Conference was coloured throughout by the interest
in the preliminary work which had been done and
by the fact that the second speaker at each of the
plenary sessions was reporting on the work of the
International Preparatory Commission.

It is not remarkable that the inter-professional
and inter-national groups which met with such
enthusiasm throughout the Congress in London
felt that their experience and work was perhaps
the most useful part of the whole meeting. The
Congress Bulletin, which had been issued during
the year preceding the Congress, has had one
issue since August and is to appear again in December, reproducing the various statements of these
groups which met during the Congress and their
comments on the International Preparatory Commission Statement. After December the Bulletin
will be continued, and will be the first organ for
international communication for the World Federation for Mental Health, to which reference is made
elsewhere.

Allowing for the 183 people who registered as
members but never turned up, or at any rate never
claimed their papers, but including 280 relatives
of members who had registered as such and attended
the Congress, there were 2,204 people in attendance
at the meetings in Central Hall and Westminster
School. Almost exactly 50 per cent, of this group
came from overseas and from 54 countries; the
balance came from Great Britain.

The organization was effective and the comments
on this were almost universally a tribute to the
Organizer and his staff, as well as'to the British
as a group. The National Association, as the host
for these three conferences, has certainly achieved
something of real value through the demonstration
of first-rate efficiency, and the toughest critics from
overseas, from the press and from those used to
international meetings, were considerably impressed.

They saw, as someone put it, that " the old lion
can move Our own press was not very inspired
in its handling of the Congress. The overseas
press, and particularly that of the United States,
was exceptionally good and productive. The press
were allowed in for the whole of the Congress,
even the technical conferences, and, with possibly
one or two instances from our own country, there
was no unsatisfactory or undesirable reporting
of the technical meetings. The B.B.C. came in
late to the proceedings, but eventually a considerable
number of broadcasts went out. The European
service produced the outstanding instance of
co-operation and of realization of the importance
of what we were attempting. There were many
broadcasts over the American and Canadian
networks.

The specialist meetings, which were dealing with
the particular interests of groups as apart from the
general theme of the Congress, were very well
attended, were interesting and enthusiastic. We
owe considerable gratitude to the societies in
London which made themselves responsible as
hosts.

Under Lady Norman's able guidance, the social
side of the Congress was extremely satisfactory,
and there were very few people who were fortunate
enough to be there who will readily forget the
impression made by Sir Owen Morshead during
the visit to Windsor Castle.

It is extremely difficult to assess the results of
such a Congress. The World Federation for
Mental Health was brought into being, as also was
the International Association for Child Psychiatry.
Many old contacts were renewed for the first time
since the war and a vast number of new contacts
were established. Discussion groups in many
places are continuing their work and new ones are
coming into being. Reports are being given and
special conferences organized to continue the
discussion of the Congress topics in many countries
throughout the world. UNESCO and the World
Health organizations are both of them considering
the recommendations contained in the International
Preparatory Commission Statement and approved
by the Congress as a whole. Men and women
in various parts of the world are certainly rather
more alive to the possibilities of the particular
approach which this Congress was emphasizing.
They realize, and can demonstrate to other
people, that team work between social scientists
and doctors is necessary for improved mental
health. Most carry with them the conviction that
human nature and social institutions also are capable
of modification, and there is some evidence that
people feel that this emphasis on mental health
provides some new hope for a troubled world.
How far all this may lead us in the future depends
largely on how much we in this country and our
friends and colleagues in other countries follow
it up, and how seriously we work to broaden our
outlook; deepen our knowledge and propagate
our ideas.

It is hoped that the printed proceedings of the
Congress, which will appear in five separate volumes,
will be available early in the New Year.

R. Rees
(President of the Congress).
