Psychiatric Examination of the School Child
============================================

:Author: Muriel Barton Hall, M.D. Edward Arnold & Co.
London. 15s. net.

When a book with such a title includes a detailed
technique of psychiatric examination, a systematic
description of the clinical field and a section on the
writing of psychiatric reports, in spite of the Author's
disavowal, it can scarcely be regarded as other than a
textbook of diagnostic psychiatry. The stated intention
of the book is to portray general principles of assistance
to medical practitioners, especially school medical
officers, in clinical examination and it is hoped that
educationists and others may be interested.

The approach is physically determined and readers
interested in dynamic psychology will find that, far from
elucidating general principles, the psychological level
of the book is superficial and unenquiring.

The classification employed is based almost exclusively
on symptoms, but readers may feel that the time has
passed when child psychiatry can afford to be content
with merejy symptomatic divisions. Within this classification, temperamental states are included with nervous
habits (so-called) such as thumb sucking, enuresis, tics,
and sleeping and feeding disorders; whereas inadequacy,
anxiety and attention-getting behaviour are grouped
under a separate heading together with behaviour
disorders (so-called), such as lying and stealing. A
separate chapter is given to juvenile delinquency and yet
another to " the psycho-neuroses Repeated references to the difficulty of distinguishing between the
divisions are scarcely surprising in the circumstances
and no attempt is made to relate classification to
pathology.

The weakness in classification is most apparent in the
chapter on Psychopathic States because, coming towards
the end, most of the thunder has been stolen by the
earlier chapters and there is little left to contribute to
the student's understanding of psychopathy. Here,
as elsewhere, the experienced reader may feel that he is
being led through a territory where much is observed,
little understood and nothing explained.

The book is marred by a lack of scientific curiosity;
for example, it is remarked that except for certain
constitutional handicaps, symptoms tend to be less
severe in young children than in older ones. This
surely depends on the criteria of severity and many will
consider this observation to be quite remarkably untrue.
Whereas stag hunting begets more public protests than
fox hunting, the rat is chased and slaughtered with
universal approval and it may be that the size of the
animal has something to do with it. Or again, nail
biting is described in terms of metabolic anomalies,
habit formation and frustration, with the symptom as
a means of relieving nervous tension. The nai've speculation follows that the intelligent child may find time to
analyse his thoughts and feelings while biting his nails.
A similar unenquiring attitude is found in two tall
stories illustrating the importance of paying attention
to early history. A self-willed (sic) boy defied his mother
deliberately before a tramcar full of people when he
was nine months old; and a dishonest maiden at the age
of twenty-two months took a penny from her mother
" by stealth and on submission to a third degree
examination passed it surreptitiously from hand to hand
to avoid detection. These stories are given as fact
and not as illustrations of the need to distinguish between
history and parental interpretation. Again, laziness is
dealt with as a phenomenon in its own right, rather
than as a symptom arising out of the interaction of
strong dynamic forces.

The many references to discipline, self control, wilfulness and so on are more moralistic than scientific.
Modern readers of psychological literature demand a
critical attitude to these phenomena, an analysis of their
component forces in their conscious and unconscious
significance to the individual and to the community.
Without this critical attitude, psychiatry has little to offer
except systematization to the understanding of behaviour
problems, not already contained in religious and ethical
systems.

The examining doctor is advised to withhold blame,
blunt remarks and harsh comment " no matter how
justified they may appear when talking to the parents;
and to resist the temptation to demean the parents or
to reveal their ignorance. Undoubtedly this advice is
fundamental to the psychiatric attitude, but if necessary,
it is a sad commentary on the present state of medical
education and manners. However, such temptations
are less inimical to psychiatry than the state of mind in
which ?these ideas are consciously formulated, and both
are far less dangerous than the unconscious judgement
which betrays its presence in the use of such terms as
" spoiling ", " self-discipline " and " uncontrollable
Let us seek an enquiring attitude in psychiatric practice
and leave moral evaluations to our off-duty hours and
to the clergy and lawyers. K.S.
