Child Guidance
=================

:Author: R. F. BARBOUR, F.R.C.P., D.P.M.

The study of the psychiatric problems of adults
has shown that they mostly start in early life before
the individual has reached school age. It is in the
first five years of life that the emotional attitudes of
a person are formed, his independence or sense of
inferiority, his reaction to authority and to people
of his own age. These are the .emotional patterns
which determine neurosis in later life. When the
importance of the child's psychological problems
was first realized, people shrank from using the word
" psychiatric " to describe them, as that term was
almost synonymous with " mental " or " lunatic "
and instead the term " Child Guidance " was used,
the word " guidance " emphasizing the natural
growing powers of the child, who could be guided
to grow aright.

All behaviour can be- regarded as the resultant
of three sets of forces. There is first the inborn
heredity and constitution, then early training and
experiences, and finally present environment, both
material and social. The same behavour, stealing,
bed-wetting or nightmares, will be assessed very
differently according to the contributory factors.
An only child of university capacity, but with a
broken home, who steals, is a very different problem
from the tenth of twelve children who sits near the
bottom of his class and whose only recreational
facilities are the street or bombed-out site. In
each case the relevant facts under these three
different headings must be found out, a time consuming process but in the long run well worth while.
It is possible for a single properly qualified individual
to elicit all the facts but in clinics the custom has
grown up of having a team of three, psychiatrist,
psychologist and psychiatric social worker, though
some clinics would add two other members to the
team, paediatrician and play therapist.

Before seeing how the team works it is worth
while considering where the child should be seen.
Practice differs, at the one end there is the mental
hospital out-patient clinic, at the other the individual
interview at the child's own school. The hospital
staff stress the continuity of patient and symptoms
with full facilities for laboratory investigation and
in-patient treatment, while those who favour the
interview in school, point out that the child is seen
amid familiar surroundings, that he can be observed
in the playground and that he does not even know
that he is being thought of as a " special case ",
let alone a patient. Still somewhat opposed, but?
less markedly, are the Child Guidance Centre and
the psychological clinic at a Children's Hospital.
The latter may have unpleasant associations and
arouse memories of injections, tonsils ; the word
" centre" is preferred by many educational
psychologists as it is non-medical. In the middle
comes the Child Guidance Clinic, usually psychiatric
in its approach, but sometimes more broadly
medical with a psychiatrist only consulting as
required.

From the foregoing it can be seen that the emotional problems of children can be approached from
two different angles, the medical and the educational.
The same problem can be regarded as either retarded
* This is the second article of a series concerning services of interest to the social worker, contributed by invitation.?Ed.
development or as stunted growth ; the latter has a
medical flavour, the former an educational. As
will be seen later, it is not always obvious which
member of the team should be the therapist.. It
has been suggested that if several children could
be " trained " together then it was an educational
problem, but if individual attention was required
then it was medical, but group therapy has made
this distinction pointless. Legal requirements, as
for instance, the signature on the Ministry form
2 H.P., make the doctor's examination essential
where any form of special educational treatment is
required.
It is very desirable that " access " to a clinic
should be as easy as possible. Most referrals will
come through educational or medical channels,
but parents should be allowed to come direct.
The problem may be one they do not wish discussed
outside the home or they may be over-anxious, the
latter at first sight might seem a waste of time but
the over-anxious parent " infects " his child so
that there is in fact a problem to be dealt with,
even though it is 90 per cent, on the parent's side.
At a Child Guidance Centre or Clinic then one
will expect to find a team of three. Usually it is
the psychiatric social worker who takes the history
from the parent, nineteen times out of twenty this
is the mother. The history will cover material
facts such as the living conditions and opportunities
for play but it will deal also with the parents and
other members of the family. The early development of the child, major events such as illnesses,
evacuation or change of school are recorded.
One is on the look-out for significant correlations
such as symptoms starting after the birth of the
next child, when father was demobilized or when
mother started to go out to work. Of special
importance is how the problem appeared to the
parents and their reaction to it. While mother is
being interviewed the psychologist may be seeing the
child. An estimate of the intelligence will be made,
his educational attainments measured. This is a
standardized situation, rather like school and the
child is asked set questions. By contrast, the interview with the psychiatrist is freer, there is more give
and take so that the emotional problems are more
easily seen. Usually some form of projection test
is also used so that the child by his actions and words
reveals his problems as he feels them, this is often
in marked contrast to his actual words which may
deny the problem that is too real to be voiced.
A period of free activity, play or blackboard, follows
and a physical examination with special attention
to minor degrees of deafness, impaired vision,
rounds off" the interview.

Each of these interviews will take on the average,
an hour. A conference of the team follows, each
contributing their side of the picture.

At the Bristol Clinic we see eight or nine new cases
each week, the following six cases were all seen
within one week, the three others were an enuretic,
another " care and protection " case, and a
stammerer.

(1) Boy, aged 9\ years, referred by speech therapist
at request of headmaster who was concerned about
his educational backwardness and wondered how
far it was due to his left-handedness.

An only child, his father in the R.A.F. was posted
as " missing, presumed killed " in 1942 ; five
years later, two years after the end of the war,
this boy had still not been told that his father would
never come back. His mother, tense, with an artificial laugh, was in half-time work. They both
lived with her parents.

His early development showed he was slow in
learning to talk, toilet training was completed by
two years. He was always a poor sleeper.
Physical examination showed a healthy lad,
left-handed and left-eyed. His finger nails were
bitten, his speech showed little hesitation but he
could not pronounce " sc " as in school or skate.
His intelligence quotient was 93, he was twelve
months retarded in his educational work.
He was excessively polite, asked permission before
doing anything, unless occupied his fingers were
continually intertwining. He was on the verge
of tears when talking about his father and again
when talking about his pet dog which had been
destroyed. Three wishes of the boy in the story
completion test were to have (1) some friends,
(2) friends to play with him, (3) friends every day.
The picture is a complex one, constitutional
handicaps in his left-handedness and speech difficulty, environmental in the all-adult house in which
he lives and in the past the lack of a clear explanation about his father's death.

(2) Boy, aged 16f years, referred by the magistrates on account of stealing clothes from his father,
which he then sold.

The youngest by six years of four children. His
father is a metal polisher. His mother has gone to
work as the parents could not rely on this boy
earning regularly.

His early development was normal. His mother
thought she might have spoiled him. He had a
good school report, was considered trustworthy
and for a time was class monitor. He held his first
job for nine months, but left on medical advice
as he was getting skin trouble, thereafter he was in
a series of jobs usually leaving for trivial reasons,
or being sacked for inefficiency.

He was before the court once for playing on the
railway line, but otherwise his record seemed to be
good until six months prior to his present offence.
Later it became clear that in fact there had been
problems, staying away from work half:a-day,
breaking into the electric meter, but these were not
disclosed by his parents. During the last six
months he had " gone to pieces ", staying out at
night, twice taking clothes from home and selling
them. He played cards, used his pay to go horseriding and was said to keep bad company, to wit
an army deserter.

His intelligence quotient was 80?his reading
age 2 years behind his mental age, his arithmetic at
the adult level.

Physical examination showed a left-handed lanky
lad, who held himself poorly.

The basic problem was the mother's attitude?
originally a "good boy" he did well while a
scaffolding was provided, and he had an adequate
series of outlets, but left to himself his desire for
excitement and to have a good time, soon got him
into difficulty.

(3) Girl, aged 5f years, referred by School Medical
Department on account of fears, being shy and
frightened.

The third of five children, the sixth born soon
after her, died at four months. The father a dustman, was discharged from the army on account of
psycho-neurosis. The mother, rough-and-ready,
works in a factory.

It was a normal pregnancy but when a year old
the child was removed to the fever hospital with
measles. Walking and talking were late, speech is
backward.

Intelligence quotient 94, would not be separated
from her mother during the test and turned to her
for help.

Physical examination showed a saddle-shaped
nose with rhinorrhoea.

A week after the referral and before the child
had been seen, she was in hospital for 48 hours for
tonsillectomy. This aggravated all the symptoms.
In this case the attitude of the mother, the low
state of health of the child, the traumatic effect of
the operation seemed to be the main factors.
(4) Boy, aged 5? years, referred by School Medical
Department on account of enuresis.

The elder of two children, father is only at home
at week-ends. Mother irritated by her children?
" such a tie ".

A wanted baby, but he cried " night and day
Talking was slow, walking normal, " resisted the
pot ". Was dry at 2? years, but enuresis started
at 3^ years, shortly after the birth of his sister. Now
he " wants attention ", " likes mucking about ".
Is still put to bed with napkins on.

Physical examination was negative.

He had an intelligence quotient of 116, his work
was very imaginative but egocentric.
(5) Boy, aged 14 years, referred by Juvenile Court
as " exposed to moral danger, having parents not
exercising proper care and guardianship ".
The second of six children, he lived in London for
6 years, going to hospital with his sister for some
skin condition ; he did not return home but was
sent to a cottage home from which his parents
reclaimed him 6? years later ; during the period
they neither visited nor wrote to him. Shortly
after his return home he began to take bread and
cakes, for this he was soundly thrashed. Later a
10s. note disappeared at home and this boy was
taken to the police station, but nothing was proved,
the boy maintaining he knew nothing about it.
He was locked in his bedroom and given only
scraps of food " to teach him ". The maltreatment was so obvious that an aunt took pity on him
and he went to live with her, but she got crowded
out, with a son being demobilized, so the boy was
returned to his home, he ran away, took a cigarette
case from a parked car and eventually was picked
up by the police. Father refused to go bail.
Physical examination was non-contributory.
His intelligence quotient was 81, his educational
work only some six months retarded.

The boy himself presented rather a pathetic
spectacle, like a " fish out of water no social
contacts and longing to get back to the cottage
home where he had spent the happiestyears of his life.
(6) Boy, aged 8 years, referred for advice re placement.

Illegitimate. Sent, aged 2 years, to a residential
nursery as he was reported to be backward, defiant,
aggressive and moody. Aged 6\ years, had
improved considerably and foster-home placement
was suggested, this occurred when he was 7 years.
Within two months the foster father got a job in
the north of England and the family moved. Was
placed in another foster-home, but he did not fit in,
so transferred to small home school. But after
six months was considered to be too babyish and
the foster-mother had been offered more attractive
children so he was again moved; by now he was
enuretic and occasionally soiled.

His intelligence quotient was 87, but his behaviour
and general attitude to life suggested a much lower
figure.

Physical examination showed him to be shortsighted, the glasses prescription had last been known
of nine months previously.

The stated reason for referral may be physical,
psychological or social ; asthma, " faints headaches?fears of the dark, jealousy, loneliness?
truanting, sex offences, stealing, but no matter in
which sphere the main problem is, there are bound
to be repercussions in the others. The commoner
reasons for referral are those which are more of a
nuisance to the grown-ups, as some adult has to
consider the child a problem before it is referred.
" Naughty " children are sent more readily than
timid children. The larger the class at school, the
greater the chance of referral. The staffing and
siting of the clinic or centre also influences the type
of referral. At a children's hospital, enuretics,
asthmas, feeding problems, will predominate. At
a psychological centre, backwardness, day-dreaming,
stealing, destructiveness will be more prevalent.
From the above cases it is easily realized that much
child guidance is, in fact, parent guidance. As a
rough-and-ready rule one may say that with the
under-fives three-quarters of the work is with
the parents ; from five to eleven it is fifty-fifty ;
over the age of eleven it is the work with the child
that is of greater importance.

Treatment has to be considered from the two
sides, parent and child. Once again one has to
stress the fact, that treatment of fathers is, in most
clinics, conspicuous by its absence. Treatment of
mothers may be in part educational and suggestive,
and in part cathartic. The former deals chiefly
with the child, methods of meeting and avoiding
problems, explaining what is usual at certain ages,
that independence, prized by adults, is uncommonly
like obstinacy when at work in the nursery. The
latter is more truly psychotherapeutic, if anyone
feels frustrated, tense or inhibited, they are less
able to give affection and they are more likely to
give vent to other feelings when checked or irritated
by a, to them, less overpowering member of society ;
the clerk told off by his employer, takes it out on
the office boy ; the daughter frustrated by her
own mother is likely to expect too much of her own
child. Friction between parents makes for nailbiting among their children. If a mother will
unburden herself, and the greater the feeling, the
greater the relief, then she is able to return to her
home better able to cope with her children and the
everyday problems of life.

Owing to a child's limited vocabulary and lack
of understanding of abstract ideas, discussion plays
little part in treatment, instead one makes use of
the child's natural form of self-expression?play.
In suitable cases play-therapy may be combined
with other measures such as medicine, speechtherapy or specific tuition. To the grown-up, play
is apt to signify something unimportant, a way of
idling away the time, but to the child it is real work
and is as expressive of the individual as any other
form of creative work. A bedroom or study can
tell us much about the owner, so the play-world
can reveal to us a great deal about the child. How
a child plays, his selection of toys, impulsive or
thoughtful, the actual things chosen, their arrangement, what happens to them during the play, is of
significance. There is the child who never gets
down to actual play but spends the whole session
arranging the pieces, the child who never chooses
people but only animals. When arranging a
battle, one boy will divide the soldiers equally,
an insecure lad will see that he has the larger force.
The way the " dangerous" things, crocodiles,
guns, soldiers, face, whether towards the child or
away, is of importance. One notes whether the
wild animals are carefully fenced in or whether they
roam at large. Then the fate which overtakes the
toys, the male figure who is always being run over,
the child who gets accidentally (?) buried, may
show one the emotional problems that are occupying the child's mind.

The commoner problems are excessive aggression
or drive for power ; a feeling of guilt or sense of
inferiority, usually the consequence of past aggression felt or put into practice ; lack of affection by
parents, with resultant insecurity and inability to
love others. Needless to say the child has no
insight into his problems, he quite fails to appreciate
that his dawdling over meals is one way of getting
more attention from mother.

If the problem is at a more primitive level, then
play is more elementary, sand, water, squirting
water into holes, making a mess, letting the water
get on the floor (and watching the adults' reaction).
Hammering, cutting, sawing, can all help a child
who is uncertain as to how much scope may be given
to his destructive impulses.

Older children can use puppets or dressing-up
games to act out their feelings.

Play-therapy is by no means standardized. Some
therapists think it wisest to act merely as passive
observers, although even by their presence and noninterference they must be classed as beneficent
grown-ups. Others take a more active role. Most
consider that at some stage the problems must be
allowed to enter consciousness, that the aggression
and fears should be linked to the objects causing
them. At present, most play-therapists are selftaught, or, at best, have watched other playtherapists at work, but the need for a more definite
type of training is recognized. The emotions of a
child are not lightly to be played with, the potential
aggression is great and if proper channels are not
provided then the destructive effect may be much
greater than expected. Provided the personality
is stable and the individual has insight into his own
problems and is willing to proceed slowly then
probably any member of the team can develop into
an efficient therapist. The training of the mental
hospital psychiatrist in this respect gives him little
advantage over that of the educational psychologist,
neither of them has had specific training in emotional problems while both of them may have made
full use of their practical experience and learned
from it, the same applies equally to the psychiatric
social worker.

Treatment occasionally requires residence away
from home, but at present, adequate in-patient
accommodation in colony, hospital, or hostel,
is extremely limited. Even facilities for residential
observation are practically non-existent. Prior
to the war there was a flourishing register of fosterhomes, but lack of houses, the general strain of
queues and post-war shopping, together with the
experiences of war-time billeting, has caused a
dearth of willing foster-mothers.

One should not lose sight of the fact that the child
is developing and that a proper "leading forth "
(e-duco) of his assets may be as important as the
solving of his problem. For this reason seeing a
child at the same hour each week may be a mistake,
if as a result, he always misses the same class.
Child guidance is an expanding subject and
certain aspects of it are receiving special attention
at present. At the organic level studies with the
electro-encephalogram show that in certain children
their " physiological age ", to coin a phrase, lags
behind their chronological age, the records are
atypical for their age though possibly within
normal limits for a younger child. The certainty
regarding the intelligence quotient is much less
than it used to be, it is still true that the intelligence
quotient is fixed " provided the child is doing its
best ", but temperamental factors which influence
the result are now receiving an attention that they
seldom had before. Various attempts are being
made to estimate the " emotional age " of the child.
One speaks also now of "social quotients this
being the ratio of the child's social achievement
compared with his chronological age. Vocational
guidance is a new service which will expand greatly
once it is better standardized. Group Therapy is
being investigated. It is no new thing for a therapist
to take one or two children together, often partly
to save time, it also provides a chance of seeing
difficult children playing together, but now it is
coming into its own as a specific form of therapy.
So much for the plan ; in fact, however, the tale
is at present rather different. There are many
areas without clinics, of those open many cannot
get fully trained workers for each department.
Waiting lists are long and the number of unwanted
children does not grow shorter. Every clinic has
its group of post-evacuation cases where the child
has had no settled home but lived in a series of
hostels. It is therefore of increasing importance
that as much preventive work be done as early
as possible, that screening be as efficient as possible.
Educational psychologists, school medical officers,
paediatricians, social workers are the first line of
defence. Their training should enable them to
deal with simpler problems but in every case a
follow-up should be made after six months, and if
the improvement is not maintained then the case
should be sent on for fuller exploration and treatment. Only in this way can the best use be made of
the limited services available at present.
