The Doctor and the Difficult Adult
===================================

MENTAL HEALTH 49
Book Reviews

:Author: William
Moodie, M.D. Cassell & Co. 15s.

Dr Moodie modestly suggests in his preface that
his book " though primarily for medical readers,
? . . may be useful to (other) professional people
whose work brings them into contact with problems
of human thought and conductThe reviewer
feels that it is one of the most practical and understandable books he has seen on the subject of psychotherapy. Not least of its values are the illustrative
cases appended to each chapter.

But the book's main virtue is its concrete guidance
to the non-specialist. In these days when the
psychiatric profession cannot, owing to its limited
size, begin to cope with the vast numbers of emotional problems that beset people in all walks of life,
and when prevention or early treatment on a modest
scale is so important, Dr Moodie's kind of exposition is essential. He never forgets Hippocrates'
dictum, do the least harm, and between the amoral
tenets of some therapists and the blindnesses of some
moralists, he steers a wise and sane course of
balanced wisdom and sage judgment. He is no
more sparing in his criticism of ultra-" modern "
methods of child rearing (Chapter X), for instance,
than of the old school parent. His observations on
sex education (Chapter X) for children are cool and
penetrating: in a convincing way he points out that
the child is no more interested in this subject than
in the intricacies of catechism. (One is reminded of
Dr Clendening's observation, " The gutter is an
excellent school ".) These are but examples of his
clinical judgment and able presentation. And in all
cases he is explicit and unequivocal in his own
advice.

His descriptions of the various neurotic syndromes
(Chapter IV) are outstanding for their palpable
relevance, and he makes important distinctions that,
in many books, are lost in muddles of words, e.g.:
" Although the anxiety neurotic appears to be
sensitive to things that happen around him, his
feelings are really dull, and it is only his concentration . . . that is greater than normal and he
goes on to amplify this point, and others like it
that are so frequently misunderstood in popular
conception, in understandable language.

But it is Dr Moodie's discussion of treatment and
psychotherapy, especially in Chapters VII and IX,
that the reviewer feels to be the outstanding contribution of the book. His important delineation
(page 19) of the "unemotional attitude of understanding without sympathy " ; the importance of
always thinking of and treating the patient not as a
simple unit but as a member of various social groups
(page 199) ; his comments on the giving of advice
(page 201)?indeed all his comments on the structuring of the doctor-patient relationship and the
process of therapy, are models of sound thought
manifestly based on wide clinical experience, and of
clear exposition?clear despite at times a somewhat clumsy style of English.

Finally, the reviewer was impressed by the general
method of psychotherapy which Dr Moodie
describes. Whether he is familiar with the work of
Dr Carl Rogers which is achieving considerable
standing in America under the name of " nondirective therapy ", Dr Moodie does not say; but
it is clear that his method is very similar to this
intrinsically and clinically sound approach. And
in the course of his discussion he incidentally
clarifies the distinction between the non-directive
and the analytical approaches?a distinction which
is often denied or misunderstood and which
is important because the non-directive method is
amenable to general use, whilst psychoanalysis is
safe only in the hands of the few. J.F.S.
