Mental Health
===============

:Type: Book Reviews
:Author: J. H. Ewen, F.R.C.P.E., D.P.M.
Edward Arnold & Co. London. 12s. 6d.

This sets out to be "a practical guide to the disorders
of the mind " and it provides a concise yet comprehensive account of psychological medicine, which will
be helpful to the general practitioner, the student and
the would-be specialist who seek an introduction to
mental hospital practice. The resident doctor here will
find the chapters on his responsibilities and on the survey
of the legal aspects most useful as a reference; though
the note on the recommendation of the Atkin Report
(p. 250), that irresistible impulse should be accepted as a
plea of non-responsibility, might be followed by the
comment that this recommendation has not yet been
carried out.

The account of the psychoses is full and clear, though
it may be questioned if the case histories add much to
the student's understanding?Dr Ewen has perhaps
felt he can have no room for such lengthy reports as
the classic case histories of Henderson and Gillespie?
but his resulting brevity leaves notes which lack colour
and life. The chapter on specialized methods of treatment (largely physical) is good, and useful as a guide,
and as a reference.

In his description of the psycho-neurosis which,
incidentally, occupies less than a tenth of the book,
Dr Ewen is on less sure ground; and his outline of
treatment makes it all sound very easy. The reader
might welcome a little more detail about how to " create
new interests " for the neurasthenic (p. 85) and how to
" insist on his facing the reality of life's circumstances
Moreover, there is only a passing reference to the influence the whole attitude of the doctor may have on the
patient. Psychosomatic disorders are very sketchily
handled, and indeed the index shows only one reference
in the introduction. The book does, therefore, not
contribute much for the practitioner dealing with the
neurotic.

The form of the book could be improved by a fuller
index and the correction of a few misprints, though one
of the latter, " over weaning " arrogance (p. 4) is
delightful.
R.F.T.
