News and Notes
================

" Mental Health "?the " Week's Good Cause "
A wireless appeal on behalf of the National Association for Mental Health was made by Miss Margery Fry,
J.P., in the " Week's Good Cause " (Home Service)
on Sunday, April 11th, at 8.25 p.m. Miss Fry spoke
about the main aspects of the work of the Association,
and particularly of the community service which it
provides in helping those who have suffered from mental
and nervous disorders to find the kind of life and
work in which they can recover. She referred to the
unhappiness, particularly of children, which could be
avoided, given the right kind of help and understanding,
and referred feelingly to her experiences in the children's
courts where frequently it could be seen that a child's
growing nature was being deformed by the mental
condition of one of his parents.

Her eloquent appeal has resulted in the receipt of
donations totalling to date ?491 14s. 8d. Listeners from
all over the British Isles responded and nearly 900 letters
were received. Contributions were mostly in small
sums, and there were several touching instances of oldage pensioners who, with true generosity, had saved up
a few shillings. The Association is immensely encouraged by the amount of goodwill which the letters
revealed, and the many expressions of keen interest in
and support of its work. It would like to take this
opportunity of thanking publicly all those who responded
to the appeal and of recording its sincere gratitude to
Miss Fry for her magnificent help.

National Health Service Act. Exempted Hospitals
Under the National Health Service Act, provision has
been made for the " disclaiming " by the Minister of
certain Hospitals (including Mental Deficiency Institutions) with the effect of exempting them from transfer
to the Ministry on the appointed day (July 5th).
A list of such Hospitals has now been issued (see The
Times, 1st April, 1948) which includes the following
Institutions and Homes for Mental Defectives :

Durran Hill House, Carlisle ; St. Joseph's, Sheffield;
St. Raphael's, Brentford ; St. Raphael's Colony,
Potters Bar ; Pield Heath House, HilJingdon ; St.
Francis School, Buntingford ; St. Elizabeth's, Much
Hadham ; Etloe House, Leyton ; Tubwell Farm and
Dungates, Brighton Guardianship Society ; Totterdown Hall, Weston-super-Mare ; Lisieux Hall,
Chorley ; Gilliebrand Hall, Chorley.

Only a small number of applications for exemption
still await final decision.

The Ministry explains that there are, in the main,
three grounds for allowing exemption : (1) That a
hospital does not come within the definitions of the Act.
(2) That it is not required by the Regional Hospital
Board as part of the hospital or specialist services for the
area. (3) That it is staffed, either wholly or in large
part, by members of religious orders.

Employment and Training Bill, 1948
-----------------------------------
This Bill repeals the Labour Exchanges Act of 1909
and the Unemployment Insurance Act, 1939, and brings
up to date " the statutory provisions regarding the
functions of the Minister of Labour and National
Service and the facilities and services provided by him
in relation to employment and training for employment ".
The second part of the Bill concerns the Juvenile
Employment Service, providing for the setting up of a
Central Juvenile Employment Executive to be staffed
by officers of the Ministry of Labour and National
Service, the Ministry of Education and the Home
Office. In addition provision is made for the setting
up of a National Juvenile Employment Council, consisting of 34 members appointed by the Minister of
Labour, these to include persons nominated by various
bodies such as the County Councils Association, the
Association of Education Committees, the Association
of Municipal Corporations, with representatives of
teachers, employers, and workers, and of the Juvenile
Employment Committees to be appointed by the
Minister in such areas as he determines.

Local Education Authorities may be authorized to
undertake any functions conferred on the Minister of
Labour in connection with Juvenile Employment in
accordance with schemes approved by him, such schemes
to include provisions for the administration of unemployment benefit to persons under 18 years of age, and grants
of assistance under the National Assistance Act to such
persons. Further, the Minister may make regulations
for requiring the proprietors of schools to furnish
particulars as to health, ability, educational attainments
and aptitudes of school leavers in order that vocational
guidance may be adequately given.

This part of the Bill is based on the Report of the
Committee on the Juvenile Employment Service issued
in September, 1945, whose principles were accepted
by the Government at that time.

" Staff Aids " in a Mental Hospital
The Nottinghamshire County Mental Hospital, like
every other institution of the kind, is seriously understaffed and as one way of dealing with the emergency,
the Committee has instituted a new experiment.
With the co-operation of the Matron and Sisters,
and the approval of the Board of Control, it has been
decided to employ selected female patients, graded
according to working ability, as part-time " staff aids
For their services small weekly payments will be made
by way of reward and encouragement but the work is
regarded chiefly as part of their general remedial treatment helping towards rehabilitation.

Patients capable of it are, of course, in all mental
hospitals frequently given small household tasks to carry
out, but the introduction of monetary reward and of a
definite status and designation should act as an incentive
and create a new interest.

International Congress of Psychology
--------------------------------------
The Twelfth International Congress of Psychology
(postponed from 1940) is to be held in Edinburgh from
July 23rd to 29th, 1948. The Congress fee is ?3 for
Members and 30s. for Associates. The Members' fee
is inclusive of the " Proceedings " containing abstracts
of the papers which will be published.
Accommodation will be provided in Hostels for a
considerable number, at an inclusive charge of ?4 excluding midday lunch. It is hoped to find hotel accommodation for those desiring it, but early application is
requested.

Enquiries should be sent to the General Secretary of
the Congress, Godfrey Thomson, Moray House,
Edinburgh 8.

N.A.M.H. Courses for Transferred Relieving Officers
In our last issue, we referred to the experimental
course, organized by the National Association for
Mental Health in co-operation with the Extra-Mural
Department of the University of Manchester, for
Relieving Officers and other Local Authority officers
likely to be appointed Duly Authorized Officers in the
new Mental Health Service. This course was attended
by 39 men and one woman, and the report on it made by
the Tutor (Miss M. Hamilton, one of the Association's
Regional Representatives), shows that despite many
difficulties inherent in the situation, it was an experiment that fully justified itself. The students were
specially interested in the medical lectures on mental
disorders and mental deficiency, and the visits of
observation to Mental Hospitals, Mental Deficiency
Institutions, Occupation Centres and Special Schools
were observed to have a particularly vivifying effect.
The?Association is indebted to the University of Manchester for its co-operation in freeing lecturers to take
part in the course and in providing premises.

A similar Two Months' Course began in London on
April 6th. This is being attended by 38 students, the
majority of whom are Relieving Officers (and in two or
three cases, Mental Deficiency Officers) from the Home
Counties although there are also students from as far
afield as Newcastle and Plymouth.

A third Course is being held in Liverpool during
May and June, intended primarily for Relieving Officers
from the Lancashire area.

These two Courses also, are organized in co-operation
with the Extra-Mural Departments of the Universities
concerned and their syllabuses follow the lines of the
Manchester Course including lectures on psychology
and the social services, the mental health services and
mental health social work, the work of a Duly Authorized
Officer, mental disorders and mental deficiency, provision for the educationally subnormal child, child guidance, and epilepsy.

Ample opportunity is provided for discussion in small
groups and visits of observation are arranged at intervals
throughout the course.

Incidence of Epilepsy in School Children
-----------------------------------------
An interesting article of this subject by Dr Peter
Henderson, a Medical Officer of the Ministry of Education, was published in The Lancet of March 20th, 1948.
The article reports an investigation, covering a school
population of approximately 1,700,000 in the Northwest Metropolitan area, East Anglia and some of the
Home Counties, carried out between October, 1946 and
February, 1947, to ascertain the number of epileptic
children who were in need of special school education
and the total number of all children known to be
epileptic.

The returns showed that out of a total of 776 epileptic
children reported to the investigator, 519 (i.e. 0-3 per
1,000) were considered to be in need of special education
and only 279 were actually receiving it. Of the remaining 240, 109 were not attending any type of school.
Despite the wide variations in the ascertainment rate
in the regions sampled?from 0-2 to 2-5 per 1,000 of
the school population?the investigation yielded clear
evidence that if the average rate of 0-3 per 1,000
epileptics needing special education is applied to the
whole country, the number of school places needed
would be about 1,500 instead of the 660 (0-12 per 1,000)
at present available.

(This estimate is, the report notes, borne out by the
experience of the Manchester Education Committee
who maintain in their Special School at Sass Moss,
0-4 per 1,000 of their school population.)
Only a small proportion of the total number of
children included in the Survey had been given a systematic intelligence test and the group so tested were
evidently composed largely of those who had been refused
admission to residential schools on account of low
intelligence. The investigation could not therefore
yield any conclusive results on the general subject of
intelligence and epilepsy. But it is good to find the
cause of the subnormal epileptic child is pleaded so
earnestly by Dr Henderson who writes ;

To refuse a child admission to a special school,
simply because his intelligence quotient is below
70, or even below 60, is doing that child a grave
injustice. The very nature of epilepsy and
the dulling effect of some forms of medication
may combine to lessen a child's response to
intelligence testing ; to be fair to a child, these
tests should be given on more than one occasion
and should not be applied soon after a seizure.
. . . Even if after a reasonable trial at a school
an epileptic pupil is found to be ineducable and
in need of colony care, the experience gained at
school will often make him a better colonist.
The handicap of epilepsy is often a barrier to
employment that becomes well-nigh impassable
to those who are also educationally subnormal
and have not received education suitable to their
limited abilities and aptitudes. A retarded
epileptic who fails to secure or keep employment
is a drag on society and a misery to himself and
his associates. Employment is, too, the best anticonvulsant.

Thus, both on social and economic grounds, it is
essential that every epileptic child, even if doubtfully educable, should be an opportunity for special
education.

Summing up his conclusions he lays emphasis on the
following five factors to which attention must be given
if the problem of epilepsy is to be effectively dealt with :
(1) proper ascertainment by the school health service ;
(2) greatly increased special educational facilities ; (3)
regular medical treatment ; (4) effective after-care ;
(5) a more enlightened public opinion.

Social Psychotherapy
--------------------
In reply to our request, Dr Joshua Bierer, has kindly
sent us the following information about the work of the
Social Psychotherapy Centre (Institute of Social Psychiatry) of which he is the Head.

This Institute includes two agencies :?

1. The Therapeutic Social Club Centre. This Section,
which has now been opened exactly a year, is to centralize
the activities of the Therapeutic Social Clubs : to advise
all hospitals and out-patient departments with regard to
the opening of the new Clubs, and, if possible, provide
workers for them : initiate new Clubs and generally
encourage and organize therapeutic work through the
Clubs, combined later on with training and providing
literature.

Patients, who are considered suitable for membership
of a Social Club are referred to this Centre, where they
are interviewed by a psychiatrist and recommended
to attend a suitable Club (some of the existing Clubs are
slightly different in character to meet the needs of the
various types of patient for whom the Centre has to
cater). The Clubs are entirely democratic, all types
mix well, and there is no financial obligation although
a small weekly voluntary contribution, according to
the person's means is asked for to meet the overhead
expenses of the Clubs which are self-supporting.

2. The Social Psychotherapy Centre, the work of
which is in its early stages, administers a combination
of five forms of treatment, as follows :

1. Individual Psychotherapy.
2. Group Psychotherapy.
3. Social Club Therapy.
4. Occupational Therapy.
5. Art Therapy.

In the course of a patient's mental rehabilitation, and
in his re-adaptation to normal life, it is often found that
he will respond to all the above mentioned forms of
treatment, given simultaneously, or to a combination
of certain of them. The form of treatment suitable for
each patient referred is decided by a Psychiatrist.
The patients are asked to pay a small amount towards
their treatment to help to cover the expenses of the
Centre. The amount is fixed according to their means.
The Institute of Social Psychiatry will also act as a
Research Centre, in connection with these particular
forms of treatment.

A training Scheme for Social Therapists is now under
consideration and it is hoped will materialize in the near
future. We are in the process of publishing a monograph on Social Club Therapy.

A plan for Membership of the Institute of Social
Psychiatry is also being drawn up, whereby members
would pay a fixed subscription and possibly receive two
publications a year.

All enquiries should be addressed to : Dr J. Bierer,
Institute of Social Psychiatry, 7 Fellows Road, Hampstead, N.W.3.

Dudley Voluntary Children's Care Society
----------------------------------------
This is an interesting piece of pioneer work based on
co-operation between a Local Authority and voluntary
enterprise and arising out of new opportunities consequent on the establishment of Statutory Children's
Committees.

The chief aims of the Society may be summarized as
follows :

(1) To act as a link between the local authority and
the general public in promoting the welfare of
deprived children for whom the local authority
has become responsible.

(2) To assist the local authority in the finding of
foster-homes and to help foster-parents to understand the needs of the children under their care.

(3) To help the local authority in providing a home
background for children in Residential Homes,
and in the provision of after-care and suitable
lodgings for children placed in employment or
under training.

A representative committee, under the chairmanship
of Councillor Dr F. G. Lewis (Chairman of the Children's Committee) has been appointed and applications
for membership of the Society are being invited.
Further particulars may be obtained from the Hon.
Secretary, Mr. C. M. Walker, Director of Social Welfare
(at present acting as Hon. Secretary), 7 St. James's
Road, Dudley, Worcestershire.

Council for Music in Hospitals
------------------------------
In November, 1947, there was formed, with the
sanction of the Board of Control and the active support
of a group of medical superintendents of Mental
Hospitals, a Council with the following objects :
"To organize and provide regular series of
concerts of music of a high quality ; to assist
in organizing lectures, meetings of gramophone
clubs, etc., in hospitals on some planned scheme;
to assist hospitals in experimental work on the
value of Musical Therapy for individuals or for
groups ; to encourage patients on leaving
hospital to continue their interest in music and
to keep them in touch with musical circles near
their homes."

Already a number of concerts have been given by
eminent artists, prefaced by simple explanatory talks
which are greatly appreciated. Programmes ? are,
moreover, sent to the Hospitals in advance to enable
preliminary lectures and gramophone recitals to be
given to the patients as a further help in understanding
the music which they are to hear.

The Chairman of the Council is Mr. Frank Howes
(Music Critic of The Times), and the Hon. Treasurer,
Mr. Stanley Rubenstein, who is well known to London
hospitals through the gramophone recitals which he
has been giving them. The members of the Council
consist of ten Medical Superintendents, and Captain
Croft-Cohen of the Board of Control has been appointed
as an " observer

The formation of a Sub-Committee for research work
on the therapeutic value of music assisted by reports
received from Medical Superintendents, nursing staff
and artists taking part in the scheme, is one of the
Council's immediate projects.

Further particulars will gladly be supplied by the
Secretary, Miss Sheila McCreery, 4 Campden Hill
Square, London, W.8.

Answers in Parliament Maladjusted Children
------------------------------------------
In answer to a question on February 19th, the Minister
of Education stated that there was accommodation at
present in special schools and boarding homes, for
527 maladjusted children. The number of children
ascertained as maladjusted was, on January 1st, 1947,
5,795 (boys, 3,896 ; girls, 1,899), but it was considered
that the great majority of these could be appropriately
treated in Child Guidance Clinics.

There are eight proposals for special schools for this
category of handicapped children under consideration
at the present time.

Mental Deficiency Institutions
------------------------------
The Minister of Health stated on November 6th,
1947, that 160 beds would be available in the near future
in premises recently acquired by local authorities.

Further accommodation would also be available in three
colonies released by Service departments.

No comprehensive figures as to the number of defectives awaiting institutional vacancies have been issued
since the publication of the Board of Control's Report,
for 1946, in which it was stated that there were on
January 1st, 1947, a total of 3,890 waiting cases.

International Congresses of Medical Sciences
--------------------------------------------
In April, Dr Soddy represented the International
Congress on Mental Health at the second meeting held
at UNESCO House, Paris, of the Organizing Committee
of the Permanent Bureau for Co-ordination of International Congresses of Medical Sciences. The Bureau
is jointly sponsored by UNESCO and the World Health
Organization, and representatives were also present from
the United Nations Social and Economic Council and
the International Refugee Organization. Other organizations represented on the Committee are those concerned
with venereal diseases, paediatrics, surgery, cancer,
radiology, rheumatism and tuberculosis.

The Committee unanimously recommended the
establishment of a Permanent Bureau with the following
functions:

I. Information and Assistance.
(1) To collect information on all national or international organizations of a medical or paramedical nature, and on the congresses which they
organize.

(2) To give all possible material assistance and in
particular, specialized conference services (staff,
technical material) and travelling facilities for
congress members (visas, etc.).

(3) To study methods of facilitating the transfer of
funds needed by congress members.

(4) To study and disseminate information on the
technique of congresses.

II. Co-ordination.

(1) To take active steps to suggest to international
medical bodies, appropriate dates and places for
the holding of their congresses.

(2) To make a special effort to group disciplines
together.

(3) To give financial assistance to the scientific work of
congresses and make grants to congress members
who particularly merit them.

(4) To give grants to enable representatives of different
disciplines to take part in congresses.

III. Diffusion of Information.

(1) To take steps to circulate information received in
accordance with Paragraph I (1).

(2) To study the whole problem of the dissemination
of medical knowledge, including the circulation of
documents resulting from the work of the
congresses.

The bodies eligible to participate will be international
organizations of a medical character.

Dr Soddy reports that he was struck with the degree
of mutual confidence attained at this meeting and the
unanimity displayed by the members of the Committee
in their desire to establish the Bureau, creating an atmosphere too seldom achieved at international gatherings.

A South African Psychiatric Hospital
The Vice-Chairman of the National Association for
Mental Health, Lady Norman, paid a visit to South
Africa during the winter and saw much municipal and
voluntary social work for Europeans and non-Europeans
in the Union.

Amongst the many hospitals, schools and institutions
she visited on behalf of the National Council of Social
Service, she mentions the Tara Psychiatric Hospital,
a few miles outside Johannesburg. She writes :

" Tara Hospital in Johannesburg is a legacy of the war,
but is now devoted entirely to civilian patients of all
ages, and run by the Provincial Authorities.
Dr Alice Cox, M.D., Glasgow, took me all round,
as the Medical Superintendent was away and the
Matron, Miss Marwick, was in England taking a Course
at the Maudsley Hospital.

Some of the work was exceedingly interesting and in
some ways rather novel. There was a dolls' house for
children where the weekly clinic is held; the furniture
is all small, and it is fitted out with pots and pans and
china, a little kitchenette, a bedroom and everything
to delight a child. The children's clinic is held in this
dolls' house once a week, the children coming out by
private bus, from the town.

I saw some of the excellent work being done by the
patients, who are of course all voluntary, and
the millinery was of the highest standard, as well as the
leather work done by men and women. From the
point of view of occupational therapy, I have never
seen anything to beat it.

I also saw a gymnasium class, both for men and
women, taken separately ; it was very remarkable,
for it was taken by a first-class teacher who, besides
being very good at her job, was good to look upon,
had a beautiful figure and exquisite face. Patients
seemed to enjoy the work, which was done to music,
the piano being played by a gifted pianist.
The final exercise was one of complete relaxation,
lying on the floor and taken to very soft music and the
gentle beating of native drums. When it was over,
it was quite a long time before the patients felt inclined
to get up, and I myself felt very rested and at peace
with the world."

Unfortunately, Lady Norman reports that there is a
possibility of the Tara Hospital being closed down,
owing to the enormous expense per patient. In view
of the splendid service it is giving to the patients (some
150 of them), in addition to its out-patient facilities
for young children, it is devoutly hoped that such a
disastrous contingency may be averted.

Children and the Cinema
------------------------
The Home Secretary, the Secretary of State for
Scotland and the Minister of Education have recently
appointed a Committee to consider and report upon :
(a) the effects of attendance at the cinema on
children under the age. of 16, with special reference to attendance at children's cinema clubs;
(h) whether, in the light of these effects, any
modification is desirable in the existing system
of film classification, the existing position with
regard to the admission of children to cinemas,
or in the organization, conduct and management
of children''s cinema clubs.

The omission of a child psychiatrist from the Committee appointed, whose membership is representative
of so many other interests, calls for comment. The
work upon which the Committee is engaged is the subject
of study and also of special interest to mental health
experts whose views and knowledge would undoubtedly
be of value in an enquiry of this kind.
