Diagnosis of the Mentally Defective Child
==========================================

News and Notes.
In April, the Board of Education issued Circular 1359 to Local Education
Authorities, prescribing" a new form (306 M.) for the use of Certifying Officers,
in view of the importance of correct diagnosis." This form allows greater
detail and discrimination in setting out the characteristics and attainments of
the child. In the Board's circular stress is laid on the contribution towards
correct diagnosis that parents, teachers, and social workers can make.
It is interesting to note that the Board point out that, in their opinion, only
Jn " rare and quite exceptional circumstances " can a child of school age be
properly certified as a moral imbecile, within the meaning of the Mental Deficiency
Act. They lay down that, in any but the clearest cases, the alternative method
?f considering the child as one who " cannot be instructed in a Special School
without detriment to the interests of the other children," should be adopted.
The general interpretation of the words " moral imbecile," has always
presented difficulties. In the current number of the Journal of Mental Science,
Mi*. John Maurice Ahern, M.B., B.Ch., Senior Medical Officer, H.M. Prison,
Liverpool, has an interesting article on " Certification as a moral imbecile."
He says: " It seems clearly to have been the intention of the framers of the Act
to bring within its scope those cases which exhibit vicious or criminal propensities
undeterred by punishment, yet whose mental defect viewed apart from delin-
quency is not of itself sufficient to justify certification as a ' feeble-minded
person.' "

Should a Special School Teacher have Opportunities for Special Training?
No member of the Central Association for Mental Welfare would answer this
question in the negative. By providing the Courses for Teachers which are being
increasingly welcomed by all who are engaged in work among the mentally
deficient, the Association gives its own answer.

It is with intense disappointment, therefore, that we search in vain for any
reference to such special training in the Report of the Departmental Committee
of the Board of Education on the Training of Teachers for public elementary
schools, which has recently been published. The Committee's reference limited
the scope of their enquiry to the public elementary schools, though in principle
they express agreement with the view that " fundamentally the distinction between
teachers for elementary and for secondary schools is grounded largely on
historical and administrative rather than on ultimate educational considerations."
1 hey do not deal with curriculum except in passing. But they find opportunity
in Chapter X. of their report to discuss the training of Handicraft, Domestic
subject and Physical training teachers.

We claim that in this chapter, special mention should have been made of the
requirements of those teachers who must add to their general professional equip-
ment, a real knowledge of psychology, of intelligence tests, and of the adaptation
?f ordinary methods of individual teaching to the children with whom they have
to deal.

Unless and until public opinion is focussed on the need for such special
trainingj we shall not attain the best results both in the school-life and the after-
careers of the mentally deficient. Local authorities are being urged by the
Board to fulfil their obligations under the Education Act of 1921, but so soon
as they become active, the shortage of qualified teachers becomes more and
more apparent.

Mental Welfare Clinic.
-----------------------

We are glad to read in the last Annual Report of the School Medical Officer,
Stoke-on-Trent, that a Mental Welfare Clinic has been opened, and that a
Special School for 100 children is to be launched. Dr Robert Hughes is
devoting much time and research to the proper classification of sub-normal
children, and, in connection with the work, has proposed to his Council the
appointment of a woman welfare worker. He especially urges supervision, in
co-operation with the Employment Exchanges, up to 18, for those who have been
in special schools, but are not considered notifiable to the Local Authority.

Encephalitis Lethargica.
-------------------------

We are of opinion that one of our most urgent needs is proper institutional
care for those suffering from the after-effects of encephalitis lethargica. Dr.
Tredgold's article in our January number set forth the distressing nature of
those effects.

We think the general public should realise the prevalence of the disease,
lest they should be lulled into apathy, based on the belief that only a few persons
suffer.

The official returns, showing the weekly notifications, which we reproduce
from the " Lancet," are as follows:?
Week ending Week ending Week ending

April 4 ... 56 May 2 ... 55 June 6 ... 06
,, 11 ... 48 ,, 9 ... 80 ,, 13 ... 59
,, 18 ... 52 ,, 16 ... 70 ,, 20 ... 61
,, 25 ... 54 ,, 23 ... 91 ,, 27 ... 49
,, 30 ... 71
210 367 225 Total 802

Courses Arranged by the G.A.Pd.W.
The sixth course in Mental Deficiency for Medical Practitioners was held
by the University Extension Board in co-operation with the C.A.M.W., at the
University of London, South Kensington, from May 18th to 24th. This course
was attended by 42 men and 11 women :?
Certifying officers to Local Authorities under the M.D. Act ... 11
School Medical Officers and Assistant School Medical

Officers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
Medical Officers of Certified Institutions for Defectives ... 2
Medical Officer of Industrial Home ... ... ... ... 1
Assistant Medical Officer of Prison ... ... ... ... 1
Candidate for post as School Medical Officer ... ... ... 1

The Course consisted chiefly of clinical work and lectures, the lecturers
being Dr Tredgold, Dr Shrubsall, Dr Cyril Burt, and Dr Norwood East.
In April, a very successful Short Course for Teachers, attended by 33 selected
teachers and one private student, was held for the Board of Education. The
teachers were housed in the Co-operative Holidays Association's Guest House at
Hope, 15 miles from Sheffield. The schools visited were at Sheffield and Notting-
ham, and all the lectures and classes were held in the Guest House. The choice
of accommodation at so considerable a distance from the schools was a new
experiment, but one that is likely to be repeated. The students thoroughly
appreciated the beautiful surroundings, and the opportunity of seeing- something
of the Derbyshire moors in no way detracted from serious study.
The three months' Course in London for Teachers is still in progress, and
lias already proved its worth.

We hope that full attention will be paid to the particulars of the Course
for Nurses and Attendants, on page 79.

Occupation Centre under a Statutory Committee.
-----------------------------------------------

The Mental Deficiency Act Committee of the Cardiff Council opened, on
June 11th, an Occupation Centre (6 girls, 8 boys, ages from 8 to 19 years), and
have appointed a Certificated Teacher, who is being trained in the management
of low grade defective children by one of our organisers.

There are more children who ought to attend, but at present it is difficult
to provide guides. The Session is from 2 to 4.30 p.m., five afternoons a week.
There is a suitable room, but no playground.

There are now four Occupation Centres under the direct control of the
Local Authority under the Act (Birmingham, Cardiff, Croydon, Norwich), and
87 under our Local Associations, most of whom have a grant for the centre
from the Board of Control and the Local Authority. The centres deal with
those excluded children, for whom institutional care is unnecessary or unavailable.
Ample testimony comes from all sources, showing the improved behaviour
and greater happiness of those attending. All that is needed is public opinion
to press the demand for suitable training for all defectives.

A new edition of " Occupation Centres for the training of mentally
defective children " has just been issued by the C.A.M.W., price 9d. It
again sets forth clearly the aims and limitations of the Occupation Centre,
brings information up to date, and contains a list of all the Occupation Centres
at present opened, with particulars of the number attending, etc.
And a Day Centre for children, both physically and mentally defective, not able
to attend the Elementary Schools, was started by Miss Arnould, House of
Helpj Fulham, in 1901, and Miss Woodhead, of the Guardianship Society,
Brighton, had a Centre as long ago as 1899. In 1914, the Central Associa-
tion for Mental Welfare, in one of its first pamphlets, advocated centres on the
present lines, but, owing to the war, it was not until 1919 that the first
Occupation Centre was opened in Islington through the enthusiastic endeavour
of Miss Elfrida Rathbone. By 1923 the Board of Control had recognised the
centres for purposes of grant towards the expenses of statutory supervision.
An additional activity of the staff connected with the centres in certain
areas is the Handicraft Class for higher-grade older boys and girls, who
cannot obtain, or can only intermittently obtain, paid employment.

The pamphlet is a clear presentation of the aims, the achievements, and
the potentialities of the training given in Occupation Centres and Handicraft classes.
New Certified Institutions and Extensions.

Two new homes for mental defectives have recently been opened, both
fulfilling a need. One is the new Roman Catholic Home, St. Teresa's, The
Cedars, 97, Belmont Hill, Lewisham. This home is for feeble-minded girls
over 16 years of age. The maintenance fees are 22/6 per week, together with
for outfit. The Home is certified under the Board of Control.
The other Home is at Reigate, and is the Ellen Terry Home for defective
blind babies, recently opened under the auspices of the Braille and Servers
?f the Blind League. It is certified by the Board of Control, and will
shortly be certified by the Board of Education, and is intended for feeble-minded
boys and girls up to the age of 10 years, preference being, at present, given to
those between 2 and 8 years. The maintenance fees are ^,90 per annum, with
an initial jQ5 in lieu of outfit.

The Besford Court Roman Catholic Mental Welfare Hospital for Children
has recently opened a Junior Department at St. Josephs, Sambourne. There
are some sixty boys there in charge of the same Sisters who so successfully
managed Besford Court. The boys will pass later into the Senior Department,
which is now staffed entirely by men. In a recent number of the " Universe,"
an interesting account of the pioneer work done at Besford Court, was given.
A new hall and house, accommodating 25 men, has been opened at Sandle-
bridge.

The Meanwood Mental Defective Colony, Leeds, is to be enlarged, and the
patients housed in separate pavilions, accommodating from 40-55 patients. The
new scheme will involve an annual charge of ?10,000 a year on the ratepayers,
the enlargement costing ,?70,000.

Occupational Training in Mental Hospitals.
-------------------------------------------

The need for varied occupation which can be carried on in wards by
patients in Mental Hospitals, not only for their pleasure, but for their improve-
ment, is becoming more and more evident to all who study the subject.
A new development of the training activities of the Central Association
for Mental Welfare is likely to prove only the beginning of a much wider
scheme. At the invitation of some three or four of the Mental Hospital
authorities up and down the country, our organisers have spent four weeks at
each Hospital to help in the training of groups of patients admitted to these
Hospitals under the Lunacy Acts, many of whom could more properly have
been dealt with under the Mental Deficiency Acts had there been accommoda-
tion for them.

The aim of the organisers is to give the attendants some idea of the
advantages of definite instruction to defectives. It is not, however, possible,
under the existing administrative conditions, to obtain results such as can
be obtained in an Occupation Centre. The Wards are often so placed that
instruction is subject to many interruptions, and the nurses-in-charge
frequently have many and various duties to perform, so that they cannot give
undivided attention. The variety in age and mental capacity is so great that
it is very difficult to grade work, and the numbers are often not enough to
justify separate groups. We may take as an example the selected patients
of a hospital recently visited. :?

Females (19)?
Idiot, aged 8 ... ... ... ... 1
Epileptic idiot, aged 13... ... ... 1
Dementia praecox ... ... ... ... 6
Epileptic and low-grade feeble-minded ... 1 Other ages from 19
to 40 or 50 years
Imbecile or low-grade feeble-minded ... 6
Epileptics ... ... ... ... ... 2
High-grade feeble-minded ... ... 1
Insane ... ... ... ... ... 1
Males (7)?
Imbecile, paralysed down right side (does Other ages from 19
not speak) ... ... ... ... 1 to 30 years
Imbecile, paralysed, cannot walk, speaks
indistinctly ... ... ... ... 1
Epileptics (one imbecile or low-grade
feeble-minded, one higher grade, but
deaf and dumb) ... ... ... 2
Imbeciles (one 16 or 17 years) ... ... 2
Boy, aged 7, just admitted ... ... ... 1

It has been found practicable to hold three separate classes, one for the
males, and one for ^]le lower-grade females, and one for the higher-grade
iemales.

In another hospital the ages of 17 boys and 8 girls vary from three to
twenty-two years. Eight of these boys cannot speak (except a few odd words),
two being of Mongolian type, while five of the boys can read and write and do
simple arithmetic. All the boys and girls have been transferred to a detached
block, with separate offices and entrances, and ample garden, so that the
conditions in this case are far better than usual.

In many hospitals there are also encephalitis lethargica cases. They are
usually of higher mental grade, and have, previously to the disease, attended
ordinary schools, but together with this higher mental standard, they frequently
show such lack of control, and, often, so violent a disposition, as to make them
impossible, even in classes for defectives.

The staffs of the hospital are sympathetic to the new venture, and with the
regular visits of our organisers for encouragement and help, or, better still, the
attendance of the nurses at one of the short courses, such as our special course
ln October, it is to be expected that, after a time, the improvement in the
happiness and health of the patients and their increased capacity for useful
occupation will justify this pioneer work.

Association of Mental Welfare Workers.
--------------------------------------

We regret to learn that Miss Nevile has felt obliged, owing to pressure of
work, to resign the Hon. Secretaryship and Treasureship of the Association.
Miss Nevile, who is, as our readers know, the Secretary of the Essex Voluntary
Association, has done a great deal of spade work in placing the Association on a
sound footing. She has always striven towards the attainment of the first object
of the Association?to further the interests and increase the efficiency of salaried
and other mental welfare workers. The Association is fortunate in having secured
,n her place Miss M. Laxton, who has had so much experience with the London
Association.

Royal Commission on Lunacy and Mental Disorder.
-----------------------------------------------

The C.A.M.W. hopes to be able to present its Memorandum and evidence to
the Royal Commission on Lunacy and Mental Disorder this month, but, unfortun-
ately, the Commission cannot receive the Association before we go to press. A
full account of the evidence will appear in our next number.

Mentally Weak Prisoners.
-------------------------

An interesting answer was given by the Home Secretary on May 8th in
reply to a question in the House as to the arrangements for prisoners, mentally
weak, but not certifiable as insane or mentally deficient. He stated that male
prisoners unfit for the ordinary discipline of prison are collected in four prisons,
and females in three. Since July, 1924, 91 males and 4 females were transferred
to these centres. They are instructed in such industrial work as they can per-
form, and Brabazon classes, outdoor work and extra exercise facilities are
arranged.

School Intelligence Tests and Employment.
-----------------------------------------

The Presidential Address of Dr J. W. Fraser, School Medical Officer, of
Hull, to the School Medical Officers' Group of the Society of Medical Officers
?f Health has been printed in pamphlet form. Its subject is the value of
intelligence tests in estimating the future careers of mentally defective children.
Out of 131 cases who have, since 1911 passed through the Special School,
?f> which Dr Fraser is the Medical Officer, 9 are earning more than 20/- a
week, 34 less than 20/- a week, giving" a percentage of 32.8 employed. "Only
9. or practically 7 per cent., are earning enough to keep themselvesj and 35
are earning on an average 9/8 per week. Of this latter number, 15 have been
discharged during the last three years, and may possibly do better later, and
13 of those unemployed have been discharged during the same period, and may
obtain employment, but of these 28 a very liberal estimate would place the
number of those capable of maintaining themselves at 14, which would raise the
total percentage to about 17. A less optimistic view would limit the number of
those capable of maintaining themselves to the nine above-mentioned."
Dr Fraser urges that it would be a policy of wise economy to increase the
number of institutions, so that by careful organisation, every inmate could work
according to capacity and make some contribution to maintenance.

By diagrams and tables the relationship is shown between intelligent quot-
ients and average annual gain, and the probability of after-employment. Refer-
ence is made to the reluctance of employers to employ a boy or girl who at 16
has to confess to having just left a Special School, and Dr Fraser states that
the boy is more likely to succeed if he can leave at 14, and that " as far as the
experience of this school shows, there is no chance of a girl obtaining remunera-
ted employment if school attendance is enforced until she attains 16 years."
It would be interesting to have similar figures for other areas regarding
the after-employment of Special School children. By the courtesy of the London
Association for the Care of the Mentally Defective, and the City of
Birmingham Special Schools After-care Sub-Committee, we have been
supplied with some extremely interesting data, but as the basis of calculation
of the numbers in employment is not quite similar, and no intelligent quotients
are given, real comparison is not possible. It is to be noted, however, that of
the 1,919 persons born in or subsequent to 1906, who have left Special Schools
and been on the books of the London Association during the year 1924, 1,136
(59.19 per cent.) are employed. In Birmingham, out of 3,513 cases that have
passed through the schools since 1901, 1,301 (42 per cent.) are employed at an
average wage of 20/11 (males earning from 3/- to ?4, and females from 6/- to
35/-). In the London figures, 271 doing useful work at home are included, and in
the Birmingham figures 598 "living at home" and doing no paid work, and in the
Hull figures 44 at home "unemployed" are excluded.

Dr Fraser's results were based upon the Binet-Simon tests. We are greatly
interested in the Northumberland Standardised Tests recently published by the
University of London Press, Ltd., prepared by Dr Cyril Burt, Professor of
Education in the University of London, whose work in connexion with standard-
ised tests is so widely known.

These tests, as printed, are a model of clear arrangement, and should be
eagerly welcomed. They were originally prepared at the request of the North-
umberland Education Committee,t mainly with a view to examining school chil-
dren aged 10-12, and selecting suitable pupils for Scholarships for Secondary
Schools. The tests are in Arithmetic, English, and General Intelligence. The
manual of instructions makes the principle of marking according to age extremely
clear.

As Dr Burt says in his foreword : As contrasted with the ordinary exami-
nation paper, the present test-sheets differ in several ways. First, instead of
having long questions to answer or short essays to write, the child is confronted
with a large number of brief problems; and all he has to do is to write down
a few figures or underline particular words. In this procedure there are many
advantages, some obvious to all, some clear only to those who are familiar
with psychological research. It is a general principle, which recent investiga-
tions have established, that, given a limited amount of time, a far better measure
is obtained if the child is required to answer a large number of short questions
instead of a small number of long questions. This is contrary to the traditional
procedure adopted by most teachers and examiners, but seems well borne out by
experimental work. The method of underlining- answers, instead of writing them,
?s a further feature that may be novel to many. It has two advantages : first,
speed of writing (a very variable factor with young children) does not affect the
final result; secondly, no uncertainty is possible about the correct replies, and
all examiners are forced to allot exactly the same marks to equivalent answers?
an utter impossibility with answers of the essay type.

New Zealand and the Mentally Defective.
---------------------------------------

A report by a Committee of Inquiry, appointed by the New Zealand Ministry
?f Health, was laid on the table of the House of Representatives at the end of
June. The question of the treatment of mental defectives and of sexual offenders
was the subject of the Inquiry, and the Committee, recognising that the two
classes of persons are not identical, make separate suggestions. Three recom-
mendations are of special interest. One is that a psychiatrist to advise the Prisons'
Department (and the Courts possibly likewise) on the grouping of sexual
offenders, and a Prisons' Department Eugenic Board should be appointed.
A second recommendation would be far-reaching. It is suggested that a
Agister of all mentally defective persons should be kept, and that such a register
should contain the names given by school medical officers, hospital authorities
and judicial authorities. There would be an appeal to the High Court by the
person so registered, or by his parents or guardians. Marriage with a registered
person would be made illegal.

Less novel is the recommendation which touches on the vexed question oT
sterilisation. On this the opinion of the C.A.M.W. is quoted. The experience
?f America in its trial of a sterilisation policy in some of the States is not
available in any statistical form, but it is true to say that fewer States now prac-
t'se it than when first the policy was adopted. The New Zealand Committee
ls of opinion that the Eugenic Board should have power in suitable cases to
make sterilisation a condition of removal from the register, persons thus treated
having their freedom of action, unless they are found later to be leading an
immoral life.

We hope in our next issue to return to this Inquiry. At present the New
Zealand Report is not widely available in this country, and we make acknow-
ledgment to the "Lancet" for its summary.

The Registration of Nursing Homos.
----------------------------------

The Second Reading of the Nursing Homes (Registration} Bill was move"*d
?n June 19th, but was withdrawn on the Government's promising to refer the
subject of Nursing Homes to a Select Committee for enquiry.

The main object of the Bill was the registration of all Nursing Homes carried
?n for private profit (hospitals and municipal institutions being expressly ex-
cluded). One of the clauses of the Bill required that after January, 1930, the
matron or other person having the management and control of the nursing of
the patients should be a State-registered nurse on the general part of the register,
?r a person eligible to be registered on the general part of the register,
?r, in the case of a home used solely for maternity cases, a registered midwife.
In view of the promised Select Committee, it is interesting to note that the
National Council for Mental Hygiene gave in their evidence before the Royal
Commission on Lunacy and Mental Disorders strong support to the registration
of Nursing Homes. They urged that medical practitioners should be allowed
to treat willing and non-volitional patients without certificates in registered Nurs-
lng Homes, and they urged the registration of all Nursing Homes under the
Ministry of Health. Later in his evidence, Dr E. Farquhar Buzzard said that
the idea underlying the suggestion for registration was the same as that concern-
lng the treatment of mental cases in general hospitals, i.e., that where one kind
?f disease was dealt with, another kind could also be treated.
