Results of Examination of 91 at a State Institution
====================================================

:Author: Margaret C. Brooke, M.A.

Child Study Department, Rochester, New York
In 1925, a request came to the Univ. of Penn. Psychological
Clinic for someone to do psychometric work at a state school
for delinquent girls. Work was so arranged that it was possible
for a member of this clinic staff to be available for this work at
certain times weekly. As a result, ninety-one girls were tested,
ranging from nine years, five months, to eighteen years, eleven
months. The comparison of the ninety-one scores with the seven
hundred seventy-eight girls tested by this Clinic at the "fifteenyear level" is very interesting and significant.

Environmental Factors
-----------------------

The girls in this group are placed in the institution by civil
authorities- throughout the state, and their placement generally
means a two-year program there. They are neither kept nor accepted after twenty-one years of age. The cottage plan is used and
the atmosphere of the entire plant savors less of institutional life
than is generally the case. Undoubtedly the "wheels go round,"
but one never sees them. To the casual observer, these girls apparently have unlimited freedom, but actually, their whole program revolves itself around an elaborate system of merits and demerits. With the possible exception of the cottage where the newest arrivals live, the examiner was always impressed by the absence
of almost everything which savored of group disciplinary life
usually apparent in institutions. Individualism was allowed even
in dress, with no semblance of regulation uniform.

At the time this group was tested, school was not in session;
consequently the grade proficiency was listed as given by the girl
prior to her placement. Most of the girls had never been in school
at the institution. In almost no instance did the intellectual level
correlate with the grade given?the retardation ranging from two
to five or six years.

The emotional make-up of this colony was especially wholesome
?laughter and singing seemed spontaneous, with a normal tendency to chastise and "kid."

CULTURAL STATUS

The cultural status was not so easily recognized, due perhaps to the heterogeneous mixture of human beings. The cottage
life was a great stimulus. Furniture and decorations were in excellent taste?entirely in keeping with the surroundings. Everything was immaculate, and every girl, to all appearances, was
keenly interested in keeping it so. The living rooms were livable,
and looked as though they were really used. Each cottage had
some individual and differentiating feature?doubtless due to the
varying tastes of the matrons and her assistants. Jazz music and
jazz records were both seen and heard; the latest in "bobs" was
to be seen on all sides, and the afternoon and morning dresses
were dainty, and of the prevailing mode. Every girl seemed to
enjoy her meals, and typical of her sex, those at the small tables in
each dining room, all talked at once without being boisterous.
Doubtless those in authority would be prone to smile at these impressions of a rank outsider, but I repeat, doubtless wheels did
go 'round, but seldom where the public figured, or when visitors
were on the scene. Personally, the examiner was converted at the
time of her first contact?and is now a loyal and sympathetic admirer of the institution as a whole.
Naturally, these girls suffered from a mal-adjusted home environment, otherwise they would never have reached the Court because of truancy, immorality, et cetera, but in the majority of
cases they were "more sinned against than sinning."

In each examination, some attempt was made to get:

a) Mental status from a battery of tests used at the fifteenyear level.
&) School proficiency with fundamentals.
Little attempt was made and little recorded concerning the
social status, since that information was self-evident from the office
records, and the mere fact that the girl was in the institution.
The battery of tests to determine mental status and school
proficiency were those used originally in making standards and
norms at the fifteen-year level (Learning). This included first
and second trials on the performance tests, known as the Witmer
Cylinders and Dearborn Formboard 1C. The former has been
standardized and found to be a test at about the six-year level.
Statistical data has not been compiled on the Dearborn Formboard

1C, but it is undoubtedly a more difficult performance test than
the Witmer Cylinders.

Memory span for digits, both auditory and visual, and the reverse span were given. The latter was not included in Dr Learning's original study. The Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon
Scale was given, and an arithmetic test including eight problems
involving the four fundamental processes, using digits only.
The Binet Test, the simple arithmetic problems and possibly
the memory span were given as an index to intellectual status,
since they dealt with knowledge and the ability to organize knowledge through language. According to Dr Witmer, intellectual
ability is that which makes it possible to '' acquire, retain, organize
and use knowledge."

On the Binet Test, these girls failed more consistently on the
tests involving understanding and use of language than on those
in which understanding only was involved. Consequently, the
vocabulary and questions involving likenesses and differences were
more often a source of failure than those in which intelligence was
involved to a greater degree than intellect?for example, the problems of fact, and the morals from fables.
At the eight-year level of the Binet Scale?the problems of
similarities, involving a series of four questions, the first being,
"How are wood and coal alike?"?95.6% pass this test, and 4.4%
fail. At the twelve-year level?problems of similarities, the first
of which is, "How are a snake, a cow and a sparrow alike?"?
46.1% pass and 53.9% fail. At the fourteen-year level?questions
involving differences between President and King, including
Tenure, Accession and Power?8.2% pass, and 91.8% fail.

At the fourteen-year level?problems of fact, involving three
questions, the first of which is, "A man who was walking in the
woods near a city stopped suddenly, very much frightened, ....
etc. "?51.6% pass, and 48.3% fail. At the sixteen-year level?
tests asking for an interpretation of Fables?23.1% pass, and
76.9% fail.

An index to intellectual status is available in Test No. 4,
eight-year level, if something more than a simple likeness is given,
but most of the children pass this test by giving obvious comparisons which, of course, must be credited, but which are not
an index to their intellectual level. This test involves discernment more than complexity or intellect.
Test No. 8, at the twelve-year level ("In what way are
and alike?") is a more complex one if for no other
reason than that a third word is introduced, necessitating a higher
intellectual level for purposes of classification with increased ability
to discern, not necessary in the similar test at the eight-year level.
Test No. 3 at the fourteen-year level, concerning the differences
between president and king is a test where intellect, or academic
training, is essential, for no child without school training could
answer this satisfactorily. It is then very significant, but not
surprising that such a large percentage of this group should fail
with this test.

In direct contrast are the problems of fact at the same age
level. Here we find intelligence?which, according to Dr Witmer,
is "the ability to solve what for the individual is a new problem
?the necessary equipment for satisfactory completions, together
with an ideational background producing appropriate associations.
These prerequisites?primarily intelligence?were not lacking, as
shown by the percentage of satisfactory completions, as were the
prerequisites?mainly intellectual?in the tests of differences, both
tests at the fourteen-year level.

The percentage of failures with the Fables is particularly significant where delinquents are concerned. Terman says this is a
generalization test valuable when examining delinquents, since it
gives an insight into the status of social consciousness and the
ability to interpret motives underlying acts and attitudes. Probably a lack of this insight is sufficient explanation for the failure
of transgressors to meet human problems and situations without
outside help or interference. In other words, the fables involve
the practical application of an abstract situation, and from generalizations, the ability to appropriate broader interpretations applicable in everyday life.

VOCABULARY ANALYSIS
(91 Cases)
Number % Word Number %
Word passing Failing passing Failing
1. gown   85 6.6% rul0  8? 5.5%
2. tap   82 9.9% 7. health  71 22.0%
3. scorch  83 8.8% 8. eye-lash   74 18.7%
4. puddle   81 11.0% 9. copper   42 53.9%
5. envelope  88 3.3% 10. curse  79 13.2%
26 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
11. pork   82 9.9% 25. hysterics   32 64.9%
12. outward   63 30.8% 26. Mars  23 74.8%
13. southern  62 31.9% 27. mosaic   100.0%
14. lecture   51 44.0% 28. bewail   14 84.7%
15. dungeon   62 31.9% 29. priceless  14 84.7%
16. skill   23 74.8% 30. disproportionate . 11 88.0%
17. ramble   17 81.4% 31. tolerate   7 92.4%
18. civil   27 80.4% 32. artless   8 91.3%
19. insure   45 50.6% 33. depredation  100.0%
20. nerve   51 44.0% 34. lotus   3 96.8%
21. juggler   18 80.3% 35. frustrate   1 98.91%
22. regard   22 75.9% 36. harpy   100.0%
23. stave  10 89.1% 37. flaunt   1 98.91%
24. brunette  30 67.1% 38. ochre  1 98.91%
Not one girl made a vocabulary score of seventy-five, which
is required at superior adult level. No one word in the list of
words was scored perfectly by the entire group.
"Envelope" receives the highest score for the group?88
passed; "rule" was second, with 86 passing; "gown," third, with
85. Not one passed "mosaic," "harpy" or "depredation" or any
word in the first line after '' ochre.''
At the higher age levels, there are very few questions where
the use of language is not involved, consequently the Intelligence
Quotients suffered. In many cases the girls had the ability to
answer questions, but lacked the vocabulary adequate to enable
them to pass the tests according to the standards laid down by
Terman.

FIFTEEN-YEAR LEVEL INSTITUTIONAL GROUP

778 Females 91 Females
Chronological Age Chronological Age
Maximum  19-2 Maximum  18-11
Minimum  12-0 Minimum  9-5
(3 below 12 yrs.)
Mode 60%  14-4 to 15-8 Mode 60% 14-3 to 16-11
Memory Span?Auditory Memory Span?Auditory
Maximum  10 Maximum   9
Minimum   4 Minimum   5
60% Mode  6-8 60% Mode  5-7
Memory Span?Visual Memory Span?Visual
Maximum  10 Maximum   9
Minimum   5 Minimum  0
60% Mode  7-9 60% Mode  6-8
No Reverse Span given at fifteen-year level. No correlation available.
EXAMINATION AT STATE INSTITUTION 27
Intelligence Quotient Intelligence Quotient
Maximum  144 Maximum  100
Minimum  54 Minimum  40.6
60% Mode  81-110 60% Mode 63.5-84.9
Cylinders?First Trial Cylinders?First Trial
Maximum  F Maximum  F
Minimum 22" Minimum  40"
60% Mode 52-96" 60% Mode  58-112"
Cylinders?Second Trial Cylinders?Second Trial
Maximum  F Maximum  ^
Minimum 18" Minimum 26"
60% Mode  41-66" 60% Mode 41-72"
Dearborn 1C?First Trial Dearborn 1C?First Trial
Mnyirmim  F Maximum  ^
Minimum 36" Minimum
60% Mode 104-375" 60% Mode  132-549"
Dearborn 1C?Second Trial Dearborn 1C?Second Trial
Maximum  F Maximum  ^
Minimum 21" Minimum  30"
60% Mode 55-185" 60% Mode  72-272"

CONCLUSIONS

I. The results show marked pedagogical retardation, but a
normal display of intelligence. Since no test has been devised that
determines intelligence alone, the conclusion that these girls display more intelligence than intellect is reached only through analysis and interpretation of their reactions to submitted test material.
The examiner attempted to accomplish this by noting kinds of
errors and how they were corrected, which necessitated an insight into the many contributing factors. From careful observation of children, it is the consensus of opinion that intelligence is
not acquired through education, but is an aggregate of congenital
abilities, both general and specific. Intelligence is thought to be
above average when it works at a high intellectual level. As this
group does not function at such a level, they may be diagnosed as
having normal intelligence. Intellectual levels are determined by
school proficiency, which is relative superiority in competition.
Their school competency can be estimated only through school
proficiency. These proficiencies were especially apparent in their
deficient vocabulary and lack of arithmetical foundations.
II. If delinquency is largely referable to truancy and pedagogical retardation?in fact, any number of things which might
result from poor home environment?the comparisons and findings
in this study are especially interesting and valuable.

III. Many of those in this group are adolescent girls who are
chronologically able to profit by additional instruction and will
doubtless raise their intellectual level as the result of the school
programs to which they are now subjected. For this reason, a
subsequent psychological examination would be interesting and
should be significant, before they leave the institution, not only
from a psychological point of view, but as an index of the value of
the program carried out in the institution.

IV. Personality ratings giving some index of emotional traits
with social and psycho-physical characteristics, would make an interesting correlation and enhance the value of the psychological
findings. An insight into the individual qualities from this angle
would also be invaluable to the personnel of the institution. Findings could be recorded weekly by the persons exercising the most
constant supervision and consistent authority over each girl.
