Billy
======

Bernice Leland Detroit Teachers' College, Detroit, Michigan
A fat little figure tottered down the hall in the wake of the
first grade teacher. He stepped briskly and unafraid but appeared to receive just the proper support from a sympathetic hand
at each step to keep him from falling flat on his face.
"Please do something about Billy. I can not teach him to
read." This from the teacher, and the lovable little boy with her
was Billy.

Billy was three semesters overdue in the second grade. In
other words he was now spending his fifth in the first. He was
nine years old, attractive to look upon, and apparently intelligent
with a pleasing sense of humor. He weighed 69^2 pounds and was
but 47 inches tall which fact produced a roly-poly effect, adding
somewhat to the immaturity which seemed stamped all over him.
Today, eight years later at the age of seventeen years three
months, Billy is a larger edition of what he seemed to be that first
day. Teachers are still asking that someone "do something for
Billy." His mother is still suggesting that he be "started all over
again" in reading and we, with special interest in the problem,
are still wondering what the answer is.

The case somewhat in detail, is as follows:
---------------------------------------------

Billy was first placed with a small group of children who were
being given special study. This was early in November, 1917.
He rapidly became a general favorite in the room, his receptive
attitude, ready willingness to learn, and unfailing good nature
helping to make him so. The free organization of the group gave
Billy the benefit of such help as other children were capable of
giving, which proved to be desirable stimulation if no more tangible result can be recorded. Also, every lesson was under very
direct supervision of the teacher.

It was found at once that he had a negligible reading vocabulary, the number of words which he was able to recognize being by
no means up to a standard for any grade and furthermore he was
uncertain of them from day to day. All reading was attended by
great effort. He stumbled along pushing his head forward, shifting from one foot to the other, stopping often to smile, open his
mouth, close it, wet his lips, give a little grunt, cock his head on
one side, arrange or rearrange the speech organs and?still smiling
?give it up. Of course, such a performance upset phrasing completely, comprehension as well, and was more or less repeated
when any silent reading exercises were presentd to him?all explained, of course, by the fact that he could not recognize words.
On November 5, an Aldine Primer was presented to him. He
learned the rhymes by rote readily enough, comprehending the
situation perfectly, entering into dramatizations, making suggestions for play in this connection which showed observation and
understanding. Each given word, having been first presented in
the rote-rhyme way, was presented again and again in situations
new and old. Billy saw and heard all new words many times. He
met them on the blackboard in script and in print, singly in
phrases, and in sentences. He found them on the printed pages
of his book. He wrote them. He searched and found them in
the newspaper. They stared at him from slips typed for silent
reading exercises, or from labeled actors, pictures and toys. They
were presented in every conceivable situation and Billy happy in
the novel experience of acquisition in reading smiled and smiled
in engaging enthusiasm, completing the Primer on January 15 a
little over two months from the time he began it. The record at
this time reads, "Reading much improved. Comprehension good.

Memory for words seems poor, preventing fluent reading."
Billy was advanced to the First Reader. Hoping now to give
him some new means of helping himself, he was introduced to
certain phonetic possibilities. He absorbed the plan readily enough,
was able to blend the parts easily, and to be sure when the occasion for such a performance arose. But, in the end, the plan
proved ineffective and useless because he consistently forgot from
one day to the next what to call the key. For instance, it was no
trick at all for him to see that t-all was tall, provided he did
not forget that all was all, which he usually did. So this means
of help was abandoned as unreliable. The sum of it all was
that Billy was taught to recognize such words as he finally came
to know through as great a variety of presentation as the skill
and ingenuity of the instructor could devise, the plan of any given
lesson being dependent upon the results of the one preceding and
upon the situation at the moment.

Billy was born December 15, 1908. He is the oldest of ten
children, nine of whom are living. The three youngest are triplets
and the girl who died in early infancy was a twin. The next

BILLY 31

younger than Billy is a girl who has been rather carefully studied.1
Six of these children have attended the same public school and
five of these were non-readers to as great an extent as Billy. One
of the six entered parochial school too soon to have any record
with us on reading.

The Binet reveals I.Q.'s as follows: Billy 79, when tested in
January, 1918, D?98.7, D?96.1 J=, H?83, P?71.
The parents own their own home in a good residential district.
The father holds a responsible position with one of the largest
R.R. concerns in the country and the mother manages their home
efficiently with the help of the children all of whom have been
trained to take some responsibility. We are not able to find any

morbid history.
----------------

Billy's instrumental birth (without injury), the proverbial
fall from a second story window at the tender age of two years,
measles, whooping cough?none of these serve our purpose in defining the cause of Billy's difficulties in learning to read.
The mother is of Swiss descent. Billy was overweight from
birth, 121/2 pounds at birth. Is it possible that this suggestion
of glandular disturbance is of importance? In February, 1918, a
specialist was unwilling to make any statement, requesting a return in six months and advising "no treatment for the present."
Meantime Billy was transferred to the parochial school where he
"didn't get along very well" but remained until the spring of
1926. He then re-entered public school in the A 7th grade and
our attention was again called to him in December, 1926.
His difficulties now are essentially the same as they were in
the beginning. On Gray's Oral Reading test, his score is 13.75.
He omits, mispronounces, and substitutes words. He ignores the
punctuation and frequently points to words. His rate is of course
very low and he moves his head from side to side as his eyes shift.
A common error is substituting a word similar in appearance as
place for palace, when for then, youngest for younger. In many
such cases, the sense of the passage is not too seriously disturbed
and Billy is satisfied unless his attention is called to the word.
Then he pronounces it correctly. His comprehension is everywhere superior to the mechanical performance, which so far as
memory and records serve us, seems to be about what it was when
he left us. Apparently he does not get an adequate word-image
of any type?visual, kinesthetic or auditory, when he reads and
1 Dana?The Psychological Clinic, Jan.-Feb. 1922.

I think the explanation may be a congenital defect of attention.
Details of words escape him. Furthermore he has a visual span
of only three letters.

Billy is classified as "dull," but he does not conform to any
picture of the typically all-around dull child. He is alert, comprehending, responsible, and capable of persistent effort. He gathers up general information from his environment and makes good
use of it. His difficulty in school comes mainly from his disability
in connection with words. A word is a pattern of fine detail,
comparatively, and he cannot seem to get these details. What
connection if any there may be between his dullness and some
possible glandular insufficiency is of course undetermined and must
remain so as he is completely removed from observation now.
In February, he left school to "get a job." This has not yet
materialized but his parents hope to find a place for him eventually
where he can attend a trade school in connection. The college
education so earnestly desired by these parents for each of the
children is impossible for him and they realize it now. We suspect that the same conclusion must be reached later on for the
others.

Billy is certainly one of the host who succeed better with their
hands and heels than with their heads. Being socially agreeable
and competent to meet situations which do not involve much intellectual activity, it is probable that he will find a niche where
he can be useful in doing the plain work of the world. Some
feelings of inferiority were detected but they have not overwhelmed
him and he has not turned to undesirable ways of using his leisure time.
Not a little interest in his case is derived from the fact that
he is one of a family of children not feebleminded, who learn to
read as well as they do only by most untiring effort and then, not
fluently and well.
