Darwin
========

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
Art. I.?.
:Author:  J. M. Winn, M.D., M.K.C.P., &c.
There is little to be said respecting the private life of this
distinguished naturalist. He was born at Shrewsbury; his
father was Dr E. W. Darwin, a Fellow of the Koyal Society,
and the son of the celebrated Erasmus Darwin; his mother
was the daughter of Josiah Wedgwood, the inventor of the
valuable, pottery wares which still bear his name. After studying medicine at Edinburgh, he went to Christ's College,
Cambridge, with a view of entering the church, but he soon
abandoned this intention and devoted all the remaining days of
his life to the study of natural history. His elaborate researches in this branch of science were prosecuted almost solely
with a view of establishing the wild and visionary hypothesis of
evolution. This was-the dominant idea of his life, and as his
reputation rests chiefly on his supposed solution of the mysterious
problem of creation, our remarks will be confined especially to
this question, and we hope to show that all his attempts to
establish the baneful doctrine of evolution have been utterly
in vain.

The Darwin furor, which was gradually subsiding under the
sobering influence of time, has burst forth with redoubled force
since the death of the great apostle of evolution. The fanaticism of his enthusiastic admirers knows no bounds, and it would
be enough to create a smile, if the subject were not too serious
for mirth, to read the extravagant encomiums they have lavished
on their idol. Since his apotheosis in Westminster Abbey, the
pceans of bis worshippers have been loud and incessant; not
content with the unmerited honour conferred upon liim by his
interment in the closest proximity to Newton, they have had
the presumption to rank him equal to this natural philosopher,
the greatest the world has ever known, and to compare the
vague, unverified, and most improbable hypothesis of evolution
with the immutable law of gravitation !

It would seem, judging from the nonsense which lias lately
passed current as science, that common sense has taken flight.
If it should hereafter again visit the earth, future generations
will wonder, on reading the following inflated encomiums on
Darwin, at the mental obliquity and credulity of the scientific
and literary men of the nineteenth century. We will now
subjoin a few only of the extravagant and unwarranted panegyrics, with which the papers have lately teemed:
Knowledge* in a leader entitled " Newton and Darwin,"
makes the following hyperbolical remarks : " In Charles Darwin
science has lost one who has done more than any since Newton
to extend men's recognition of the wideness of the domain of
law I do not know whether the grandeur of the universe, as pictured by Newtonian astronomy, or the vastness of
past and future time, as pictured by the Darwinian system, is
the more impressive. Certainly there can be imagined nothing
much more wonderful than those vast depths of space in which
we are absolutely compelled to believe since Newton established
the great law which bears his name. But if there is aught
grander than this, aught more solemn in its impressiveness, it is
the thought of the immeasurable vistas of past time, during
which the races inhabiting earth came into being under the
action of the laws assigned to them." Mr. Proctor, the Editor
of Knowledge, in an article on Darwin, in the Contemporary
Review for June 1882, has the temerity to speak of the law of
Biological Evolution, as if it were an unquestioned truth.
" The course " of folly " can no further go."

The Standard furnishes us with the subjoined opinions of
the continental press on Darwin and his speculations:?
The France observes : " Darwin's work has not been merely
the exposition of a system, but, as it were, the production of an
* Mr. Proctor seems to imply, in giving his journal the presumptuous title of
Knowledge, that all other journals are in a state of Egyptian darkness. We fear,
however, that his views arc one-sided, for ho excludes from his publication facts
that are unfavourable to evolution. In an oarly number of the journal, wo
observed that, he refused to insert a communication from a correspondent which
contained arguments adverse to Darwinism. This is the usual practice of
evolutionists, and reminds us of the Welsh Judge, who said ho never wished to
hear more than one sido of a case, as otherwise, he got bothered and could not
come to a decision.

epic?the great poem of the genesis of the universe, one of the
grandest that ever proceeded from a human brain?an epic
magnificent in its proportions, logical in its deductions, and
superb in its form. Darwinism may be disputed, but if it be
true that, according to Greek etymology, 4 poet' means ' creator,' how can the name of poet be refused to him who intellectually has created a world, and has propounded so wonderful
a theory of its origin and development. Darwin deserves not
only a place by the side of Leibnitz, Bacon, or Descartes, but is
worthy to rank with Homer and Virgil."

" The whole Vienna press assigns a prominent place in its
columns to the news of the death of the great English philosopher, Darwin, and to their notices of his eminent services to
Natural Science."

The Vienna Allgemeine even says : " We must apologise
for touching on political matters on a day when humanity has
suffered so great a loss. It seems to us that the world has
become gloomier and grown greyer since this star ceased to
shine. Our century is Darwin's century. We can now suffer
no greater loss, as we do not possess a second Darwin to lose."
The Neue Freie Presse says: " Darwin's death causes
lamentations as far as truth has penetrated, and wherever
civilisation has made any impression. Darwin advanced the
progress of mankind. Although his peculiar work was determining man's real position in Nature, the life of Darwin had
far greater importance in point of culture than the life and
work of many more exalted personages who were interred with
pomp."

" Almost all the other Vienna papers publish notices of the
deceased philosopher of an equally eulogistic character."
Almost all the German papers publish obituary notices of
Darwin, and agree in regarding him as one of the greatest
men of the nineteenth century. The Cologne Gazette calls him
" a man of science who made a mark upon his times in a manner unparalleled by any of his contemporaries. He compelled
every branch of science to acknowledge his revolutionising
discoveries. The completion of his gigantic system will give
abundant occupation to the remotest generations; but the
memory of the founder of this prodigious scientific structure
will remain imperishable to all time."

The adoration of the Times for Darwin is unbounded:
" At least for the next century it may confidently be predicted that biological science will do little more than work upon
Mr. Darwin's line. If the ' Origin of Species,' had never been
written, if there had been no 4 Darwinian hypothesis,' the actual
work he did would have been enough to gain him a reputation
among the highest. His books on the voyage of the 'Beagle,'
on minute vegetable anatomy . . . and lastly, that marvellous
book on earthworms, form a host that would of themselves
adorn the name of any other man of science. Joined to his
great philosophical achievement, they place him beyond rivalry
among the men of to-day, and side by side with two or three
great discoverers of the past, whose names are household words."
?Times, April 21st, 1882.

The West/minster Review, in an article on Darwin says:
"The life of Dai win is an epic .... Enemies opposed his
progress, and assailed him with every weapon in their power;
but, like a skilful general, he allowed them to spend their
strength in vain, upon a fortress which he knew to be impregnable, and it triumphed."
The Medical News speaks in the same strain of the supposed
triumph of Darwinism : " The death of Charles Darwin has called
forth a universal expression of regret, which cannot fail to be
especially gratifying both to the intimate friends of the deceased naturalist and to every disciple of the school he in reality
created. How marked the change that has come over the
opponents of Darwinism they only can fully appreciate who
preserve a recollection of the torrent of abuse with which the
theory and its author were ruthlessly bespattered on the first
appearance of the ' Origin of Species.' The ultimate triumph
of the evolutionary hypothesis, however, was from the outset a
foregone conclusion; and none saw more clearly than the noble
old man who now lies in the midst of England's most honoured
sons, how far-spreading and all-embracing his immortal conception really was. Invulnerable in the strength of assurance
lent by the testimony his incessant labour had extracted from
the realms of nature, he could well afford to wait while his
followers slowly grew from a few to a multitude; and we cannot
but be thankful that ere the sands ot his life had fully run, he
was enabled to witness the submission of even his most bitter
opponents, while with perfect simplicity and honesty he welcomed them as fellow-travellers with himself through the
country he himself had opened up."

Had the writer of this article fully understood the question
on which he speaks so dogmatically, he could not have uttered
an opinion so completely at variance with recognised facts. He
would have known that even Professor Huxley, one of the
strongest advocates for Darwinism, had been obliged to confess
that evolution could not, as yet, be considered a thoroughly
established fact. The theory is based on false premises; if so
and so is true, then Darwinism is true. This is the key-note to
all their loud songs of triumph.

We will now proceed to show by the irresistible logic of
facts, the fallacies and absurdities of that modern fiction of
scientific atheism?the theory of evolution. To prove this
position, it will be necessary to refer to many of the facts
and arguments which we have published in The Journal of
Psychological Medicine during the past seven years. Philosophical and scientific truths will not, however, lose their
weight by repetition; and if the infatuated believers in Darwinism will persist in bandying their old and oft-repeated
arguments, we are perfectly justified, at the risk of being
tedious, in again arraying against their flimsy sophisms, ? our
phalanx of irrepressible truths, which strike at the very root
of evolution. These facts could be multiplied to almost any
extent. We shall only mention some of the chief objections
to Darwinism, but enough, and more than enough, to convince
any unprejudiced inquirer, with a modicum of common sense,
that evolution which assumes to be a law, is absolutely at
variance with the recognised laws of nature.

1. The infertility of hybrids as a general rule, with a very
few equivocal exceptions, is universally acknowledged, and is
utterly irreconcilable with flie theory of evolution. Can a
better reason be given for this truth, than the one commonly
received, that the great Lawgiver has established a law to
prevent the confusion of species ? If the law of evolution had
been true, the animal and vegetable world would have become,
ere this, a vast chaos of bizarre varieties, incapable of definition
or classification.

2. It is a fact that the forms and features of men and
animals are the same now as they were thousands of years ago,
tis depicted on the Egyptian monuments, or as still traceable in
the mummies of the pyramids, and that the intellect of man
has never been developed in a higher degree than it was in the
days of the Hebrew prophets and Greek poets. The only
answer offered is, that evolution requires not only thousands,
but billions upon billions of years for the development of a
new species. This is dreaming and not sober reasoning. The
palaeontologists can read the records of the past, stamped on
the crust of the earth, but who can read the future of a million
years to come ? The mind of man has not only a limited field
of observation, but has also limits to its own power, and it is
not a healthy exercise for the mind to indulge overmuch in the
pleasures of the imagination. Professor Tyndall has strongly
advocated what he terms the " scientific use of the imagination." It would have been far better for mankind if he and
the evolutionists had paid more attention to the cultivation of
their reasoning powers, and less to that of the iMi-scientific use
of their imaginations.

The periods required for the evolution of one species into
another are infinitely longer than the time, as calculated by the
physicists, which has elapsed since life first appeared on the
face of the earth. It has been estimated that a period not
much exceeding one hundred millions of years must have
passed since the earth was sufficiently cooled down to support
life. This is not nearly long enough for the imaginary law of
evolution to produce all the species, living and extinct, that
have been discovered; for the Darwinites are obliged to admit
that a fabulous time is required for the development of even a
single species by evolution.

3. Species have maintained their distinctive peculiarities
since they were first created. Darwin laboured in vain to upset
this fact, and confounded races with species. It was known to
all breeders of animals and common gardeners, long before
Darwin's work on " The Descent of Man " appeared, that an
enormous variety of animals and plants can be produced by
careful selection, crossing, &c., and yet the worshippers of
Darwin will talk of these trite facts as if he had been the discoverer of them. Frank Buckland's bright and genial spirit?
combined as it was with good sense and thorough knowledge of
natural history?recoiled from the teaching of evolutionary
atheism. He often amused himself by giving exceedingly droll
and imaginary transmutations of species, after the fashion oi
evolutionists. But setting this apart, we defy them, as we have
often done, to inform us whence, or through what channel, the
nightingale derives her song ? Are the wings of birds derived
from the quills of the porcupine ? Whence does the beaver
obtain his constructive power, the spider learn to spin her
geometric web, or the carrier pigeon acquire her wonderful
instinct ? Are the beauty and scent of flowers, which are the
grace and ornament of the earth, due to natural selection?
They have not deigned to answer these questions, simply because
they cannot do so. Their grand and immutable law of evolution is utterly incapable of explaining these wonderful mysteries.
4. Very many years previous to the publication of Darwin's
works, naturalists had observed the gradations of organisms, on which evolutionists lay so much stress, as well as
the similarity of the bodily functions and conformations of
animals ; but this is nothing more than that archetypal unity,
which is found throughout all nature. Would it be reasonable to say that because a pig's liver and a man's are anatomically
and physiologically alike that they have the same pedigree?
5. Mr. William Carruthers, keeper of the Botanical Department of the British Museum, and a high authority on subjects
connected with natural history, made mention at the opening
of the Geologists' Association in November 1875, of the following
facts which the evolutionists are unable to contradict: " The
plants portrayed on the ancient paintings and sculptures of
Egypt; the fruits placed in coffins with embalmed bodies, and
the fruits and seeds found in ancient lake dwellings, all belong
to existing species, with which they agree in the most minute
and apparently accidental particulars. The existing order of
plants if it be due to generic evolution supplies no proof of
it. . . . The cellular algoe preceded the vascular cryptogams, or
the gymnosperms of the newer palaeozoic rocks, and these were
speedily followed by monoctyledons, and at a much later period
by dicotyledons. But the earliest representatives of those
various sections of the vegetable kingdom ivere not generalised
forms, but as highly organised as recent forms, and in many
cases more highly organised; and the divisions were as clearly
bounded in their essential characters, and as decidedly separated
from each other as they are at the present day. ... Is it
possible from the record of organic life preserved in the sedimentary deposits, to discover the method or agent through the
action of which the new forms appeared on the globe ? The
rocks record the existence of the plants and animal forms, but
as yet they have disclosed nothing whatever as to how these
forms originated."

6. We have much pleasure in adding to the testimony of
Mr. Carruthers, that of Mr. Thomas Davidson, F.R.S., Y.P.P.S.,
derived from the animal kingdom. He stands unrivalled for
his knowledge of the bracliiopoda. He was the friend of
Darwin, at ivhose particular request he undertook the task of
minutely examining the characteristics of the bracliiopoda (a
very small shell, of which there are three thousand species), with
a view of testing the truth of the theory of evolution. In the
Geological Magazine for 1877, Mr. Davidson gave the following opinion, which is decidedly adverse to the views of Darwin:
" We have no positive evidence of those modifications which
the theory invokes, for types appear on the whole to be
permanent as long as they continue, and when a genus disappears there is no modification, that T can see, of any of the
forms that continue beyond, as far as the bracliiopoda appear to
be concerned; and why should a number of genera, such as
lingula, discina, crania, and rhynchonella, have continued to be
represented with the same characters, and often with but small
modification in shape during the entire sequence of geological
strata ? Why did they not offer modifications or alter during
those incalculable ages ? Limiting myself to the brachiopoda,
let us see what further they will tell us on this question. ^ Taking
the present state of our knowledge as a guide, but admitting at
the same time that any day our conclusions and inductions
may require to be modified by fresh discoveries, let us ascertain
whether they reveal anything to support Darwinian ideas. We
find that the larger number of genera made their first
appearance during the palaeozoic periods, and since they have
been decreasing in number to the present period. We will
leave out of the question the species, for they vary so little that
it is often very difficult to trace really good distinctive
characters between them ; it is different with the genera, as
they are, or should be, founded on much greater and more
permanent distinctions. Thus, for example, the family
Spiriferidse includes genera which are all characterised by a
calcified spiral lamina for the support of the brachial appendages ; and, however varied these may be, they always
retain the distinctive characters of the group from their first
appearance to their extinction. . . . Now, although certain
genera, such as terebratala, rhynchonella, crania, and discina
have enjoyed a very considerable geological existence, there
are genera, such as stringocephalus, uncites, porambonites,
koninckina, and several others, which made their appearance
very suddenly and without any warning; after a while they
disappeared in a similar abrupt manner, having enjoyed a comparatively short existence. They are all possessed of such marked
and distinctive internal characters that we cannot trace between
them and associated or synchronous genera any evidence of their
being the result of descent with modification."

7. The fossil Trilobite crops abruptly, at the close of the
carboniferous epoch, with the eye perfectly formed.
8. No breeding has yet been able to produce, by selection,
two animals of such specific differences that they can generate
hybrids. Moreover, there is a limit to the variability of species.
9. The faculty of language places an impassable barrier
between man and the brute creation. This distinction has
been scientifically advocated by Dr Bateman in his valuable
work, "Darwinism Tested by Language."

10. It has been asserted that the distinguishing characteristics observed in animals in various countries are due to their
environments?to use a newly-coined word. How does it happen
then, that in parts of South Africa and Australia, alike in soil
and climate, the species are entirely different ?
11. Evolutionists have never informed us which was developed first, the male or the female of animals. A man and
woman are very different, and yet one mother produces both.
How can this be ? Again, hew is the balance of the sexes pre* Rivington, London.
served? These are mysteries which the materialist can no
more explain than lie can the mystery of life.

12. It is impossible for the evolutionists to explain by insensible gradations or fortuitous changes the origin of the electric
battery in the torpedo. Would they presume to say that if
Galvani was able to perfect his battery in a few years, the Great
Mechanician required billions of years to complete the wonderful
weapon of defence with which the torpedo is endowed ?
13. Another point on which great stress has been laid is the
resemblance in appearance between the human embryo, and
that of various animals, during its development in utero. But
a little consideration will show that the similarity is partial, and
is not carried so far as to lead to any doubt as to the existence
of that law which prevents the confusion of species ; and without
which the world would long ago have been filled with legions
of monstrosities.

14. It is affirmed that the human embryo, when in utero,
passes through successive forms of organisation analogous to
those of a fish, a reptile, a bird, and the inferior mammalia.
But if it is fish-like at one period of its growth, how does it not
sometimes come to pass that it is developed into a perfect fish.
There must be a fundamental difference between the germ of a
man and that of a fish from the very beginning, which no microscope has yet been able to detect. Moreover, physiological
observations have led to the probable inference that the brain
of the human foetus does not at any time exactly resemble that
of any inferior animal. Merely vague resemblances are very
imperfect data on which to form a theory.

15. With reference to the two principles?"the struggle for
existence " and " selection in relation to sex "?nothing more
need be said here than that they would be of no avail with
regard to those animals that are destitute of the power of locomotion. Beauty can have no place in the scheme of the evolutionist, for it is impossible to believe that the lowest grades of
animals acquired it by the assumed law of natural selection.
16. Although twenty-three years have elapsed since the publication of the " Origin of Species," the missing link between
man and the ape has not yet been discovered, in spite of the
unwearied search for this mythical animal by the bigoted
believers in Darwinism; and we have not yet heard whether
Mr. Pengelly has found the remains of primitive man in Kent's
Hole.

17. "Design in Nature," which affords the most grand
and unanswerable argument against atheism,is utterly opposed to
Darwinism. We have now to learn that the admirable Bridgewater Treatises, by Sir Charles Bell and others, are fallacies,
and that the prosaic process of development effects all that is
seen in animated nature, and that we are to shut our eyes
to the endless wonders of design, as exhibited by the manner
in which the requirements of the species are suited to the
circumstances in which they are placed. Are not the wings
of the eagle adapted for an elevated flight, and the fins of the
trout to darting through the water ?

The striking facts we have enumerated, which are utterly
irreconcilable with the theory of evolution, ought to be amply
sufficient to convince anyone of average and unprejudiced intellect that Darwinism, logically speaking, has completely broken
down. If more facts are needed, they will be found in the
works of Dr Bree,* Quatrefages,f Flourens,^ and the Rev. F. 0.
Morris.? The writings of these distinguished naturalists contain innumerable instances of the fallacies and inconsistencies
of the popular evolutionary delusion.

It may be naturally asked if evolution is such a self-evident
absurdity why expend so much labour in confuting it ? Simply,
because it is not merely a scientific blunder, but a mischievous
and atheistical doctrine which, by destroying the idea of a
ruling Providence, must be subversive of the very fundamental
principles on which all our morality and policy are based. It
has no doubt poisoned the minds of thousands in consequence
of its advocacy by many leading scientific men of the day
whose materialistic views have become universally known
through the medium of the public press.

Many timid clergymen?some holding a high position in
the Church.?have materially helped to propagate the infidel
doctrine of evolution by their attempt to adapt this unverified
theory of pseudo-philosophy to Christianity. They imagine
that all may be made smooth by admitting that the primordial
germ was created?not produced?by spontaneous generation
or the potentiality of atoms. They do not seem to be aware that
if they admit the first germ was created billions of years ago,
and was sufficient to develop all the endless and complicated
forms of life which are found at the present day upon the earth,
it must follow that the necessity for a watchful and superintending Providence is done away with. This Theistic form of
evolution removes the Creator so far from us and our sympathies
that He becomes a mere vanishing point in the dim vista of
* An Exposition of the Fallacies in the Hypothesis of Mr. Darwin, by C. R.
Bree, M.D., F.Z.S., London. Longmans, Green & Co., 1872.
| The Human Species, by A. de Quatrefages. C. Kegan, Paul & Co. London,
1879.
t Exam&n du Livre de M. Darwin sur 11 Origine, Par P. Flourens, Paris.
5 All the Articles of the Darwin Faith. London, W. Poole, Paternoster Row,
infinity. They have recently had recourse to another expedient.
They attempt to draw a line between the evolution of animals
and the origin of man. The latter, they say, was produced by a
special creation, the former by development. This is virtually
a surrender at discretion, for if evolution could produce all the
animals in the world, why not man ?

It is a mistaken policy for the clergy to succumb to their
antagonists at the present time, when the discoveries of science
are more than ever opposed to the fatalistic doctrine of
Darwinism in every form. It would have been far better if they
had kept a dignified silence whilst the question was being thoroughly discussed by all the leading science men of the day.
The speculations of the modern materialistic school of
philosophy are permeating all classes of society, which is to be
expected, when leading members of the British Association and
influential public lecturers are doing their utmost to imbue the
minds of the rising generation with the notion that all our
time-honoured creeds are the assumptions of credulity and folly.
They would substitute for these creeds the fantastic hypothesis
of evolution, potentiality of atoms, spontaneous generation, &c.,
which must inevitably, if not checked, sooner or later make
shipwreck of the highest hope and noblest aspirations of our
nature.

The works of Herbert Spencer have probably done more than
those of any other disciple of Darwin to disseminate the irreligious doctrine of evolution. They have been translated into
most of the continental languages, and strange to say, one of his
works has been chosen as a text-book at an English university.
Nothing can more clearly indicate the modern decadence of
thought than the fact that the pseudo-philosophical discourses of
this writer have been placed in the hands of youth by their
alma mater. It is, indeed, a most extraordinary circumstance
that the illogical lucubrations of Herbert Spencer should be
regarded with such general admiration. Dr Tyndall called him
" The Apostle of the Understanding." Does he think that what
he says of life, which he defines " as a continuous adjustment of
internal relations to external relations," has won that title for
him ? Can anything be more indefinite than such a definition ?
This is what he says of evolution : "Evolution is a change from
indefinite incoherent homogeneity to a definite coherent heterogeneity, through continuous differentiations and integrations.
* We first drew attention to this literary curiosity in an article published in
the Journal of Psychological Medicine, for April 18/5. Since then, we have
frequently asked, what great moral or scientific truth Herbert Spencer had originated or established, which should entitle him to bo ranked as one cf the greatest
philosophers of the ago. We have not yet had a reply.

Can such expressions as these be considered indications of a
master mind, and do they entitle him to be looked up to as a
guiding star? Asa writer, he is obscure and pedantic, and his
style forms a striking contrast to the simplicity and perspicuity
of our greatest authors.

Evolution has been a favourite theory of the scientific
atheists for several years, and we can readily understand how
loath they must be to abandon a theory which chimed in so
harmoniously with the materialistic hypothesis of potentiality
of atoms, bathybius, spontaneous generation and materialistic
physiology?but happily these fanciful, atheistical notions have
been scattered to the winds, and their last stronghold, Darwinism, is doomed. Inductive reasoning has completely failed
to prove it; and if we argue from assumed causes to effects, the
result is a complete reductio ad absurdnm. The chain of
evolution which was supposed to be constructed of links of iron
is no better than a rope of sand. The scientific objections to
Darwinism are innumerable, and it would be well if its supporters would wait until their theory is proved, before boastfully speaking of it as a verified fact. A fixed law gains by
investigation, but this has not been the case with Darwinism.
Every year some fresh defect is revealed, and it is wonderful
that there should still remain any who believe it to be standing
on as firm a basis as the law of gravitation. Hackel goes so
far as to propose that it should be accepted as the basis of education ! Can this extravagance be exceeded ? Irrefragable
arguments are unheeded by the enthusiastic believers in scientific atheism. We want a Swift to hold up to ridicule the
pseudo-philosophy now so rife. The speculations of the philosophers of Laputa were not more visionary than those of the
evolutionists.

Since the advent of Darwinism, the importance of natural
history?now inappropriately termed biology*?has been greatly
overrated. The evolutionists think it ought to take precedence
of all other branches of education. A magnificent building has
been erected at South Kensington for the glorification of dead
animals, which remind one of an Egyptian monument. Natural history is a delightful pursuit, and increases the relish for
existence by widening the prospect of nature around us ; but
* Tho term biology is now very commonly misapplied to the science of natural
history, by materialistic _ evolutionists. Every collector of bees or butterflies is
called a biologist. This is all very wrong and unphilosophical. Natural history
is generally understood to be that branch of knowledge which describes the objects
of nature, the habits of animals and plants, &c. Biology, as its derivation signifies,
is the science of life; it is therefore extremely illogical for that large section of
the evolutionists, who ignore the vital principle, and consider vital phenomena to
bo the effect of mechanical and chemical forces, to make use of this term.
there are few who have the taste and leisure for its cultivation
when once the business of life has commenced. We are quite
at a loss to understand why it should have been recommended
to School Boards as an essential branch of education for the
children of artisans. We are still old-fashioned enough to
think that "the noblest study of mankind is man."
The modern materialistic school has done incalculable mischief, morally and scientifically, not only to the dissemination
of flimsy hypotheses, but they have corrupted the English
language itself by the scientific jargon they have adopted in
the endeavour to make the new theories intelligible. We have
already referred to Herbert Spencer's incoherent definition of
evolution. A glossary of the new terms will soon be required.
The modern scientists call poetic emotion, " the thrill of a
ganglion " ; thought, " cerebration "; life, " molecular force " ;
creation, " evolution " ; the Deity becomes " a primordial germ";
crime, " cerebral disease " ; and the soul is described as " the
non-atomic centre of psychic force." Another writer says:
" The development of human thought is conditioned by the
development of organism and cosmic environment." This is a
fine specimen of one of " the fruits " of evolutionary " philosophy." We shall soon have a treatise written on what
Blackwood humorously called "the moral attributes of the
physical forces."

The late Gr. H. Lewes, who had a host of admirers?but on
what rational ground we could never discover?used the following unintelligible metaphysical verbiage. In speaking of the
question of objective and subjective laws, he said: "Biology
presents it in a peculiar Light; for here for the first time the
twofold aspect of phenomena become conspicuous, our interest
in the subjective side, that of feeling, being as great as our
interest in the objective side, that of force. It also takes place
among the subjective sciences, since its phenomena include
those of mind. In its evolution it passes from vegetality to
animality; and through animality to humanity, With animality a new factor, sensibility, becomes conspicuous. With
humanity another factor emerges?sociality." Was there ever
a greater jumble of ideas?mind and matter confusedly mingled
together ? Evolution seems to be the drift of the argument.
He should, like one of the spiritualistic writers (who talks of
materialising spirits), have gone so far as to assert that the last
step of evolution was to develop the human spirit. Lewes
should have said, " first vegetality, then animality," and lastly,
soulality.

No hypothesis was ever more open to ridicule than Daiwinism.
It is easy to imagine the curious questions which Hackel s
embryo class of evolutionists would have to answer: for instance?describe the various transmutations required for the
development of a worm into a man? How many billions of years
would be required for the metamorphosis ? Grive an account
of the various species which intervened between a periwinkle
and a peacock, a flying fish and a swallow, and between a
maggot and an alligator, &c. &c.

Sir John Lubbock, a zealous evolutionist, has taken great
pains to endow the ant with all the moral and intellectual
attributes of the human mind, but he did not see that in doing
so he was breaking the ingenious train which was to link the
anthropoid ape with man. Sir John admits that, although the
anthropoid ape approaches next to man in bodily structure,
the ant claimed the next place to him in intelligence; therefore, inasmuch as mind is superior to matter, it happens after
all, that it is not the monkey but the ant who is our immediate
progenitor: if not, man must be a cross between the ant and
the baboon, or, as a late popular novelist might put it: In the
morning of life the industrious married the grotesque, and their
offspring was the human mind. This is only one of the
endless absurdities which follow in the wake of Darwinism.
Sir John thinks so highly of the reasoning powers of the ant,
that he believes that if its space of life were not so brief, and
it had time to cultivate its intellectual powers, it would rise in
the scale of civilisation. He also estimates its moral goodness
equally high, and it might be inferred, from his reasoning, that
it was the original primitive Christian.

We have shown that the theory of evolution is utterly
untenable, from whatever point of view it is contemplated. How,
then, does it happen that a hypothesis so groundless should
have taken such a stronghold of the public mind ? The chief
causes appear to be the following: 1. It is the pet theory of
the positivists and scientific atheists, who naturally cling with
desperate tenacity to a doctrine opposed to the idea of an
ever-ruling Providence ; especially when the allied notions of
potentiality of atoms, bathybius, spontaneous generation, the
fabulous antiquity of man, and physiological psychology,* have
been completely disproved by the inextinguishable logic of facts.
2. Its advocacy by presidents of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science, and other leading scientific men who,
however distinguished for discoveries in their special pursuits,
have nevertheless displayed a lamentable ignorance of the first
principles of mental philosophy and logic. Their writings.
abound with examples of the petitio principii fallacy. These
scientists have numerous imperfectly educated admirers, who
consider them omniscient, and accept their teaching with
unbounded faith. 3. There is also a conceited superficial class
of atheists who are but too well pleased to seize hold of evolution, or any other plausible irreligious dogma, on the authority
of a popular lecturer. 4. The prevalent craving for sensational
lectures and addresses. In referring to the sensational addresses
at the meeting of the British Association in 1881, we made
the following remarks in Vol. VII., Part 2, of The Journal of
Psychological Medicine: " It is a notorious fact that sensational lectures with a spice of wickedness in them attract the
largest audiences. We have no doubt that if some one were
to announce an address entitled ' The existence of a Deity
disproved by the spectrum analysis,' or something equally
impious or absurd, that the draw would be immense. There is
nothing like ad captandum atheistical rhetoric to attract a
thoughtless crowd." 5. The unfortunate fictitious halo which
has surrounded evolution, owing to the miserable attempt of
many of the clergy to adapt Christianity to evolution.
It is a curious fact in the history of evolution, that
Mind, an evolutionary and materialistic journal, in the
recent number for July, admits that Darwin cannot be ranked
as a philosopher. In this article on Darwin the following
observations occur: " The great scientific genius who has just
been arrested in the work he was continuing, at the age of
seventy-four, was not a philosopher, as every generation has
need of such to probe the foundations and direct the issues of
its thoughts. He was not even a psychologist. The present
age is not devoid of such ... to apply the new scientific
principle of evolution to the disentanglement of the whole
complex web of mental processes." This is sheer nonsense.
We cannot look upon Darwin as equal to Bacon or Newton.
He was, nevertheless, an accomplished naturalist and an original
observer. But if hb did not establish a great general principle, he never said anything so unphilosopliical as Mind's
remark about the "disentanglement of mental processes by
means of evolution." This achievement was left for Herbert
Spencer to accomplish. Moreover, if Darwin had established
the fact of evolution, he would have been entitled to rank as
one of the first natural philosophers of the age.

Mind was started about seven years since, under the editorial
auspices of Mr. George Croom Robertson, who belongs to the
so-called advanced school of philosophy. The title is singularly
anomalous, as the object of the publication is to ignore mind
and exalt matter. Its dull and dreary articles have consisted
of little more than a rechauffe of the dangerous dogmas of the
positivists, and the contributors to it imagine that the use of
obscure and pedantic phraseology is adding to our knowledge of
the operations of the human mind. Mill, Herbert Spencer,
Bain, Gr. H. Lewes, and Wundt, the leader of the school of
physiological psychology (a new variety of phrenology), 'and
others of this class, are the authors who have been held up to
admiration in this journal. I have frequently, but fruitlessly,
asked what have these writers done morally or intellectually
for the cause of truth ? Evolution and physiological psychology were to explain all the mysteries of life and mind, but
after seven years of ponderous verbosity Mind leaves the
questions precisely where they were when the journal was
started. So confident was Mr. Gr. C. Eobertson, several years
since, that physiological psychology was " to open a new vista of
philosophic thought," that he advertised a new work, entitled
A Psychological Manual. We have been constantly on the
look-out for this work, and although we have made numerous
inquiries respecting it, have never been able to gain any tidings
about it, we are therefore forced to conclude that he has suppressed it.
From all the facts we have adduced, it must be obvious to
every candid inquirer, that the theory of evolution has not been
proved, but had the converse been true, the merit of having
conceived the hypothesis was not due to Charles Darwin.
Diderot, Lamarck, and the author of "Vestiges of Creation" have
been severally supposed to be the author of it. Erasmus Darwin,
however, was no doubt the originator of the theory. Charles
Darwin, with a frankness which did him honour, set this question
at rest by publishing, in the interesting life of his grandfather,
a translation of Ernst Krause's work.* The following extract
from this publication shows incontestibly that it was Erasmus
and not Charles Darwin who suggested the idea that "we are
merely an immense chain of material progression " f;?"Almost
every single work of the younger Darwin may be paralleled by a
chapter in the works of his ancestor ; the mystery of hereditary
adaptation, the protective arrangements of animals and plants,
and the analysis of the emotions and sociological impulses, nay,
even the studies on infants, are to be found already discussed in
the writings of the elder Darwin."

Before concluding the subject of evolution, it may be as
* The Scientific Works of Erasmus Darwin. Translated from the German, by
W. S. Dallas, F.R.S.

t We are indebted to Mrs. Fanny Kemble for this happy expression. It will be
fonnd in her charming " Iiccords of Later Life." (Eontiny, London.) Her genius
intuitively perceived at a glance the hollownoss of the atheistical doctrine of
evolution.

well to say a few words on sexual selection, the struggle for
existence and pangenesis. Sexual selection was an important
factor in the theory of the descent of man; in fact, Darwin
could have given but little plausibility to his speculations, had
he not ingeniously invented this hypothesis. We have previously mentioned an insuperable objection to it, that it would
be of no avail with regard to those lower grades of animals, who
have not the power of locomotion. This objection applies also
to the struggle for existence.

I have been informed that it was proposed sometime since,
by a zealous disciple of Darwin, to paint the wings of male
butterflies in order to attract the females ! What next ?
Darwin's account of sexual selection is very amusing, but we
prefer his grandfather's poem on " The Loves of the Plants."
The notion of 'pangenesis (the theory of physiological
units), was perhaps the most extravagant of all Darwin's fancies,
but we believe he abandoned this chimera long before his death.
It was ingeniously devised to give force to his views of heredity,
which has to perform an incredulous amount of work in the
development of the instincts of animals. Mr. Jonathan
Hutchinson made a fruitless attempt to revive the hypothesis
of pangenesis, in his lectures on The Laws of Inheritance,
delivered at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1881.
One of the most unpliilosophical outcomes of Darwinism
has been the tendency to endow the very lowest grades of
animals with mental attributes. Darwin, in his work on worms,
speaks of the mental faculties of worms, and a Danvinite has
recently gone the length of discussing the psychology of this
slimy wriggling creature. In spite of Darwin's eulogy of this
intellectual being, we are inclined to think higher of Sir John
Lubbock's ant. The worm is no doubt useful in its way?
nature has made nothing in vain?but we have not had experience enough of its fertilising properties to give an opinion on
the subject. We have, however, been credibly informed by a
competent judge, that Darwin's treatise on worms is "a wormcast-of exaggeration." We are not at liberty to mention our
informant's name. Although not a professed naturalist, he_ is
a close observer of nature, and his popular writings abound with
original and graphic descriptions of the habits of plants and
animals.
Darwin gives, as a proof of the worm's intellect, that it
avoids a sudden bright light. This intellectual characteristic
is in striking contrast to that of its fellow creature, the
philosopher and poet Goethe, who, in his last moments requested that the shutters might be opened in order that he
might have more light.

Evolutionists and materialistic physiologists have created
intense confusion by their attempts to locate the faculties of the
mind in the brain, and at the same time to give intellect to
brainless animals. Some assert that a properly developed brain
is necessary for the development of mind. Others are for
endowing the ant and worm, who have no brains, and whose
nervous systems terminate in simple ganglions, with intellectual
faculties.

In opposing the theory of evolution, and dissenting from
those enthusiasts who think it has been a great blessing to mankind, we readily pay a tribute to Darwin's great moral worth.
Nothing could surpass his devotion to science, his love of truth,
his modesty, single-mindedness, industry, zeal, and patience.
He was a close observer of nature, and he described what he saw
in language remarkable for its simplicity and perspicuity. Nevertheless, without taking into consideration the question of evolution, we think his discoveries have been overrated. He made
some original observations on the fertilisation of orchids, ship
barnacles, climbing plants, carnivorous plants, &c., &c.; but as
regards these special studies, he was not the first to cultivate
them. In his attempts to solve the enigma of life, he reminds
one of the alchemist's search for the philosopher's stone. Evolution could not be found, but Darwin, in his search for it, has
brought to light many interesting facts connected with animal
and vegetable life.

In their indiscriminate praise of Darwin, his followers seem
to have unfairly thrown into the shade many eminent naturalists
of this century, who will not lose by comparison with him?
Linnreus, De Candolle, Jussieu, Lindley, Sir W. J. Hooker,
Professor Owen, and Cuvier, should not be forgotten.
A scientific worker may make a thousand observations and
experiments, without having the good fortune to make an important discovery; and though ready tc accord to Darwin all
honour for his industry and love of science, we cannot rank him
with those who have been able to establish great and general
principles.
