Lectures on the Pathological Appearances Observed in the Bodies of the Insane
==============================================================================

CDitatnnl GTommum'cattons.
.
DELIVERED AT THE MIDDLESEX COUNTY LUNATIC ABYLUM,
:Author: DE. JOHN HITCIIMAN,
Resident Medical Officer to the Female Department of the Institution.
NO. I.

Gentlemen,?Were it not that I feci that this large institution,
containing nearly a thousand patients, and situated, moreover, in the
metropolitan county of England, should throw open its portals
widely to all those who seek for information in the most difficult and
most important of diseases; were it not, that I as strongly feel that
its medical officers, however feeble their talents for observation may
be, or however weak their power to enunciate the result of these
observations, should, nevertheless, contribute their " little all" to
enlarge the boundaries, to increase the resources, and to elevate the
aims of this department of science, I should have shrunk from
addressing you. And I should have done this all the more readily,
because our able and distinguished physician has so fully set before
you the symptoms and treatment of the malady, and because his
extensive experience, his great acquirements, his elegant diction, and
didactic skill, make it appear something like presumption in me to
occupy the place which lie has so recently vacatcd. I know, how-
ever, that with him, and I trust also with you, the will to act will bo
received with favour, and that my humble efforts to advance this
great cause will neither be misunderstood nor unappreciated. The task
which has been assigned to me is, to state the facts which have come
before me in the autopsy-room of this great institution, and to draw
from tlicni such inferences as may appear to me consistent with tho
established laws of physiology, and the rigid requirements />f a
purely inductive science.

Thirty-seven patients have died in the female department of the
Asylum, between January 1st, 1848, and the commencement of this
coursc of lectures. Their respective ages, divided into decennial
periods, were as follow:?
Between 20 yenrs nnd 30 .... 4
i, 30 years and 40 . .CI
? 40 years and 50 ?... 7
n 50 years and GO . . " [5
? 60 years and 70 ? ? . ' 7
? 70 years and 60 ? . *. ! 4
08
There were four patients of whose ages there was no record; of
these, two were apparently between the ages of thirty and forty
years; one between forty and fifty years, and one between fifty and
sixty years. The duration of the mental disease in seven of these
thirty-seven cases was unascertained. Of the remaining thirty, two
had been insane for a period not exceeding two months; two for a
period not exceeding one year; one for nearly two years; three for
nearly three years, and two for nearly five years. But to avoid being
extremely tedious, I will arrange the remaining twenty in quin-
quennial periods.

Between 5 and 10 years ..... 9
? 10 and 15 years . . , , .2
? 15 and 20 years . . . . .4
? 20 and 25 years ..... 4
? 25 and 30 years . . . . .1
The above cases were classified as suffering respectively from the
following forms of mental disease:?
Mania ............. 8
Mania, with General Paralysis ........ 2
Mania, with Epilepsy .......... 1
Melancholia
Convalescent from Melancholia at the time of lier decease from Pneumonia 1
Imbecility ............ 10
Senile Imbecility ........... 2
Imbecility, with Epilepsy ......... 3
Imbecility, with General Paralysis ........ 3
Dementia ............ 2
. Dementia, with General Paralysis ........ 1
Dementia, with Epilepsy ......... 3
37
Of the above patients, two died in the acute stage of mania: one
in one month after the attack, in the sixty-seventh year of her age;
the other, aged thirty-six years, had been deranged in her mind
nearly two years, but died from exhaustion consequent upon recur-
rent maniacal excitement. Six of the above patients died from
"general paralysis:" in one of these, the paralysis was associated
vitli pulmonary consumption, and in another with abscess about the
parotid gland; only one of these patients had reached the age of
forty years: the average age of the six being thirty-three years.
Four died from " apoplexy;22 three of these were the subjects of
epilepsy ; the apoplexy was of the congestive kind in two out of the
four, and was probably the consequence of epilepsy; in the other
two there was extravasation of blood, in one, upon the cranial sur-
face of the dura mater, and in the other, into the left cerebral hemi-
sphere, and was the consequence of a previous softening of that struc-
ture. These apoplectic cases had respectively attained the age of
forty-seven, fifty-five, forty-eight, and sixty-one years. One died in
a fit of "epilepsy" (age unknown); one in the sixtieth year of her
age, from " paralysis agitans." Of the remaining twenty patients,
there died, from "pulmonary consximption," one; from "pneumonia"
and its consequences, five; from " pericarditis," one; from " fatty
degeneration" of the heart, one; from " hydrothorax,' one; from
"scirrhus of the liver," one; from "cirrhosis" of that organ, one;
230 ON THE rATIIOI.OGlCAL APPEARANCES OBSERVE!)

from "inflammation of the bowels," two; from "erysipelas," one;
from "cancer of the breast," one; from "dysentery," one. One was
brought into the Asylum in all but a moribund condition, whether
from fever or mania, I could not satisfactorily ascertain: one died
from the "general dccay" of old age; and the remaining five were
classcd under the head of "general debility." This last term "general
debility" has been applied by Dr Conolly to "cases in which tho
performance of every function seems to become enfeebled by long
continued disorder of the nervous system." You will observe that
in this catalogue of the causes of death, fourteen belong to the class
neuroses, or diseases directly involving tho nervous system; exhaus-
tion after mania, two; " general paralysis," six; " apoplexy," four;
"epilepsy," one; "paralysis agitans," one: making, in fact, nine-
teen, if we add the five caused by " general debility." Even four-
teen eases out of thirty-seven, as it is considerably more than one-
third of the whole number, prompts the question ? lias insanity a
tendency to shorten the duration of human life ? It would seem
that this is a question which statistics alone can answer, but figures
are among the most deceitful things in the world, and many circum-
stances must be taken into consideration before wo can arrive at
accurate results,?for instance, a short time ago, " the mortality in
prisons was calculated by dividing the number of committals by the
deaths." The result thus obtained was so favourable to the healthi-
ness of prisons, as to have led a French minister to pronounce pri-
sons the healthiest places in the world: and an English inspector
gravely to affirm, " that in very few situations in life is an adult
less likely to die, than in a well-conducted English prison." Only
one in five hundred prisoners die; so, according to this view, Mr. Farr
says, " If a man desire to live to the age of Methuselah, ho should
go to Newgate."?(Dr Seller, EdiiC. Med. and Surg. Journal, Oct.,
1848.) This calculation overlooked tho fact, that tho inmates
of a prison are renewed, on an average, eight times in tho year, so
that if one in five hundred be tho mortality for tho eight-part of a
year, it represents a mortality of sixteen per thousand, which is
more than one-half greater than that of the population in general,
at the average age of prisoners. Tho mortality in this Asylum,
during the past ten years, has been 7.78 per cent.; and I find from a
most valuable article on Lunatic Asylums, in tho Supplement of tho
Penny Cyclopaedia, that it has, in the Norfolk Asylum, from 18.16
to 1845, reached as high as 19.74 per cent.; and at Lancaster, 14.94
per cent.; and Stafford nearly as high; tho mean of 44 Asylums in
England, Ireland, and AN ales being about 9.02 per cent. Thcro arc
not yet observations enough made on an accurate basis to determino
the mortality of lunatics at different ages, but assuming, as Mr. Farr
has done, that the mean age of lunatics docs not exceed forty to
forty-live years; then, if, according to Quetclct, the average mortality
of the population at that age be 1.17 per cent., or, according to Farr,
1.50, it follows that insanity, to use Dr Parr's words, " increases the
mortality six-fold." This calculation gives such an cxcess of mor-
tality, so to speak, as completely to set aside any difference which
may ensue from a slight error in the probable average age of the
lunatics referred to, in making a comparison of the mortality of the
insane and sane. Again, a tolerably extensive experience among
the insane, enables me to state that, with the exception of fever,
there is no disease, which they are not as liable to as the general
population, while they incur the additional risks of the affections
incident to mental derangement; and therefore, with all these facts
before you, you may positively affirm that insanity has a tendency
to shorten the duration of human life; nay, that it increases the
mortality at least threefold. I say threefold, because there are
some circumstances, not taken into consideration by Mr. Farr, which
tend to diminish his high estimate; for instance, when the lunatic
has passed through the malady for several years, and arrived at the
age of sixty years, there is not so great a difference between the mor-
tality of that age among lunatics, and among the general population,
as at the period of life selected by Mr. Farr for his calculations and
inferences. I have been minute, and, I fear, tedious, in these details,
because great mistakes still prevail among medical men on this sub-
ject, and I am frequently asked by the public, whether insanity
does not tend to longevity? Dr Burrows, in his " Commentaries on
Insanity," undertakes to deny this latter supposition, but demurs as
to whether it directly shortens existence. I gavo the class of last
year an account of a law-suit on this very topic, in which, in conse-
quence of the discrepancy among medical men, as to whether insanity
had, or had not, a tendency to shorten human life, the majority
having come to the latter conclusion, a Life Insurance had to pay
over (we now know how unjustly) to the executors of a lunatic, the
sum of 2,000?. The weekly medical press of the period espoused
the opinion of the majority, and thus perpetuated, for awhile,^the
error, and the wrong arising out of it. We can readily perceive the
data from which such erroneous opinions spring, even in the small
number of thirty-seven patients, whose deaths we have brought
before you; e. g., four patients had reached a good old age, seventy-
two, seventy-four, seventy-five, and seventy-six, and one of these had
been insane twenty-eight years. A few isolated facts, such as the
great age of an individual lunatic, like to some of those you have
seen in No. 2 Ward, or an obituaiy limited to three or four persons
who may have died in his neighbourhood, has ever enabled the
observer, provided he be a " practical man," and no mere " theorist"
or vulgar " statistician," to come to positive conclusions. Still those
who arc less gifted with the egotism of " practical experience," and
therefore more cautious, find it nccessary in all such matters as these
to search over a large number of facts, and over a great space of
time, and thereby learn that insanity does shorten the duration of
human life ; that the mortality of the insane is greater in the earlier
stages of the malady than in its subsequent stages; and that it is
more fatal among the male than among the female patients. It is
in the matter of births and deaths, or such like positive facts, that
statistics arc so valuable. In reference to the comparative merits of
different modes of treatment, or the special fatality of certain dis-
cuses, I have less confidence in them, inasmuch as these must he so
much influenced by the severity of the malady, on the one hand, and
the diagnostic skill and therapeutic knowledge of the practitioner,
on the other, that no precisely accurate conclusions can be deduced
from them. And this reminds me to state, that in assigning the
causes of death in the above thirty-seven cases, we have fixed upon
the most conspicuous and serious lesion. Nature defies the simple
classification of the nosologist; and in the examination of several
hundred bodies, I have rarely found disease to be limited to one
organ, much less to one structure; for example, the ease marked as
having died from " pericarditis," had also hepatization of the upper
lobe of the right lung, and pleuritic adhesions over it, and over the
same lobe of the left lung, together with minor changes in other
/Drgans of the body. There is one feature in the table of causes of
! death which requires a passing remark, otherwise you may be led
/ into a fatal inference from the unusual circumstance of there being
j only one recorded case of pulmonary consumption, out of thirty-
seven deaths, or, strictly speaking, two; one being associated with
general paralysis. In the year 1846, eight deaths out of twenty-
\ four were from this cause; and in 1847, six deaths out of twenty-
i one: and from facts in my possession, extending over a series of
\ seven years, I should say, that more than 20 per cent, of the deaths
Vjunong the female insane arise from pulmonary phthisis, and from a
disease which has been termed by Andral chronic pneumonia. It
is an affection in which there seems a union of pneumonic indura-
tion and grey tubercular infiltration. The lung under such-circum-
stances is so heavy, that it falls like a stone when dropped into water,
and the bronchial twigs arc choked with a white chalk-like sub-
stance ; the colour of the lung resembles the appcarancc of granite,
with occasionally stripes of white colour across the cut surfaces.
There are in the upper parts of the lung some small cavities con-
taining pus. It will be found, moreover, that the tendency to pul-
monary consumption is nearly as great among the male insane. If
the calculation be made upon the number of deaths, this will not
appear, bccausc of the great mortality which is causcd by general
paralysis; but if the deaths from phthisis be calculated upon the
annual number resident, through a series of years, this approxinni-
C tion will be recognised. I must, however, add, that there arc no
V published records upon an extensive scale in England, from which
x^you can draw safe inferences in this matter; bccausc hundreds of
lunatics have died with tuberculous lungs without the fact having
been recogniscd, so completely 1ms the pulmonary affcction been
modified and concealed by the mental derangement. Leaving, how-
ever, the statistics of this interesting subject, I must inform you that
insanity greatly obscures the manifestations of bodily disease. In
the wild excitement of acute mania, or in the profound distress
which characterises some cases of melancholia, this may have been
expected, nay, it has been recognised, and beautifully illustrated by
our revered dramatist, (or as I may perhaps have here called him,
the great psychologist, Shakspeare,) where he makes the unhappy
king exclaim?


" Where the greater malady is fixed,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'dst slum a bear;
J3ut if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
Thou'dst meet the bear i'th the mouth. When the mini's free
The body's delicate: the tempest in my mind
Dotli from my senses take all feeling else
Save what bents there."

But it is not in these forms of insanity alone that such influence is
exerted over bodily derangements. In chronic mania and imbecility,
we observe the same influence, and especially in their power to
modify and conceal pulmonary diseases. If life be pleasing to the
lunatic,?and we who are in daily communication with them know
that it is,?then have they of all persons reason to be thankful that
the genius of Laennec has taught us to recognise the whisperings and
murmurs of disease, even where no vital phenomena or symptoms
have displayed its existence; indeed, the psychologist must be atten-
tive to physical diagnosis, not only as regards the pulmonary organs,
but all others, if he is to bring relief to those under his care. Dr.
John Davy having recognised the fact to which I am now alluding,?
namely, that pulmonary consumption may run its fatal career in the
insane without any cough or expectoration, and stating, that there
was in such cases a sensible increase of temperature under the tongue,
I had this little thermometer made to ascertain the existence of this
phenomenon; but it is so difficult of application in many cases, .and
so liable to error from the manner in which it may be embraced by
the lips and tongue, that I have ceased to use it, and rely wholly on
percussion and auscultation, which seldom fail to recognise the
malady. Cases do, however, occasionally occur, in which the general
health has been such as not to rouse suspicion until the disease has
reached a very advanced stage. Thus, J. G., an epileptic patient,
who died during the past year, became very ill 011 Tuesday, January
16tli, with vomiting, accompanied by much febrile disturbance and
some slight diarrhoea. On percussing the chest, I found extreme dul-
ness in the supra-clavicular and supra-scapular regions, with a perfect
absence of the respiratory murmur; in other parts, pectoriloquy was
well marked; while throughout the lung there were unequivocal
signs of extensive organic change. O11 the 22nd, six days from the first
appearance of illness, she died; and in the post-mortem examination
the chest presented the following appearances:?The right and left
lungs bound down by pleuritic adhesions; the apex of the left lobe
indurated, impervious to air, and strewed with granular matter; in
the lower part of the upper lobe there were several tubercular cavi-
ties, while the lower lobe was disintegrated, having a large abscess
in its interior, which had escaped into the cavity of the thorax. The
right lung was also tuberculous, but not nearly to the same extent.

234 ON THE PATHOLOGICAL APPEAUANCES OBSERVED

Others die having scirrhus of the ovaries, or of the mamma, and not
a murmur escapes them of pain or uneasiness; others so blend up
their bodily sufferings with their mental hallucinations, that your
attention is directed to their bodily ailments by the peculiar character
of their delusions. Dr Conolly has given you some illustrations.
One poor woman, E. J., who died in January last from chronic peri-
tonitis and inflammation of the bowels, used to state that I cut her
with knives over the abdomen during the night, and that I employed
invisible devils to do it during the day. This woman evidently felt
great pain occasionally, but still she pursued her ordinary avocations
about the ward, cleaning, and the like, until a few days before hex-
death. In the phthisical cases, and in many others, there is not the
same secretion, irritation, and pain as are felt by the sane.under
similar diseases. Emaciation goes on rapidly?turbercle is evidently
suppurating in the lungs, and yet no cough, no expectoration pro-
claim the fact! IIow is this? Did it take place in every case;?if all
lunatics who were phthisical were devoid of cough and expectora-
tion, one might imagine that there was some truth in the supposi-
tion entertained by Mr. Rainey, of St. Thomas's Hospital, that the
arachnoid membrane was, in fact, a membranous plexus of organic
nerves; and thence infer that by its diseased condition it implicated
the organic nerves throughout the system; but as sonic lunatics are
exempt from this anomaly, whose cerebral meninges are equally din-
eased with others who display the above peculiarity, this supposition
will not hold good; and again, it only explains the absence of secre-
tion and irritation, but not of pain. Still, that the condition of the
arachnoid membrane, and of the vesicular ncurinc of the brain which
it covers, do influence the symptoms of disease in other organs, is
unquestionable. A pulmonary patient gasping for breath, and
unable to speak a sentence, becomes delirious; and from that moment
he shouts and vociferates so long as the delirium lasts, as though his
lungs were free from disease; and I have shown you, by the autopsy
of J. G., (and I could have added fifty others,) how silently such dis-
eases proceed to their fatal termination, so far as cough and expec-
toration arc concerncd, even in the chronic diseases of the cerebral
organ. Pathology, studied carefully, with a close comparison of the
symptoms observed during life, will aid the science of physiology,
and reveal more of the true lunctions of the various parts of the
brain, than all the vivisections which have been so skilfully per-
formed by Magendic, 1'lourens, and others; but these remarks arc
foreign to our purpose.

01 the eight cases of mania, unassociatcd with epilepsy or gene-
ral paralysis, two died while labouring under the malady in its acuto
form ; in one of these the disease was recurrent, and occurred in a
female who had been insane nearly two years; in the other, the
insanity was quite recent, not having exceeded live weeks' duration.
This patient, whose autopsy we shall now describe, was in the sixty-
seventh year of her age. The form of tho skull was normal; it was free
from disease, and rather more than onc-cighth of an inch in thickness,
The dura mater was firmly adherent to it; this membrane was inflamed,
and the superior longitudinal sinus was large, having a gritty, bone-
like deposit upon its exterior surface, and long fibrous bands extend-
ing to about half-an-inch on each side of it. The arachnoid membrane
was slightly inflamed, but not thickened; there were about three
drachms of red-coloured serum beneath it, but this was limited to
one spot, and served to fill up a hollow in the upper surface of the
anterior cerebral lobes, to be presently noticed. The pia mater was
greatly congested, giving to the convolutions on the superior and
lateral parts of the cerebral lobe, a scarlet, arborescent appearance.
The enceplialon weighed two pounds eight ounces avoirdupois. It was
well formed, except that in the upper part of both cerebral lobes,
at a point subjacent to that part of the skull which the phreno-
logists have marked out for the organ of " Veneration," or rather
at the junction of this faculty Avitli the organ of " Benevolence,"
there was a cup-like cavity formed by the junction of the two lobes,
and caused by an atrophied state of the convolutions, capable of con-
taining three or four drachms of fluid. As we have befox'e observed,
the calvarium itself was smooth and regular in form, and presented
no corresponding depression. The convolutions at this spot were
shrunken and atrophied laterally, as well as in depth; they were
slightly softened at this place, possibly from the fluid resting upon it.
(I believe this to have been a post-mortem change.) In other parts
they were firm; the vesicular neurine, or " grey matter," of the convo-
lutions, was a pink or rose colour, more intense in its hue in the
anterior and upper convolutions of the brain than in the posterior or
inferior lobes; the three layers into which the "grey matter" seems
to be divided were well marked, owing to their variations in colour,
the middle line being more scarlet in its hue, and rendering the
division as distinct in the convolutions of the upper surface ot the
anterior cerebral lobe by its rosy tint, as it at all times is in some
of the convolutions near the posterior cornu of the lateral ventricles,
by the white, thread-like film of matter which traverses them; the
laminae of the cerebellum were not so highly inflamed as the neurine
of the cerebrum; the difference was well marked; the white or
fibrous matter of the cerebrum was much congested, presenting many
bleeding spots when sliced; the ventricles of the brain contained
about a drachm of colourless fluid; the corpora striata were much
injected, as were the optic thalami and the choroid plexuses; the lungs
were free from disease; the pericardium was adherent to the anterior
surface of the heart, and was separated with extreme difficulty, and
not without lacerating the muscular fibres; there was no fluid in the
sac; the muscular structure of the heart was soft; the right auricle
was greatly dilated, and its internal lining inflamed; the tricuspid
valves were greatly thickened, this fibrinous concretion extending to
the tendinous chords, aud rendering them thick and knotty, and even
reached upwards, involving the auricular lining; the mitral valves
were thickened, but not to the same extent; strong marks of endo-
carditis were visible in both ventricles; the stomach and liver were
healthy, but the mucous lining of the small intestines was greatly
congested and inflamed. In the other patient, who died in the acute
stage of mania, there happened to he a similar condition of the
heart, in a lesser degree, accompanied with great dilatation of the
pulmonary artery a little above the semilunar valves.

The next autopsy which I shall select for your notice is that
on the body of S. F., a patient who was seventy-five years ot
age, who had been deranged in her mind twenty-seven years,
eighteen of which had been passed in this Asylum. She was unable
to identify persons with accuracy, and imagined she had seen parties
before, and assigned to them a history, of whom in reality she knew
nothing, and whom, in fact, she had never seen prior to the moment
of addressing them; she was garrulous and somewhat suspicious,
becoming angry if her name was mentioned in conversation by other
parties. About two months prior to her decease, she became more
excited than she had been for several years?was restless at night,
walked about the room, pulled off the clothes from the beds of other
patients, and wandered about as if in search of some imaginary
object or person; this state of feeling passed away after the exhibi-
tion of a few doses of acetate of morphia. She died from pericarditis.
In the autopsy we found that the skull was normal in thickness and
moderately well formed; the dura mater healthy; the arachnoid mem-
brane was beautifully transparent, and the brain could be distinctly
seen in some parts a quarter of an inch below it, the interspace
being occupied by a clear serum, translucent as spring water; the
veins ramifying on the arachnoid were large and of a very deep blue
colour; small veinlets could be distinctly seen passing from the con-
volutions through the fluid to the under surface of the membrane;
and it was interesting to observe the minute threads of other blood-
vessels passing from a rich brown colour to a beautiful scarlet hue
from the action of the atmosphere. When the dura mater was first
removed from the brain, these small vessels to which I refer were
resting on the face of the convolutions, and were of the colour of a
ripe chestnut, but in less than five minutes they became of a bright
red; the transition was gradual and complete. I mention it, bccausc it
assumes an importance in a pathological point of view, it being ci
post-mortem change, and likely to mislead a person (who might sec
the brain for the first time five minutes after the membrane was
removed) by indicating an amount of arterial cxeitcmcnt which did
not exist. Ihc clear serous fluid embraced tho whole cnccphalon,
but was most abundant over the superior portions of tho anterior
cerebral lobes; the membrane when removed was very slightly, if at
all thickened, and there was not an opaque spot upon it except im-
mediately in the neighbourhood of the Pacchionian bodies, which
latter were slightly enlarged. The grey matter, which I will here-
after call the vesicular neurine of the convolutions, was palo and
soft; the other parts of the cnccphalon were healthy. I should have
stated that it weighed three pounds avoirdupois. The lungs were
hepatized (grey induration) at their apices, and sunk immediately on
being placed in water; the heart was liypertrophied, more especi-
ally the left ventricle; it weighed eleven ounces, was covered with
fibrinous lymph, and immersed in a thick fluid of a greenish hue,
having small shreds of the same matter which covered the exterior
of the heart floating in it; the valves were healthy. There was no
important lesion observed in the other parts of the body. The great
quantity of fluid surrounding the brain would lead to the belief that
the patient died from serous apoplexy?the symptoms during life did
not indicate this; and great quantities of fluid are found in the
brains of lunatics who have been long in a state of imbecility, and
whose brains are shrunken. It is conservative in its nature, and is
invariably found to exist in an inverse ratio with the size of the
brain as compared with the cranium; it is sometimes local, filling up
the sulci of atrophied convolutions, or occupying a cavity or depres-
sion in the surface of the encephalon, as in the case of S. 0. I
always look as a matter of course for its presence in chronic cases
of dementia, from whatever cause they may have died.

C. L., aged fifty-four, had been insane twenty-two years. Chronic
mania.?Calvarium very thick; dura mater firmly adherent to it;
arachnoid membrane white, opaque, thickened, capable of being torn
from the surface of the brain with ease; pia mater much congested;
serum between the gyri of the convolutions; brain pale, and some-
what soft; lateral ventricles containing about an ounce of fluid;
lungs bound down to the chest by old pleuritic adhesions; other
structures healthy. This is a fair type of the cerebral appearances
in chronic mania.

We will now pass 011 to an illustration of one of the most
important complications of insanity that can possibly fall under
your notice?namely, that of general paralysis. Its symptoms have
been portrayed to you by a master hand, and I feel assured that,
after the many illustrations of the disease which you have seen in
the wards, and after the graphic description of its commencement,
progress, and termination, which you have listened to, you will
readily recognise it, if it should hereafter come before your notice
as practitioners.

Six cases, suffering under general paralysis, have died during the
past fifteen months. They presented several anomalies?not one
lived eigtheen months after the attack became evident; one, not
six months. Four out of the six were morose, sullen, gloomy, and
unhappy; and only one exhibited the hopefulness, the buoyancy, the
elated self-satisfaction, which usually characterise the malady among
the male patients. Only one, C. K., out of the six, possessed the
ample forehead, the well-formed, full-sized anterior cerebral lobes,
which have frequently been observed, in this Asylum, to co-exist
with general paralysis; in only one brain was there a generally
diffused hardness of structure, and strong tenacity of fibre, resem ing
a brain hardened by alcohol, which characterised the cerebra ot the
female paralytics which I examined during the year 18IG and part ot
1847, and which is common among the male patients. 00 strong
no. x. it
does the fibrous matter of the brain become, that I have seen the
greater part of the organ lifted up from the table, by seizing on the
upper portion of the septum lucidum, and this normally delicate
structure remain unlacerated by the attempt; still there was, in a
few cases, a firm abnormal consistence of the medullary matter; and
the lining membrane of the lateral ventricles of the brain was strong,
tough, and gritty to the touch, resembling finely pulverized glass
upon paper. In every case, there was a thickened arachnoid mem-
brane, a pia mater congested with venous-coloured blood, and con-
siderable effusion of serum beneath it, and beneath and within the
sac of the serous membrane, as also in the lateral ventricles. In
one case of the six, there was softening of the medullary matter of
the brain, a condition which I have found, on former occasions, in
similar affections, and which has been recognised by all observers in
this malady?in this, as in every case in which I have found a soft,
almost pultaceous, condition of tho peripherean surfaces, and the
white fibrous matter of the brain, the general paralysis had existed a
long time; the patient had lost all power of locomotion, and even of
prehension; the sphincters had long been useless; the legs were
contracted, and drawn up towards the chest; the skin had lost its
vitality in many parts, and sensation was blunted over the general
surface, and wholly lost in the lower extremities; such patients were
also in the lowest stage of dementia. The six cases differed so little
in the pathological appearances of the brain, that I shall limit myself
to the detail of one case, as the type of the other five, which I select
from no especial peculiarities, but because it was tho last case of
general paralysis which has occurred 011 tho female sido of tho
asylum. Her name was S. B.; she was about forty years of age, and
had been insane six months. The mental derangement was ascribed
to conjugal strife. Insanity is hereditary in her family, and she
was the sister of L. B., a dangerous lunatic, now in Number 8 Ward.
The symptoms of general paralysis were, in all probability, coeval
with the mental disease; for 011 her admission, twelve weeks after
the attack of insanity, there was great tremor about tho lips; the
tongue was protruded slowly, and with that quivering propulsory
effort, to which your attention has been frequently drawn. Her
speech was deeply involved; she walked with extreme difficulty, and
could not carry anything steadily to her mouth with her hands. She
was restless and noisy, but still good-tempered, during tho twelve
weeks she lived in the Asylum. She died 011 the 10th of December,
1848.

The calvarium was thin; the dura mater adherent to its under
surface; the arachnoid membrane was thickened and opaque, con-
taining serum within its sac; there was also a considerable quantity
of eftuscd fluid beneath it, and also under tho pia mater, filling up
the gyri of the convolutions. The cineritious neurine was somewhat
soft; the fibrous matter was strong and shining. Tho foramen
occupying the anterior commissure was so large, patulous, and firm,
that I could place the point of my little finger in it without laceration,
The ventricles contained about one ounce and a half of clear fluid;
their lining membrane was strong and gritty to the touch. The lungs
were tuberculous, and the heart presented unequivocal traces of
endocarditis. These changes in the brain are so like those commonly
met with in the brains of lunatics, that the description of one seems
almost the echo of all others; but in these cases of general paralysis,
there is superadded to the appearances found in mania uncomplicated
with this dire affliction, the hardness of the medullary fibre, and the
gritty condition of the ventricular lining; still, even this latter
particular has again and again been found in cases which were free
from general paralysis, while in others, as I have before named to
you, there is the general softening of the whole medullary structure.
I also remember having seen the brain of a male patient, in whom
there was 110 lesion to be discovered at all characteristic of general
paralysis; in a second, I recollect, that while the upper surfaces of
the brain were free from any apparent disease, there were great hard-
ness and a shrunken condition of the pons Varolii and medulla
oblongata?these latter appearances of course fully accounting for any
amount of impaired action in the voluntary muscles. I have care-
fully examined the spinal chord in two cases of general paralysis?in
one I found it had undergone considerable change in various places,
especially in the cervical portion, and the canal contained a great
quantity of fluid; in the other case, there was no appreciable lesion;
the only peculiarity was, that the chord did not extend so far down
the spinal column as it is ordinarily found to do?i. c., it did not
reach the first lumbar vertebra, but terminated opposite to the
inferior edge of the eleventh dorsal vertebra. In this patient there
was an entire loss of power of the lower extremities, accompanied by
great contraction of the flexor muscles.

It now becomes my duty to tell you that the precise pathology of
this affection is involved in much obscurity. It has received but
little attention in England?so little, indeed, as to induce Dr Burrows
to think that the disease is more common in France than with us. I
believe it to have been long overlooked: in my early career I saw
many such cases, but did not know the affection by the term " general
paralysis." I have recognised its presence in every asylum I have
visited, except Bethlehem or St. Luke's, from which hospitals it is
especially excluded. The first writer 011 its pathology was Monsieur
Bayle, in 1822, who ascribes the disease to chronic meningitis.
Calmeil, who published his work in 182G, ascribes it to a softening
of the cineritious neurine. The latest author is Monsieur Bodriguez,
professor of medicine at Montpelier, who has published his work
so late as 1847. An analytical review of this book has been
given by Dr Winn, of Truro, in the Psychological Journal, and
published subsequently as a distinct work: it is from its pages
that I have gathered the experience and opinions of the French
author. This gentleman has given us the results of twenty-one dis-
sections. Congestion of the scalp; variations in the form, and thick-
ness, and character of the bones of the skull; induration, thickening,
and adherence of tlie dura mater to the calvarium; changes in the
character, and effusions beneath and within the arachnoid membrane;
serous infiltration of the ccllular tissue of the pia mater; hypoxemic
and anannic states of the brain, and softening and induration ot this
organ, with effusion into the lateral ventricles, arc the changes which
occurred in some one or other of the cases. There is one passage to
which I solicit your especial attention: it is this?" Hardening ot
the brain occurred as frequently as softening, and was accompanied
by either hyperemia or anaemia. In some cases the cortical substance
and the ventricular walls were indurated, the other parts, nevertheless,
being in a normal state. In one case, softening of the superficial
parts of the brain occurred, whilst the deep-seated portions were
hardened. In one case, cited from Calmeil's work, in which the skull
had sustained a fracture, with loss of substance of the parietal bone,
the part of the convolutions contiguous to the bony aperture was
firm and resisting, and covered a layer of hardened brain. In another
instance, the colour of the hardened brain varied, from a light coffee
colour on the outside of the brain, to a reddish tint on the inside.
The cerebellum and pons Varolii were indurated in one case."?p. 35G.
M. Rodriguez asserts " that all alterations produced by inflammation
begin with softening, and end with hardening;" and his opinion of
the true pathology of this formidable malady is thus given: " The
disease commences with sanguineous congestion, which is discover-
able by symptoms differing in intensity, and which may be oc-
casioned by a blow, or some other cause. This congestion," he says,
"gives rise to chronic inflammation of the membranes, and cerebral
disturbance, indicated by delirium and agitation; the inflamed arach-
noid, in the next place, pours forth serum upon the surface of the
brain, into the ventricles at the base of the brain, and into the
vertebral canal, producing general paralysis."

In support of his opinion that meningitis is the cause of " general
paralysis," the author quotes M. Bayle, who gives fifty cases of
general paralysis, in which he found chronic meningitis. (L have
never seen one case of general paralysis without it.) Chiarugi, of
Florence, Neumann, of Berlin, the great name of Esquirol," and
many other authorities, are brought forward to support these facts
and doctrine. In some of M. Calmeil's cases, these membranes
were partly fibro-cartilaginous; and M. Rodriguez gives an instance
where " an effusion between the dura mater and the external layer of
the arachnoid membrane had completely dissected that membrane
from the great falx, to the tempcro-parictuo suture, and from the
coronal fossa to the posterior edge of the parietal bones on each
side. " lhcre was sometimes found an albuminous effusion upon
the arachnoid membrane, which had some analogy to trembling
jelly."

1 dissent from this writer's conclusion, but I accept his facts with
thankfulness, for I recognise their truth ; and, singular enough,
while the ink which I used to abstract the notes was yet wet on the
paper, a case, closely resembling the last detuiled, fell under my
notice. It was a male patient, H. R., and Dr Begley invited me
to look at what lie properly regarded as an unusual circumstance?
the arachnoid membrane on the left side of the brain (and it was
limited to that side,) had acquired the thickness of fibro-cartilagc,
and was covered over with a soft yellow-coloured lymph?the patient
had died from apoplexy, while suffering from general paralysis. I
regarded this thickening as the result of previous inflammation, and
the lymph which was diffused over its surface, as the remains of
effused blood, it being of the same colour and character (though
somewhat softer in consistence) as the fibrinous, yellowish-coloured
clots, which are so commonly found after death in the ventricles of
the heart. I did not consider this thickened membrane as the cause of
the general paralysis, but felt assured that the man must have been
apoplectic on a former occasion, and that he had suffered from
hemiplegia of the right side. I told Dr Begley that I suspected the
patient must have been hemiplegic prior to admission, and he kindly
placed before me a very full account of the patient's history, in which
I found my suppositions verified. A past hemiplegia may, or may
not, have been the state of things in M. Rodriguez' special case. But
to pass to his conclusions respecting the general opacity and disease
of the membranes. It does not follow, that because Tenterden-
stecplc and the Goodwin Sands are found together, that they must
be regarded as cause and effect; and so with the thickened mem-
branes and general paralysis: they are perhaps associated in ninety
cases out of one hundred; but then, membranes as thick, as strong,
and as opalescent are found in the same number of cases, who have
never exhibited the slightest trace of general paralysis. It is ex-
ceedingly rare to find a healthy arachnoid membrane upon the brain
of a lunatic who has been insane two or three years; and inasmuch
as general paralysis frequently extends over two years, and is
during the whole of that time associated with mental derangement,
a diseased condition of the serous membrane may always be ex-
pected, as coincident with, but not the cause of, general paralysis.
We must, in investigating the pathological characters of general
paralysis, rid the subject of superfluities, and thus be in a condition
to see and appreciate some one especial case which shall elucidate its
true nature. In the first lecture which I had the honour to deliver
in this room, I stated that " the pathology of insanity, as described in
books, is most unsatisfactory; and if ever a perfect light be thrown
upon this truly mysterious subject, it will be, in all probability, by
the examination of some single case, marked with prominent
peculiarities: for example, from the dissection of the brain of some
patient who had exhibited intellectual delusions, unaccompanied by
paralysis or epilepsy, and who had been deprived of life by an acci-
dent, not interfering with the condition of the brain, and fortunately
falling under the examination of some person accustomed to reflection,
and acquainted with the assemblage of appearances commonly found
in the brains of lunatics"?in other and better words, from what
Jjacon calls, some "glaring instance." So with general paralysis,
its pathology will be discovered from some single instance; but
the discoverer will have been previously experienced in the post-
mortem appearances common to such cases, either by the recorded
experience of others, or by his own; in this respect, at least, I hope
to be useful. First, then, the thickened membranes may be removed
from the list of assigned special causes of general paralysis, for I
have seen them in two hundred cases in which there Avas no general
paralysis. Different conditions of the pia mater, and tumours of the
cerebrum, have also been recorded in the history of these diseases?
the former being strewed with hydatids, in one case. The position
and character of the tumours will determine the influence they may
have in producing this malady; but I have seen the pia mater, in a
case hereafter to be described, strewed with these parasites, and the
patient was free from general paralysis. In one case of this disease,
M. Rodriguez found the spinal marrow compressed to the thickness
of a riband by a tumour; and Professor Carswell has given one or
two beautiful illustrations of disease of this structuro in similar
affections. In Carswell's cases, there is a yellow discoloration on the
side of the upper part of the spinal chord, and this alteration of
structure was found to reach the grey matter in the centre of the
chord. These are most instructive cases, and merit our greatest
consideration. And here let me state, that if I have dissented from
the conclusions of M. Rodriguez, or, indeed, from any other labourer
in this great and difficult field of research, I do so in no flippant
spirit, or with any censorious feeling; on the contrary, I reverence
them for their research?I feel grateful for the result of their labours,
and for the suggestions which they have given respecting the nature
of this disease; their opinions, when adverse to my own, make me
re-examine my facts and my conclusions; but no true son of science,
no earnest lover of the truth, would wish me to forego the teachings
of nature, or to conceal the convictions of my oavii mind.

It is in this spirit that I have just closed the pages of Monsieur
Calmeil's great work?a work which merits all the eulogies which
Dr Conolly has bestowed upon it; and I am sure Calmeil would not
seek for higher praise; Calmeil's facts arc invaluable, but it is my
misfortune to differ from his conclusions. He states, that the disease
is a phlegmesia, and that its seat is in the cineritious neurine of the
hemispheres. I could have believed in this opinion, had I never
seen an inflamed peripheral surface unassociated with general
paralysis; but I have seen this structure in a state of the most
intense inflammation, where there has been none of the signs of the
malady in question; and in the person of S. B., who died in this
Asylum, having a large fungoid tumour, arising from the dura mater,
the anterior and middle lobes of the left cerebral hemispheres were
in a state of pulp throughout their peripheral surface, with none of
the pathognomonic symptoms of general paralysis. Monsieur Foville
ascribes the disease to an adhesion and hardness between the separate
planes of the medullary fibres; while to add to the general difficulty,
Monsieur Lelut, in the Annals of Medical Psychology, has published
two cases of general paralysis with dementia, in which there was no
lesion whatever in the brain or spinal chord. Where are we to find
a clue out of this labyrinth of contradictions 1 A few years ago,
cerebral pathology was regarded as a mass of contradiction, and by
many it is still so estimated. I have always felt that it is not so;
and although I may be unable clearly to see the unity, to descry the
essential lesion, in these various details, still I am confident it is to
be found, and I hope none of you will be deterred from research by
these conflicting theories.

Let us proceed per viam exclusionis. You may rest assured, it is
not chronic meningitis, in the ordinary sense of the term; it is not,
(as I think) inflammation of the vesicular neurine; and we have known
it to co-exist with softening of the medullary fibre, the opposite
condition to that detailed by Foville. All observers will, I think,
agree in locating the disease in the brain or spinal chord, notwith-
standing Monsieur Lelut's cases; nor is it, as some whom I highly
esteem imagine, dependent on the effused serum, so uniformly
found in this malady, in the lateral ventricles of the brain, and
beneath and within the sac of the arachnoid membrane; for we find
this effusion in almost every chronic case of mania, and I have never
seen a case of dementia without it, whether or not the mental affec-
tion was associated with general paralysis. The arrangements of the
committee of this great institution have enabled me to see and ex-
amine the brains of fifty-five lunatics, who have died affected with
general paralysis. I had examined them before I entered the
Asylum, and my convictions from these facts are, that Foville has
approached, perhaps realized, the truth, for he may have recognised
other lesions than hardness, as the cause of general paralysis. (I
have never read his paper on the subject, and am indebted to Dr.
Prichard for the statement I have made respecting his conclusions.)
If, however, he limits the cause to this special change, he is obviously
wrong; the experience of Bayle, of Calmeil, of llodriguez, of Lelut,
and of others, proclaims that softening of this structure may co-exist
with general paralysis, while Lelut (and I for one do not dispute
liis facts) shows that no lesion may be perceptible. Allow me to
attempt an explanation of these discrepancies.

Faithfully have I recorded facts, as far as my feeble powers of
observation have enabled me; and now that I am about to give my
conclusions, I solicit a patient examination of them. Examine them
thoroughly; contrast them with well-observed facts; and if, in your
calm judgment, they are erroneous, discard them for ever. I dread
to mislead you; and I now distinctly state, that what I am about to
offer, is simply the result of my own ratiocination, to be accepted or
rejected, as you may think fit. I speak to you as gentlemen, fitted
by age, and education, and reflection for independent thought: and
if I know myself, my only wish is to arrive at truth. I believe,
then, that general paralysis may be produced by any lesion which in-
volves in its action, and partially destroys, the whole plane of
medullary fibres which comes into contact with the vesicular neurine
of the periphery of the brain; that the same result would follow any
lesion which partially changed the whole of the fibres of the pons
Varolii, or the motory columns of the medulla oblongata. I have
seen these structures in general paralysis, hard and shrunken, when
the brain has been free from any other changes than those common
to insanity uncomplicated with other maladies, and I have already
drawn your attention to similar cases recorded by M. Rodriguez.
Perhaps my language is not sufficiently explicit to convey a precise
idea of my meaning, when I state, that in persons who become the
subjects of general paralysis, there has been existing, for some time
previously, a capillary hyperemia of the brain, induced by intellectual
exertions, or other causes; that, from some strong emotion, or from
persistence in the aforesaid exertions, there is, from these capillaries,
an outpouring of fibrinous fluid between the primary elements of the
cerebral structure?this becomes coagulated, (or rather, partially
organized,) and hence the augmentation, and partial induration, of
the fibrous parts of the brain in some cases; in others, this blastema
becomes converted into fibrine, and leads to great hardness, and a
general contraction, or shrinking up, of the structure into which it
has been effused. My opinion is, that this induration precedes the
softening; in the great majority of cases; that being, in fact, an
adventitious structure, it is deficient in vitality, and ultimately
becomes soft and broken up; while in other instances, the blastema
being poured forth from vessels in an aiuemic condition, does not
become organized, but remains permanently fluid, softening the
histological elements around which it is poured, and producing what
is generally understood as " Kamollissement" of the brain.
It does not militate against this idea, but, on the contrary, sup-
ports it, that general paralysis is frequently associated with diseases
of the heart. It occurs for the most part in persons of a sensitive
or impressionable nature, belonging to the nervo-lymphatic, or nervo-
sanguineous temperaments?to a class of persons whom Hippocrates
would consider as having a humoral diathesis, and in whom the
" affcctions " had been strong and active. The apt comparison which
has been made by our distinguished physician between this disease
and the separate stages of intoxication, also shows that the nerve-fibre
itself may be so lar disturbed as to induce this malady without any
appreciable structural change; in other words, that the blood may be
so contaminated as to give rise to a temporary general paralysis; and
if to a temporary disease, then to a permanent one; for it is obvious
that the general paralysis would last precisely as long as the alcohol
in definite quantities should remain in the blood unrcmovcd by the
excretory vessels of the system. Now, if it can be produced by one
extraneous element in the blood, it may be by others; and hence the
importance which a diseased heart, especially endocarditis, or an
aftcctcd kidney, may have in inducing this malady, in such very rare
and isolated cases as those detailed by Lelut, where no appreciable
lesion could be detected in the brain or its membranes. This pro-
duction of general paralysis by blood disease is not an idle hypo-
thesis; epilepsy, and the disease called "delirium cum tremore," which
is an evanescent type of this very formidable malady, has been
proved to arise from the absorption of lead into the system. Dr.
Todd, from whose profound researches and great acquirements we
have learnt so much, respecting the physiology of the nervous system,
has published the following interesting case:?

" A man, who had been several times the subject of lead colic, was
brought to King's College Hospital, having had an epileptic fit; and
being then in a state of coma; he soon had a second fit, after a few
days he recovered considerably, but with much cerebral disturbance,
and resembling a person in delirium tremens. Opium and other
stimulants appeared to be beneficial, but after a few days lie again
became stupid, a factor of the breath indicated gangrene of the lung;
after this he quickly sank. The brain was found to be pale, much
shrunken, and the grey matter of a very light colour; a good quantity
of sub-arachnoid fluid existed in consequence of the shrunken state
of the brain. There teas no disorganization of the brain; but on
chemical analysis, there was found a great quantity of lead in the
brain, and a still greater quantity in the lung, which was gangrenous
in the centre."

Andral, Bouillaud, Bright, Macintosh, Watson, MacLeod, Haw-
kins, Burrows, and others, have given instances in which a diseased
condition of the heart and pericardium have produced spasmodic
diseases, general paralysis, mania, and even dementia; but for these
particulars I refer you to the Sixty-first Lecture of Dr Watson, to
Copland's " Dictionary of Medicine," to Rostans upon the " Soften-
ing of the Brain;" but more especially to a very admirable treatise
on the Cerebral Circulation, by Dr Burrows, of St. Bartholomew's
Hospital.

I wish, however, to add to these imperfect observations, that in-
flammation is a poor word to apply to those changes which produce
general paralysis, inasmuch as by some special action upon the brain
itself, the disease may be produced in a moment; for it is more fre-
quently produced through the emotions than through the intellect.
Last Christmas, I saw a gentleman who was suddenly paralysed by a
piece of intelligence: there were all the symptoms of general para-
lysis in a most aggravated form; the quivering of the facial muscles
on speaking, the tremor of the lips, the peculiar progression which
has been described to you, and the quivering of the muscles after the
slightest movement; there was a perfect loss of all power over the
sphincters; and in three weeks he became altogether powerless, and
in the fifth week he died.

This disease, then, in the great majority of cases, is one of im-
paired nutrition of the fibrous structure of the cnceplialon, and of
some of the ganglia at the base of the brain, commonly induced by
intense and long-continued intellectual exertions, carried on under
emotional excitement; by some other causes, which seem to act
specially 011 the nervous system itself; and occasionally from dis-
eases of the heart, and other viscera, inducing sympathetic irritation
of the above structures, or acting directly upon them by the poisonous
elements which these respective diseases have contributed to the
blood.
