The Anatomy of the Human Brain
===============================

107
i y
Art. IV?

The advance made within the few last years towards a more accurate
and scientific knowledge of tlic nervous centres is due to microsco-
pical investigations, and to the study of comparative anatomy; the
former having brought to light the minute structure of the nerve
tubes, of the vesicular matter with which they are connected, and
the arrangement of the capillary vessels which minister to their
growth and repair; the latter having shown the signification of a
nervous centre, the relative value of its different segments, and of
the parts by which it is surrounded. Had anatomists followed the
precepts and example of John Hunter, and traced the nervous system
in its gradations, step by step, from the lower to the higher classes
of the animal kingdom, we should have been spared those long dis-
cussions to disprove that the spinal chord is made up of an assem-
blage of nerve tubes, which pass in an unbroken line from the peri-
phery to the brain; or those figurative expressions, so productive of
error, which pronounced the spinal chord to be a prolongation of the
brain, or the brain to be an efflorescence of the spinal chord. Both
the brain and chord are developed contemporaneously in early foetal
life as a single hollow membranous cylinder, of which the anterior
extremity, more dilated than the rest, becomes eventually the cncc-
phalon. The deposition of nervous matter commences upon the
under or abdominal wall of the cylinder; small granular and
nucleated bodies (cytoblcists) are arranged in a double linear series;
the fissure between them, separating the right from the left half,
being still traceable in the adult spinal chord as the posterior median
fissure. The further accumulation of nervous matter within the
membranous cylinder, and the coalescence of the two halves along
its dorsal aspect, leads to the formation of a central canal, which is
persistent in fish, but obliterated in the mammalian class; this canal
leads into the anterior encephalic or cranial dilatation, the brain
vesicle, which soon becomes constricted into three smaller vesicles,
the rudiments of the cerebellum, the mesencephalon, and the cerebral
hemispheres. A fourth segment, the olfactory (rhinencephalic), is
subsequently added. About the third month of fcctal life in the
human embryo, the cerebral hemispheres rapidly increase in size,
and extend backwards so as to overlap the other cranial vesicles; but
By llolnies Cootc, Demonstrator of Anatomy at St. Bartholomew's Hospital*
the median canal, obliterated in the chord, is persistent in the brain;
it leads from the mesencephalon, under the nates and testes, to the
vesicle of the cerebellum, and is known as the iter e tertio ad quartum
ventriculum. The communication between the mesencephalic and
hemispheric vesicles, though masked, and divided by the development
of the fornix, is still recognised in the adult brain as the foramina of
Monro. The gradual perfection of the brain is marked by the sepa-
ration of the white and grey nervous matter; by the introduction of
longitudinal and transverse commissures bringing into connexion
its different parts; and by the development of those superficial in-
equalities known as, convolutions, which, however tortuous and
subdivided, are yet under the control of a fixed law, by which their
number and course are regulated. The incomplete separation of the
white and grey matter, errors in their due proportion, or the imper-
fect development of commissures, are always associated with impair-
ment of function. Excess of fluid in the cranial vesicles leads to their
rupture and collapse: from this cause is produced the anencephalous
foetus, in which we notice a membranous sac resting upon a basis
cranii, but surrounded by a skull-cap, so imperfectly constructed, that
no small skill is requisite to designate its component pieces. But in
the anencephalous foetus the skull is still composed of its proper
number of bones, however much deformed or twisted they may be.*
Some idea of the period of collapse of the brain vesicles may be
entertained from the study of the deformed bones by which they are
surrounded. It has been correctly remarked by Ilyrtl, that inas-
much as the proportional development of the organs which preside
over vegetative life, and of those which are connected with the psy-
chical manifestations, is regulated by the period of existence, so the
brain is the less fitted for its higher functions the earlier the arrest
of development, and the more the organ retains its embryonic sim-
plicity. Indeed, in these monstrosities the parts and organs connected
with vegetative life seem to have acquired undue activity in growth;
the upper, the lower jaws, and the os hyoides, are absolutely larger
than the same bones in the well-formed foetal skull of equal age: but
the bones at the base of the skull become coalesced and blended
together, so that their separation cannot be effected. The arrest in
the developments of the parts, both external and internal, is in
obedience to one and the same law.

Microscopical Axatomy.?The ccrcbro-spinal centre is com-
* In the Museum of fit. Hartliolemew's Hospital, there is a preparation oftlio
skull of an nnenccplialous fiutus, disarticulated; the bones properly marked and
numbered.

posed of vcsicular and of fibrous nervous matter; of fatty and granular
matter; of pigment, epithelium, and bloodvessels.

Vesicular Nervous Matter.?Vesicular nervous matter, which,
preponderates greatly in the grey substance, whether spread over a sur-
face as in the cerebral convolutions, or accumulated in central masses
as in the spinal chord, consists of cells, containing usually one nucleus,
but sometimes two, in which may be seen nucleoli. The cells arc
round, oval, or angular, and are contained in a sheath or capsule of
very delicate membrane: when angular, one or more of the angles
maybe prolonged into a tail with rounded or with sharp extremity;
some of the cells are fusiform or caudate. Their dimensions, says
Hannover, varies from the size of a globule of human blood to six
or seven times that of a globule of frog's blood. The largest are those
in the grey matter of the spinal chord. Next follow, in the order of
size, those of the cerebellum, cerebral hemispheres, and olfactory
bulbs. The small cells abound most in the cerebellum and the tuber-
cula quadrigemina. Vesicles may be found in every part of the
nervous system where the substance is not perfectly white.

Fibrous Nervous Matter.?Nerve fibres are cylindrical tubes
of different diameters; they are composed of a fibrous sheath (neu-
rilemma) and an homogeneous, semi-transparent, easily coagulating
fluid. Hannover,'* who has particularly examined the minute struc-
ture of nerve tubes, describes, in the large fibres taken from the floor
of the fourth ventricle, two double outlines on either side, of which
the two exterior belong to the cellular sheath, the two interior to
the marrow. Within the sheath and the marrow is a cylindrical
axis, which pursues exactly the course of the nerve fibres. There
are many small nerve tubes amongst those of larger size: their
structure is supposed to be in every respect similar, although, from
their delicacy, the outlines are not clearly marked. The large fibres
abound in the spinal chord, the small fibres in the grey substance
of the brain, and in the retina. The fibres of the former part are
more clastic than those in the latter. From mechanical or chemical
causes, the fibres, which, in the fresh state, are rectilinear and trans-
parent, become varicose, the swelling affecting sometimes only
one side, sometimes both: and upon examination it will be found
that this appcarancc depends upon the unequal accumulation of the
fluid which surrounds the central cylindrical axis in different parts of
the fibrous sheath.

Origin op the Nerve-Fibres.?The nerve-fibres have been dis-
* Recherehes Microscopiques sur le Systtme Nerveux. 1814.
tinctly traccd to arise from the nerve vesicles, with the outer wall of
which, and not with the nucleus, they are continuous. As a rule,
a vesiele gives origin to a single nerve-fibre; it is less common to
find two arising from the same source. Care must be taken, in in-
vestigating these points, not to confound with true nerve-fibres the -
caudate prolongations terminating in blunt extremities, noticcd in
the triangular vesicles of the grey nervous matter. There are other
vesicles from whence no nerve-fibres arise; and as the fibres arc by
far more numerous than the vesicles, it has been conjectured by
Hannover, that upon the perfect development of the fibre, the union
between it and the vcsicle ceases. The fibres pass from the surface
of the brain towards its base; then traversing the different accumu-
lations of grey matter in the interior, bccomc continuous with the
white fibres of the chord; but many escape to form the cerebral
nerves, which emerge from the cranial foramina. In the chord, nerve-
fibres arise from the central grey nucleus, and curve outwards after
descending, for a short distance, to constitute the spinal nerves. These
remarks apply to the fine as well as to the large nerve-fibres, although
the origin of the former is less directly capable of proof by ocular
demonstration. The presence of the fine fibres in nerves, and especially
in the branches of the sympathetic, was noticed first by Reinak, who
pointed out their close resemblance with the smaller and more deli-
cate fibres in the cercbro-spinal axis ; and there is now little doubt of
the continuity of the peripheral and the central fibres: the latter,
constituting an integral part of a nervous centre, arc surrounded by
a more delicate cellular sheath, and arc consequently more prone to
varicose dilatations, but they suddenly bccomc larger upon leaving
their point of origin, and arc bound together by a coarser tissue, to
form those white chords which wc commonly recognise as nerves.
The Cerebro spinal Axis may be regarded as an assemblage of
ganglia, corresponding in number with the vertebral segments of the
spinal column, and giving origin, each in its turn, to a pair of
nerves. And to this definition, the ganglia constituting the brain
or encephalon offer no exception. Since Oken's discovery, the skull
has been rccognised as part of the vertebral column, composed of
four segments, of which three are well formed; and the fourth, the
most anterior, is cartilaginous in cold-blooded animals, and obscured
by the development of an organ of spccial sense, the olfactory, in
the higher mammalia. The cranial vertebras are as follows:* the
* This description comprises only the upper or neural linlf of the craninl ver-
tebra;; the lower or lnenml linlf, being uncounccteil villi the nervous centres, is
not mentioned.

occipital, formed by the occipital bone; the parietal, formed by the
posterior part, and great alas of the sphenoid, and by the parietal
bones; the frontal, formed by the anterior part, and lesser alaj of
the sphenoid, and by the frontal bones; and the nasal, formed by
the vomer, with its ossa plana and perpendicular lamella, and the
nasal bones. The occipital, parietal, and frontal vertebra correspond
with the three primary constrictions of the embryonic brain vesicle;
the nasal, with the subsequently developed olfactory bulbs. The
assemblage of pieces constituting the human temporal bone (viz., the
squamous, mastoid, typanic, stylo-hyal, and petrosal bones) is inter-
calated in the skull to occupy the space between the occipital and
parietal vertebra?, caused by the enormous backward development of
the cerebral hemispheres. The vertebrate character of the rings of
bone surrounding the simpler and more typical encephalon of some
of the cold-blooded vertebrata?e. </., the turtle?can be easily reco-
gnised. Like as -each ganglion or segment of the chord gives off its
pair of nerves, corresponding with the vertebra which surrounds it,
so in the same way does the chain of cerebral ganglia; the two first
pair containing both motor and sensitive filameiits; the two last
Ijeing nerves of special sense. It is true that several of these chords
divide within the cranium, and their branches emerge by separate
foramina, but in these eases both the origin and distribution indicate
their affinity with spinal nerves. The occipital segment (epence-
phalon) gives off the hypoglossal or motor nerve of the tongue, and
the glossopharyngeal and pneumogastric nerves, which bestow sen-
sation upon the fauces, oesophagus, stomach, air-passages, and lungs.
The spinal accessory nerve, though receiving filaments as low as the
fifth cervical vertebra, is connectcd with the medulla oblongata, or
upper extremity of the chord, in the close neighbourhood of the
pneumogastric. The motor and sensitive nerves of the parietal or
second segment (mesencephalon) comprise the three divisions of the
fifth, and the third, fourth, sixth, and facial nerves. The ophthal-
mic and the motor nerves of the muscles of the eye pass into the
orbit: the superior maxillary, with the facial nerve, supplies the
greater part of the face; the inferior maxillary, containing both
motor and sensitive filaments, terminates in the organs of mastica-
tion. Through the foramina of the frontal vertebra, which contains
the prosencephalon, pass the optic nerves; through those of the
nasal vertebra, surrounding the rhinencephalon, the olfactory; both
supplying organs of special sense. It would be impossible in the
limits of this paper to trace the nerves of communication connecting
these several chords. As illustrations, I would mention the great
petrosal nerve, extending between the superior maxillary and the
facial nerves; and the numerous filaments passing between the oph-
thalmic and motor nerves of the orbit; or the intimate connexion
between the hypoglossal and the nerves composing the eighth pair.
In the study of the cerebro-spinal axis, the anatomist should not
limit his views to the information afforded by the human subject: he
should trace the modifications of encephalic development through
the different orders of the vertebrate sub-kingdom; he should notice
the varying proportions of the primary cranial ganglia, their gradual
diminution in size, and eventual disappearance; until, as in the Lan-
celet (branchiostoma) there remains but the faintest trace of a brain,
or of the organs with which it is associated. The neural axis of the
lancelet, composed of vesicular matter (nucleated cells), terminates
by an obtuse end at its cranial extremity, and gives off but two
nerves, the trigeminal and the optic; the nerves corresponding with
the hypoglossal, and the three divisions of the eighth pair belong to
the system of spinal nerves. But in all other fishes, the cranial ex-
tremity of the chord supports ganglionic masses, arranged in linear
series, and giving oft* the vagal and trigeminal nerves, and the nerves
of special sense.

Membranes op tiie Cerebro-spinal Axis.?The membranes of
the neural axis are three: the dura mater, arachnoid membrane, and
pia mater.

The dura mater, composed of white inelastic fibrous tissue, sup-
ports the spinal chord; and, within the cranium, becomes closely
applied to the inner surface of the bones, forming an internal
periosteum. It is the opinion of Dr Sharpey that the cranial bones
are developed, not from temporary cartilage, but from the fibrous
tissue of the dura mater.

It is certain that one fails in detecting cartilage in the stages of
ossification of the foetal frontal or parietal bones; and the intimate
vascular connexion between the dura mater and the pericranium is
maintained through life, in spite of the deposit of earthy matter by
which they are separated. The membranous partitions (falx cerebri,
tentorium cerebelli, &c.) are ossified in some animals, as the cat, dog,
&c.; but this conversion of membrane into bone cannot be connected
with the firm support of the brain in the active movements of the
animal; for it is found in the ornithorhynchus, an animal formed for
burrowing in the soft mud of the Australian rivers. The adhesion
of the dura mater to the skull is very firm in eases of chronic in-
flammation and cerebral affections: bony growths from the interior
of the skull generally produce a thinning of the membrane, which is
rendered transparent.

The arachnoid membrane is the serous membrane; it offers points
of interesting inquiry both in its healthy and morbid state. It is
described as lining the dura mater, and being thence reflected upon
the outer surface of the pia mater. But it is a mistake to suppose
that a distinct vascular membrane, coated by epithelium, is spread
over the inner surface of the dura mater; the so-called parietal
arachnoid consists only of a layer of epithelium; its vessels are the
vessels of the dura mater, and morbid appearances observed upon it,
result from inflammatory changes in the same membrane. The
false or adventitious membrane, formed occasionally upon the inner
surface of the parietal arachnoid (and which has been referred, by
some authors, to the organization of extravasated blood), should be
regarded, not as a disease of the arachnoid membrane, but as a dis-
ease of the dura mater; and this will explain why adhesions so rarely
form between the opposed surfaces of the arachnoid. It does not by
any means follow that the pia mater and visceral arachnoid should
be inflamed, because of inflammation of the dura mater.

These adventitious membranes, so rarely seen in ordinary hospital
practice, but not by any means uncommon in the bodies of those
who die in lunatic asylums, result from inflammation, which, during
life, manifests itself by interfering with and disturbing the proper
functions of the brain. The class of persons in whom such morbid
changes are found after death, are noticed by their friends for
months, perhaps for years, to be irritable and easily excited, or to
become dull and morose; delirium often supervenes, and frequently
paralysis, which, in the cases examined by myself, has depended
upon softening of some part of the surface of the encephalon. I
have henrd it said that these false membranes are formed uncon-
nected with any change of structure in the dura mater; that state-
ment is totally at variance with my dissections. The dura mater
will be found to be either extremely vascular, or most firmly adherent
to the cranial bones; in short, it presents the usual indications of
previous inflammation. The visceral arachnoid, connected with the
pia mater, has its own vascular layer; the morbid changes most
commonly seen in it are interstitial deposition, thickening, and
opacity. Does the arachnoid membrane enter the cavity of the ven-
tricles by the fissure of Bichat, as usually described 1 I believe not.
In the first place, it is not possible to introduce a probe, however
fine, under the corpus callosum into the ventricles: in the second
place, the ventricles arc lined by ciliated epithelium, and not by the
tesselatcd epithelium of the arachnoid: and in the third place, it
never happens that fluid accumulated in large quantity in the ven-
tricles, makes its escape from the cavity when, in the examination of
the head, the sac of the arachnoid is opened.

The pia mater, or the vascular membrane of the neural axis, is
composed of a network of small vessels, which closely invests the
surface of both brain and chord, following the inflexions and convo-
lutions in every part, and lining those internal surfaces known as the
walls of the ventricles. The blood-vessels form minute polygonal
spaces; the arteries, which pass into the nervous substance, arc given
off at right-angles to the trunks, which form the network. In the
spinal chord, the greatest number of vessels is found along the
course of the anterior and posterior median fissures, where they dip
down to ramify in the grey nucleus. The pia mater of the brain,
which covers the grey matter of the convolutions, is more vascular
than that of the chord. Infiltration of fluid converts the membrane
into a loose, spongy mass, which may be pulled from between the
convolutions. In old age, when the convolutions are shrunken and
atrophied, the fluid in the layers of the pia mater occupies the cerebral
interspaces, which may attain considerable size.

The Spinal Chord.?The spinal chord extends from the foramen
magnum to the first or second lumbar vertebra, from whcncc it is at-
tached to the extremity of the canal by a fibrous chord, named filum
terminale. It lies nearer the bodies than the arches of the vertebra;, and
is separated from them by a venous plexus, external to the dura mater.
In form, it is a cylinder, compressed from before backwards; but its
diameter is not in all parts the same. Both in the cervical region,
from the fifth cervical vertebra to the second dorsal, and in the
lumbar region, from the eleventh dorsal to the extremity of the chord,
there is a marked increase in size, from the accumulation of grey
matter. These swellings correspond with the origins of the large ner-
vous chords, which supply the upper and the lower extremities. The
chord is composed of two symmetrical halves, separated by an anterior
and a posterior median fissure, in which dip the vessels of the pia
mater: both fissures arc lined by white matter, and it is an error to
suppose that the posterior readies the central grey matter. The
white matter at the floor of the fissures serves as a commissure
between the two halves of the chord. There are also noticed in
either half of the chord, two fainter marked collateral lines, which
correspond with the anterior and posterior roots of the spinal nerves.
Beside the above; other linear impressions have been described, but
their existence in the fresh chord is still doubtful, and they are destitute
of any physiological interest. Upon making a transverse section of
the spinal chord, it will he found that the central grey matter, pre-
senting some varieties of outline in the different regions of the spine,
appears as two crescents, with the concavities directed outwards, and
united by a transverse band of grey matter, which crosses from one
half of the chord to the other, between the two median fissures.
The anterior cornu does not reach the surface of the chord, but
terminates in the white matter by a blunt extremity. The posterior
is continuous with the posterior roots of the spinal nerves. Anato-
mists have chosen, for convenience of description, to divide the white
structure of the chord into tracts: all that part between the posterior
cornu and the posterior median fissure is the posterior tract or
column; all that between the posterior cornu and the anterior
median fissure, passing over the blunt extremity of the anterior
cornu, is the anterolateral tract or column; but it must be remem-
bered that these tracts are not divided by any well-marked natural
fissures. In the lower vertebrata, the proportion of white to grey
matter is much greater than in man; the grey matter, too, loses its
characteristic colour so as to be with difficulty distinguished by the
naked eye: in fish, its presence was for some time totally denied.
Thirty-one pairs of nerves, exclusive of the nervus accessorius,
take their origin from the spinal chord. Every nerve arises by two
roots, separated by a process of pia mater, the ligamentum dentatum:
the posterior root passes into the posterior cornu of grey matter;
the anterior, intimately blended with the external white fibrous
structure of the chord, is also continuous by means of some of its
fibres with the anterior cornu. Ganglia are formed upon all the
posterior roots, before the union of the two to constitute a perfect
spinal nerve. Amongst the few facts worthy of credence, relative to
the functions of different pai'ts of the nervous system, there is none
supported by better evidence than that of the anterior roots of the
spinal nerves being motor, and the posterior, sensitive; but it is not
yet so clear that motion and sensation can be referred to particular
portions of the chord itself; we are not justified, from experiments
upon the roots of nerves, in assigning special functions to particular
tracts of white matter. Within the cranium, the chord becomes again
enlarged; from the lower border of the pons Varolii, to the spot known
as the decussation of the pyramids, it is called medulla oblongata;
the white fibres become gathered together into bands, and the
posterior tracts separate so as to leave exposed the central grey
nucleus here highly developed. We notice two flat bands, one on
either side of tlie anterior median fissure, tlie anterior pyramids;
external to tliem two oval bodies, tlie corpora olivaria; next, two
round chord-like bands, corpora restiformia; within these the
posterior pyramids; and finally, by the remains of the posterior
median fissure, two faintly-marked chords, the fasciculi teretes.
Although it is doubtless desirable that these superficial markings
should be properly indicated by names, care must be taken not to
attach to them an importance due to the deeper fibres. That typical
constancy which we observe throughout the vertebrate sub-kingdom,
in the primary divisions of the nervous centres, is not adhered to in
these superficial linear markings of the medulla oblongata. Let any
one examine the posterior surface of the chord in the leopard; the
columns are too numerous to be named otherwise than by numbers.

I apprehend one object gained by the formation of these fibrous
bands is the more ready passage of the white fibres into the masses
of grey vesicular matter which, supported by the cranial prolongation
of the chord, constitute the enceplialon. We will attempt to follow
the fibres into each of the four primary encephalic ganglia, premising
that the term medulla oblongata is artificial, and designates no truo
natural division of parts.

The restiform bodies, diverging from one another, and leaving ex-
posed the grey centre of the chord, curve upwards, and pass into the
accumulation of grey matter, constituting the cerebellum. From the
under surface of the cerebellum, two bands of white fibres, the pro-
cessus e cerebello ad testes arc continued to the next pair of cranial
ganglia. Between the processus e cerebello ad testes, and the
restiform bodies, arc the fibres of the pons Varolii; and these three
constitute the crus cerebelli. Now, a cerebellum is seen in its simplest
condition in the cold-blooded vertebrata, and in birds; we there find
it composed of that part of the organ, known in man as the superior
and inferior vermiform processes; or that central disc to which the
two lateral lobes of the human cerebellum are appendages. It is
wrong, then, to speak of the vermiform processes as commissures;
the terms are ill-chosen, as they are applied to tho fundamental part
of the organ. Observation seems to warrant our regarding the
cerebellum as an organ presiding over combined muscular action. It
is singular that, in its description, white fibres should be traced into
it from the posterior columns of the chord only; for tho central
white fibres of the crura ccrebelli, connccted with the pons Varolii,
are described as commissural, and passing from one lateral lobe to the
other. I think that this account is incorrect. Tho pons Varolii
contains white and grey matter, receiving and giving origin to nerve
fibres, and therefore cannot be rightly regarded as a mere commissure.
The superficial fibres are commissural; but the deeper, and by far
the more numerous, spring from the remains of the anterior median
fissure, from the anterior columns, and turning outwards to the right
and to the left, pass into the cerebellum in the same manner as do
the fibres constituting the restiform bodies. In the rabbit's brain,
which presents only the rudiments of the lateral lobes of the cere-
bellum and the pons Varolii, I have nevertheless succeeded in tracing
from the anterior columns of the chord, those fibres forming the
middle part of the crura cerebelli.

About an inch and a half below the pons may be seen that inter-
change of fibres in the anterior median fissure, known as the decus-
sation of the pyramids. Too much importance has been attached to
this spot; the number of nerve fibres which pass from right to left,
and vice versd, is inconsiderable, and the commissure most probably
affects only that segment of the chord in which it is found. Between
the decussation of the pyramids and the pons, commissural fibres
may be seen, upon the separation of the two halves of the chord, to
pass from the posterior to the anterior columns: some of these,
emerging from the anterior median fissure, and curving under the
olivary bodies, have been called the arciform fibres. The same
decussation exists in the central line of that complicated part of the
encephalon, the pons Varolii; although, from the accumulation of
grey matter, the anterior median fissure is obliterated, the passage of
white fibres from side to side may be distinctly made out: some of
them pass into the crura cerebelli.

The space between the posterior surface of the medulla oblongata
and the under surface of the cerebellum is called the fourth ventricle:
its floor is composed of the grey matter of the chord left exposed by
the divergence of the restiform bodies. In it are seen elevations
connected with the roots of the pncumogastric and glosso-pharyngeal
nerves, and transverse white fibres (the feather of the Calamus
Scriptorius), which are regarded as the origin of the acoustic nerves.
The lower opening of the fourth ventricle is shut up by pia mater
and arachnoid membrane; the upper opening is continued into the
space between the two optic thalami or the third ventricle, by a
canal, the remains of the central canal of the cerebro-spinal axis,
and called the iter e tertio ad quartum ventriculum. In the
crus cerebelli is a zigzag line of yellowish grey matter, the corpus
dentatum. The smooth tongue-shaped cerebellum of osseous fishes,
which move with but little effort in an atmosphere of sufficient
density to support them, is superseded, in the predacious cartilaginous
sharks, by a cerebellum, of irregular surface, and marked by trans-
verse foldings. So also in birds which soar by muscular exertion in
the rarer strata of the atmosphere, the cerebellum is plicated, and
the division between white and grey matter is distinct. The size of
the cerebellum seems to depend less upon the required amount of
muscular strength than upon the necessity of rapid and varied mus-
cular combinations. Man, inferior to the lion in point of strength, is
immeasurably his superior in the extent, accuracy, and delicacy of
his movements.

The second cranial segment, or ganglion (mesencephalic), compre-
hends the nates and testes, and that portion of the pons Varolii con-
nected to them. The mesencephalon is surrounded by a ring of
bone, which, though greatly expanded in man, retains in the lower
vertebrata, its typical relations, and is formed by the posterior half of
the sphenoid bone, and its greater aire, (basi and ali-sphenoids,) and
by the parietal bones. If the corpora olivaria be cut across, we find,
in the interior, a corpus dentatum, formed of a zigzag line of
yellowish-grey matter, as in the crus cerebelli. The white fibres,
both surrounding the corpus dentatum, and springing from its
interior, pass into the pons, where they are joined by fresh fibres.
They unite to form a band, which divides into two: one passes to
the nates and testes; the other, to the crura cerebri.

The nates and testes, composed of white and grey matter, are two
pair of smooth, roundish bodies, which retain much more than the
cerebral hemispheres, or the cerebellum, that simplicity of structure
seen in the cold-blooded animals. Obscured from view by the great
backward development of the hemispheres, they arc not seen until
the contiguous parts are somewhat separated; and their tine impor-
tance might be overlooked, were it not for the information afforded
by comparative anatomy. The corpora bigemina in fish, the homo-
logues of the nates (for the testes do not exist), far exceed in size
the other cerebral ganglia, and present a greater complexity of
structure than is found in the human brain. Indeed, Cuvier re-
garded the hollow lobes, as they were then called, as the hemi-
spheres. The addition of an inferior pair is first seen in the impla-
cental mammalia; the relative size of the two depends upon causes
not perfectly understood. The nates seem connected with the origin
of the optic nerves, which wind round the crura cerebri, to be
attached to the corpora gcniculata upon the optic thalami. The testes,
resting upon the valve of Vieussens in front of the origin of the
fourth cerebral nerve, are relatively largest in the active carnivorous
mammalia.

The nerves connected with the mesencephalon are numerous, and
divide within their cranial vertebra, before passing through different
foramina to their destinations. The nerves of sensation are repre-
sented by the divisions from the Gasserian ganglion of the liervus
trigeminus. The motor nerves include all the motor nerves which
accompany their branches. The third, the fourth, the sixth, the
portio dura, and the motor root, which accompanies the inferior
maxillary nerve, may be regarded as so many divisions of an ante-
rior motor root of a spinal nerve.

The ring of bone surrounding the cerebral hemispheres is formed
by the anterior part of the body of the sphenoid bone, the processes
of Ingrassias and the frontal bone. It contains the largest segment of
the encephalon. The two round chords, known as the crura cerebri,
receive fibres from the anterior pyramids, from the olivary tracts,
and from the grey matter of the pons. Doubtless, also, fibres pass
in the opposite direction, arising from the accumulation of grey
matter within the hemispheres. The separation of the white and grey
structures of the brain in distinct layers, imperfect even in the rodentia,
is complete in man, who, in his intellectual faculties, is so greatly
superior to all other animated beings. The crura cerebri am be traced
into three accumulations of grey matter?first, into the optic thalami;
secondly, into the corpora striata; and thirdly, into the grey matter of
the convolutions. The hemispheres, thus formed, are united byatrans-
verse layer of white fibres, the corpus callosum; and the vault between
them, divided into spaces by the development of intercerebral com-
missures, constitutes the lateral and the third ventricles. All persons
are familiar with the way in which the grey matter of the surface of
the hemispheres is spread out in wavy lines, coating the central white
matter, and forming the convolutions; and the course and number of
these convolutions is not a matter of chance, nor do they adapt
themselves to the inner surface of the skull; they are under the
control of some law, which as yet is but imperfectly understood. In
the lower vertebrata, and in most birds, there is no trace of cerebral
convolutions; in the implacental mammalia, and in rodents, the
superficial markings are faint. In the feline carnivora, the convolu-
tions, commonly four in number in either hemisphere, extend longi-
tudinally from before backwards, parallel to the median fissure, and
to one another. In the herbivora, e. g., the sheep, they are oblique,
converging towards the median fissure from behind, forwards. In
man they are so numerous, that no useful arrangement has yet been
agreed upon. They all arise from a spot upon the under surface
of the corpus striatum, known as the locus perforatus anticus, and
extend backwards to the posterior cerebral lobes, and to that pro-
minence lodged in the middle fossa of the skull, which marks the
hippocampi majores. About the fourth month of foetal life are
developed, within the range of the cerebral hemispheres, and in
intimate connexion with one another, the corpora mammillaria, the
fornix, and the hippocampi majores, with their transverse com-
missural fibres, the lyra. The fornix, and the under surface of the
corpus callosum, arc united by two delicate layers of white and grey
matter, constituting the septum lucidum, and inclosing a space called
the fifth ventricle, which may contain fluid under circumstances of
disease, or may attain very considerable size from congenital mal-
formation.

The spaces known as the lateral ventricles arc bounded below by
the fornix, the corpora striata, and the optic thalami, and above by
the corpus callosum. Three cornua lead into the inferior, posterior,
and middle lobes of the hemispheres : in the posterior cornu we sec
the eminence known as the hippocampus minor; in the inferior, we
see the hippocampus major, with the corpus fimbriatum, or the thin
margin of the posterior crus of the fornix. The anterior cornu
turns outwards round the blunt end of the corpus striatum; the pos-
terior curvcs in the opposite direction: the inferior cornu winds
round the optic thalamus, and ends at the base of the brain, near
the division between the anterior and middle lobes, or that interval,
the fissure of Sylvius, which receives the processes of Ingrassias of the
sphenoid bone. The third ventricle is the space between the optic
thalami, under the fornix, and is bounded below by the tuber
cinereum, infundibulum, corpora mammillaria, and locus pcrforatus
posticus; it communicates with the lateral ventricles by a fissure,
the foramen of Monro, situated between the anterior crura of the
fornix and the optic thalami. The iter c tcrtio ad quartum ventri-
culum leads from its posterior extremity under the nates and testes.
The two optic thalami arc united by a narrow band of white fibres,
the posterior commissure; the corpora striata are united by a thicker
band of white fibres, immediately in front of the anterior crura of
the fornix, the anterior commissure: a fusion of tho grey matter of
the two optic thalami, the middle or soft commissure, may in most
instances be seen in the middle of the third vcntriclc. The character
of this commissure approaches that of the fusion of grey matter con-
necting the two halves of the chord. The position of the pineal body,
connected by its two crura to the white investment of the optic thalami,
or to the posterior part of the ccrebral hemispheres, is remarkable,
inasmuch as throughout the whole vertebrate sub-kingdom, whatever
may be tlie size of the hemispheres, its typical relations remain un-
changed. The same remark may be applied to the pituitary body,
although it is but rarely lodged in so deep a bony cavity as exists in
the human skull. The fissure between the cerebral hemispheres and
the corpora quadrigemina is called the great transverse fissure, or the
fissure of Bicliat, and it is here that the pia mater (I believe not the
arachnoid) enters the ventricles. It is bounded above by the corpus
callosum; below, by the nates and testes; and it extends outwards
on either side to the crura cerebri.

The nerves connected with this segment of the enceplialon arc the
optic. They arise from two tubercles of grey matter, situated upon
the posterior extremity of the optic thalami, the corpora geniculata
externa and interna, and from the nates: the testes have 110 con-
nexion with the optic nerves. From this extensive origin two flat
bands, the optic tracts, wind round the crura cerebri, and unite at
the base of the brain to form the commissure or cliiasma. Some
white fibres seem to pass iuto the optic tracts from the crura cerebri,
aud a layer of grey matter is continued from the anterior extremity
of the corpus callosum to the upper surface of the commissure. The
optic nerves, diverging from this point of union, pass through the
optic foramina, at the root of the processes of Ingrassias, and termi-
nate, as the retina, within the fibrous sense-capsule, known as the
globe of the eye.

The bony ring surrounding the most anterior of the primary
encephalic ganglia is obscured in man by the great development of
the ethmoid cells; in its typical form it has the vomer for the centre
or body, the two plates of bones constituting the perpendicular
lamella, as the neurapophyses; and the ossa nasi as the spine. The
cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone supports the olfactory bulbs
which represent the last cranial ganglion. Although the cavity for
the reception of the olfactory bulbs is small, and retracted between
the orbital plates of the frontal bone in man, yet in other animals??
the mole, the sheep, the fox?it lies anterior to the frontal bone,
forming a distinct, well-circumscribed space, of no inconsiderable
size. The bulbs which lie upon it give off numerous delicate nerves
to the nose. The soft chords usually termed olfactory nerves are
no nerves at all, but direct prolongations of the cerebral substance;
in many animals they are hollow, and open into the lateral ven-
tricles ; they are composed of white and of grey matter inter-
mixed, a condition which constitutes the main character of a
nervous centre. Each olfactory tract is connected to the cerebral
hemispheres by three roots, two white and one grey. The external
white root crosses the Sylvian fissure, and terminates in the middle
or hippocampal lobe: the internal, also white, passes into the
locus perforatus anticus, and joins some of the fibres of the an-
terior commissure within the corpus striatum. The middle or grey
root, superior to the other two in the natural position of the brain,
arises from a tubercle of grey matter at the posterior extremity of a
deep fissure, in which this three-sided olfactory tract is bound down
by arachnoid membrane.

From this general survey of the cerebro-spinal axis, it will be seen
that the encephalon, or brain commonly so called, is composed of
four highly-developed neural segments, of which the posterior epen-
cephalic presides over the functions of respiration and of digestion; the
second, mesencephalic, over the act of deglutition, the movements and
the sensation of all parts forming the face; the third, prosencephalic,
connected with the manifestation of the intellectual faculties, gives
to the animal the sense of sight; and the fourth (rhinencephalic)
imparts the sense of smell. These latter are the two senses, observes
Cuvier, which exercise the greatest influence on the actions of animals,
and which minister not only to the preservation of the individual,
but also to the conservation of the species. For although the
olfactory sense has 110 connexion with the procreativc impulse in
man, it has in most of the lower animals, in whom, indeed, it seems
to be the main channel through which the sexual stimulus is con-
veyed.

Nonuc vides, ut tota tremor pcrtentct cquorum
Corpora, si tnntum liotas odor nttulit auras?
Geoiig. lib. iii. 250.
