The French Law of Lunacy
=========================

400
I.
OF LUNATIC ASYLUMS.

Article 1.?Every department is directed to have a public establish-
ment, specially designed for the reception and treatment of lunatics,
or to make arrangements for that objcct with a public or private
establishment, either in that department or in some other.

All arrangements made with public or private establishments,
are subject to the approval of the Minister of the Interior.

Article 2.?The public establishments devoted to lunatics arc im-
mediately under the control of the public authorities.

Article 3.?Private establishments for the insane arc also under
the surveillance of the public authorities.

Article 4.?The Prefect, and those individuals specially nominated
by him for that purpose, or by the minister of the interior, the
president of the court, the king's advocate, the justice of the peace,
the mayor of the division, are directed to visit the establishments,
both private and public, dedicated to the service of the insane.
They will receive the petitions of those confined there, and will,
respecting their interests, procure all the information requisite to
give a precise knowledge of their condition.

The private establishments are to be inspected at uncertain periods,
once at least every three months, by the king's advocate for the hun-
dred. The public establishments are in like manner to be inspected
once at least every half-year.

Article 5.?No person shall be permitted to direct or form a
private asylum for lunatics without the sanction of the government.
Private establishments intended for the treatment of other diseases,
cannot admit patients labouring under lunacy, unless they be received
into a detached house.

These establishments for that purpose require to receive the
special sanction of the state, and will be subjected in every respect,
so far as the lunatics are concerned, to all the regulations enforced
by law.

Article C. lhe regulations of the administrative government
determine the conditions under which the authority announced in
the preceding article will be granted, the cases in which they arc to
l>e withdrawn, and the obligations by which the authorized establish-
ment are to be bound.

Article 7.?The internal arrangements of houses for insane, either
in whole or in part, shall, in so far as that public branch is inte-
rested, be submitted to the sanction of the minister of the interior.
? II.
ON TIIE RECEPTION OF PATIENTS INTO THE LUNATIC ASYLUMS.
Clause First.?Of Voluntary Admissions.

Article 8.?The heads or responsible governors of public establish-
ments, and the directors of private asylums for the insane, arc not to
receive any one labouring under lunacy, unless there be transmitted
with the party?

1. A claim for admission, with the name, profession, age, and
abode, both of the person who makes it, as well as of the individual
for whom it is intended, with the precise degree of relationship sub-
sisting between the parties, or failing that, the mutual relations be-
tween them.

The petition is to be written and signed by the individual who
draws it up, and if he be unable to write, it will be received by the
mayor, or the commissary of police, who will ratify it.
The heads, governors, or directors, on their own responsibility,
will have to satisfy themselves of the identity of the person who has
drawn up the petition, in ease it has not been received by the mayor,
or the commissary of police.

If the claim for admission is drawn up by the guardian of the
interdicted person, he will be required to present an extract of the
decree of interdiction, in confirmation thereof.

2. A certificate from a physician, attesting to the mental con-
dition of the person whose admission is proposed, pointing out the
peculiarities of the disorder, and the expediency of treating the indi-
vidual described in a lunatic asylum, and confining him there.

This certificate is not to be acknowledged if it has been written
more than fifteen days before it is sent to the governor or director of
the lunatic asylum; if it is given by a physician attached to the
institution, or if the attesting physician is a relation or connexion,
to the second degree inclusive, of the governor or proprietor of the
establishment, or of the individual who is to place the patient in the
asylum.

In cases of an urgent nature, the heads of public establishments
may dispense with a medical certificate.
3. The passport, or some other document of the personal identity
of the proposed patient.

In the bulletin of admission, mention will be made of all the
documents produced, which will be transmitted in the course of
twenty-four hours, with a certificate of the physician of the institu-
tion, and the copy of that above-mentioned, to the prefect of the .
police at Paris, to the prcfcct, or sub-prefect in the principal parishes
of the department or hundred, and to the mayors in the other
parishes. The sub-prefect or mayor shall immediately transmit it
to the prcfcct.

Arliclc 9.?If the order is for a person to be confined in a private
establishment, the prefect, within three days from the receipt of the
bulletin, will direct one or more professional man to visit the person
described in the bulletin, so as to ascertain the state of his mind,
and furnish an immediate report. He may associate any other
person lie thinks lit with him or them.

Article 10.?During this time the prefect will notify officially the
names, profession, and abode, both of the proposed patient, and also
of the person who makes the petition for the admission, and the
grounds for confinement:?1st. To the king's advocate for the
hundred of the dwelling-house of the lunatic. 2nd. To the king's
advocate of the hundred of the locality of the asylum. These in-
structions apply both to public and private institutions lor the
insane.

Article 11.?Fifteen days after the reception of a patient, either
in a public or private asylum, a new certificate of the physician of
the institution is to be addressed to the prefcct, in conformity with
the last paragraph of Article S. This certificate will corroborate, or,
if it be necessary, rectify the remarks delivered in the first, stating
the more or less frequent recurrences of the paroxysms, or of the
acts of dementia.

Article 12.?There is to be kept in every institution, a register,
endorsed and signed by the mayor, in which arc to be immediately
inserted the names, professions, ages, and abodes of the individuals
confined in the lunatic asylums; the statement of the dcercc of in-
terdiction, if it has been delivered, with the name of the guardian;
the dates of their admission; the names, profession, and abode of
the individual, whether relation or not, who has given in the peti-
tion. The following also is to be inscribed in the register:?1st. The
certificate of the physician in connexion with the claim for admis-
sion. 2. Those certificates which, in conformity with Articles 8 and
11, the physician of the institution is required to transmit to the
government.

In the register, ait least every month, the physician is directed to
report any changes that may have taken place in the mental condi-
tion of every patient. The dismissals and deaths aire likewise to be
recorded in the register.

I his register is to l>c placed for examination before those parties
who have the authority and privilege to inspect the asylum, when
they visit the place for that purpose. After having concluded the
inspection, they will place on the register their visa, with their
signature, and observations, if there be any necessary.

Article 13.?hvcry individual confined in a lunatic asylum, ceases
to be detained there as soon as the physicians of the establishment
have declared in the register referred to in the preceding article, thut
the cure has been effected.

If the individual is a minor, or under interdiction, notice of the
opinion of the physicians will be given to the person to whom it
ought to be sent, and to the king's advocate.

Article 11.?Bctorc the physicians declare thut a cure is accoin*

plished, every person placed in a lunatic asylum is free to leave it,
when his dismissal is required by any of the individuals undernoted;
to wit?
1. The curator appointed according to Articlc 3S of the present
law.
2. The husband or wife.
3. If there arc neither husband nor wife, the elder relative.
4. Failing these, the junior relatives.
o. The individual who has signed the claim for admission, pro-
vided no relation is opposed to the use of that authority, without the
assent of the council of the family.
G. Any person authorized to do so by the sanction of the council
for the family.

If there be any opposition notified to the chief of the asylum by
any having authority, that there is a difference of opinion, cither
amongst, the elder relatives, or amongst the junior, the advocate of
the family will decide.

Nevertheless, if the physician of the asylum be of opinion, that
public order or the safety of individuals would be compromised by
the enlargement of the lunatic, lie will give notice thereof previously
to the mayor, who will immediately direct a provisional supersedeas
to the order for dismissal, on condition that it be reported to the
prefect in twenty-four hours. This provisional supersedeas will lose
all force in law after the expiry of a fortnight, if the prefect has not
during the interval given contrary directions, in conformity with
Articlc 21, below. The order of the mayor is to be transcribed into
the Register kept in accordance with Article 12.

In ease of minority or of interdiction, the guardian alone may
authorize the dismissal of the patient.

Articlc 15.?Within twenty-four hours after dismissal, the
governors or directors will give notice of it to the functionaries
mentioned in the last paragraph of the Article 8; and will intimate
to tlicm the name and residence of the individuals who have with-
drawn the patient, the state of his mind at the moment when he was
enlarged, and in particular, if possible, the locality where lie has
gone to.

Articlc 1G.?It is always in the power of the prefect to direct the
immediate discharge of persons under voluntary confinement in
lunatic asylums.

Articlc 17.?In every instance the person under interdict can only
be restored to his guardian, and the minor to those who have legal
authority for his control.

Clause Second.?Of Cases admitted under I'ublic Authority.
Articlc 18.?At Paris, the prefect of police, and in the depart-
ments, the prefects, will regulate the order lor admission into a
lunatic asylum, of every individual, whether interdicted or not inter-
dicted, whose state of mind is such as to compromise public order, or
the safety of individuals.

The orders of the prefects ought to give the reasons, and state the
circumstances which rendered them necessary. These orders, as well
as those delivered in accordance with Articles 19, 20, 21 and 23,
shall be inserted in a liegister similar to that directed by Article 12
above, all the forms of which are applicable to persons confined
officially.

Article 19.?In all cases of insanity attended by imminent danger,
certified by the statement of a physician, or declared through public
notoriety, the commissary of police at Paris, and the mayors in the
other departments, will direct every provisional measure that may
be requisite, under condition that they arc reported within the period
of twenty-four hours, to the prefect, who will deliver his decrcc
thereon without delay.

Article 20.?The heads, directors, or governors responsible for
lunatic asylums, arc by law bound to write to the prefects, in the
first month of every half year, a Kcport prepared by the physician of
the institution, on the condition of each individual under confinement,
containing an account of the nature of the disease, and the result of
the treatment.

The prefect shall deliver his opinion on each individually, and
order his continuance in the asylum, or his discharge.

Article 21.?In respect of individuals confined voluntarily, and in
those instances where the state of the mind might be such as to
compromise public order, or the safety of individuals, the prefect
may, in the forms specified by the second paragraph of Article 18,
give a special order, to the effect that the individual be prevented
leaving the asylum, without his sanction, unless it be to become the
inmate of another institution.

The heads, directors, or responsible governors, are bound to act in
conformity with this rule.

Article 22.?Intimation must be given to the king's advocates of
all orders or directions delivered in virtue of the Articles 18, 19,
20, 21.

These orders shall be intimated to the mayor of the abodo of the
persons placed under restraint, who will notify it immediately to the
families.

An account shall also be transmitted to the minister of the
interior.

The different notifications prescribed by the present article shall
be made in pursuance of the forms and retardations detailed in
Article 10.

Article 23.?If, during the interval which shall elapse between the
Reports directed by Article 20, the physicians declare on-the Register
kept in conformity with Article 12, that the discharge may be per-
mitted, the heads, directors, and responsible governors of tho asylums,
shall bo bound under pain of prosecution, agreeably to Article 31,
l>elow, to make an immediate report to the prefect, who will ordain
without delay.

Article 21.?The hoipuxt and hospitals arc bound provisionally to
receive those persons transmitted to them in virtue of the Articles 18
and 19, until quarters are found for them in the asylums specially
intended for their reception, according to the terms of the First
Article, or during their passage to these places.
In all the parishes where there are religious houses or hospitals,
the lunatics cannot be disposed of otherwise than in these houses or
hospitals. Where there arc none, the mayors shall be enforced to
provide lodgings for them, either in an inn, or in a dwelling hired
for the purpose.

In no instance are lunatics to be transported along with criminals,
or those condemned, nor lodged in a prison.

These arrangements apply to all lunatics placed by government
cither in a public or private asylum.

Clause Tiiiud.?Of the Expenses of Lunatics.
Article 25.?Lunatics placed in confinement by order of the
prefect, and whose families have not petitioned for their admission
into a private asylum, shall be conveyed to the asylum for their
own department, or to such other with which an agreement has been
made.

Those lunatics whose state of mind would not affect public order,
nor the personal safety of individuals, shall have free admission there,
in the modes, under the circumstances, and according to the con-
ditions which will be regulated by the general council, on the pro-
posal of the prefect, and sanctioned by the minister.

Article 2G.?The expense of the conveyance of persons directed
by the administration of lunatic asylums, will be regulated by the
prefect, on the report of the parties charged with the conveyance.
The expense for maintenance, lodging, and treatment, of persons
placed in religious houses, or public lunatic asylums, will be regulated
according to a tariff fixed by the prefect.

The expenses of maintenance, lodging, and treatment of persons
confined by the authority of the departments in private asylums, shall
be fixed by the arrangement made by the departments, agreeably to
Article 1.

Article 27.?The expenses mentioned in the preceding Article
shall be charged to the persons confined?failing whom, on those for
whom they would have a claim for aliment, agreeably to the direc-
tions in Article 205 of Civil Code.

If the obligation to furnish the food be disputed, or the quota
contested, a competent tribunal will issue a decree thereon, on the
prosecution of the trustee appointed to act in accordance with Article
31 and 32.

The recovery of money due will be prosecuted at the instance of
the administration for enrolment, and for property.

Article 28.?In default, and when the aforesaid sources are inade-
quate, it will be provided by the financial laws, at the ordinary
expense of the department to which the lunatic belongs, without
prejudice to the meeting of the commune where the lunatic resided,
according to a basis submitted by the general council at the instance
of the prefect, with the sanction of the government.

The religious houses shall have claim for an indemnity, correspond-
ing with the number of the lunatics placed at their charge, and who
shall be confined in an asylum appropriated to lunatics.
In case of differences, the council of the prefecture shall give a
final decision.

Clause Fourth.?Rules and Arrangements common to all indi-
viduals confincd in Lunatic Asylums.

Article 20.?Every individual confined or detained in a lunatic
asylum, the guardian, if he be a minor, bis tutor, any relative or
friend, at any period, may, by making application before the tribunal
in the immediate locality of the asylum, after the proper authentica-
tions are lodged, obtain an order for the immediate discharge of the
patient.

The persons who shall have demanded the confinement, and the
king's advocate, may make similar applications.

In the ease of interdiction, this application can only be drawn up
by the guardian of the person interdicted.

The decision will be delivered simply by making application in
the council-room, without giving the reasons.
The application, the decision, and the other deeds to which the
reclamation will give rise, will be examined for stamp, and registered
in the account.

Any requests, any petitions addressed, either to the judicial or to
the administrative bodies, must not be suppressed or retained by flic
directors of the asylums, under the penalties mentioned under the
Third Section, above.

Articlc 30.?The governors, directors, or responsible superin-
tendents, are not permitted, under the penalties mentioned under the
120th Article of the Penal Code, to retain any individual confined in
a lunatic asylum, when the discharge has been ordered by the prefect,
according to the directions of the Articles 12, 20, and 23, or by the
court, according to the terms of the 29th Article, except the condi-
tions of the Articles 13 and I f apply to the case.

Articlc 31.?-The administrative commissions, or those entrusted
with the superintendence of hospitals or public lunatic asylums, shall
excrcisc, as regards persons not interdicted, but under confinement,
all the provisional functions of administration. They shall select
one of their body to fulfil those functions. The individual so autho-
rized, will take the usual steps for the recovery of monies due to the
person in confinement and for the discharge of the debts, will give
leases which are not to exceed the limit of three years, and may
even, in virtue of special power delegated by the civil tribunal, sell
the property.

The proceeds from the sale, or from other sources, will be put
directly into the treasury of the establishment, and, if necessary,
shall he expended for the interest of the lunatic.

The caution, or bail, for the receiver will be found as security of
abave money, by a claim on every other kind of debt.

Nevertheless, the relations, the husband, or the wife of the person
confined in the lunatic asylum, under the direction and 'guidance of
the administrative commission, the commission itself, and the king's
advocate likewise, may have their appeal to the subsequent Articles.
Article 32.?On the demand of the relatives, or of the husband,
or of the wife, along with that of the administrative commission, or
on the official charge of the king's advocate, the civil court in the
locality of the dwelling of the lunatic may, in conformity with
Article 407 of the Civil Code, nominate in the council chamber a
provisional curator for the good of any person not under interdiction
in confinement in a lunatic asylum. The nomination will not be
final until after the family shall have advised thereon, and the con-
elusions of the king's advocate been heard. There will be no appeal
from it.

Article 33.?The court, at the request of the provisional curator,
or by command of the king's advocate, will appoint a special man-
datory to represent judicially every individual not under an interdict,
and confined in a lunatic asylum, who will be engaged as judicial
agent at the date of confinement, or against whom an action may be
afterwards raised.

The court shall also, in a case of urgency, nominate an especial
mandatory, to commence a suit, in the name of the same individuals,
for moveable or fixed property. In which two cases, the provisional
curator may receive the appointment of special mandatory.

Article 34.?The arrangements of the civil codes as to the causes
which do not require tutelage, as affects incapacity, the exclusion, or
the destitution of tutors, apply to all provisional curators nominated
by the court.

On the petition of interested parties, or that of the king's advocate,
the decree, which fixes the provisional curator, may at the same time
determine a general or special mortgage on his property, so as to be
responsible for the sum arranged by the aforesaid judgment.

The king's advocate ought, in the course of a fortnight, to cause the
mortgage to be registered in the office for deeds: it only takes its
date from the time it is inscribed.

Article 35.?When the provisional curator is appointed by a
decree, the communications to be made to the lunatic arc to be
made to that curator.

Communications presented to the house may, according to cir-
cumstances, be annulled by the courts.

Nothing here interferes with the provisons of the Article 173 of
the Code of Commerce.

Article 30.?In default of a provisional curator, the president, on
the application of the most attentive party, will authorize a notary
to represent the interests of individuals not under interdiction, con-
fined in lunatic asylums, as to inventories, accounts, shares, and
disbursements, which may affect them.

Article 37.?The authority conferred through the sanction of the
preceding articles ceases entirely on the person being removed from
the asylum.

The powefs sanctioned by the court, in virtue of the 32nd Article,
cease entirely after the expiration of three years: they may, how-
ever, be renewed.

This arrangement does not, however, apply to provisional curators
appointed for individuals maintained by the authorities in private
establishments.

Article 38.?On the petition of a person wl'io has an interest in
the matter, one of his relations, of a husband or of a wife, of a friend,
or at the instance of the kings advocate, the court may, in a chamber
of consultation, nominate by a decrce, against which there shall be
no appeal, in addition to the provisional governor, a curator to the
person of each individual confined in a lunatic asylum, but not under
interdiction, whose duty will be to sec?1st, that his income is em-
ployed to soothe his unhappy fate, and to promote his cure; 2nd,
that the aforesaid individual is restored to the free exercise of his
rights, as soon as the condition of his circumstances will permit.
This curator, or guardian, cannot be selected out of the presumptive
heirs of the person in confinement.

Article 39.?The deeds of a person placed in a lunatic asylum,
during the period of his confinement, though there has been no
interdiction certified or raised, may he? brought in evidence for
dementia, agreeably to Article 1301 of the Civil Code.

The ten years of action for nullifying the deeds shall run, as refer
to the lunatic who shall have subscribed these acts, commencing at
the date at which intimation has Ikjcu given him, or of the know-
ledge he has received of them after his final discharge from the
lunatic asylum.

And in regard to his heirs, from the date of the intimation which
has been sent, or of the knowledge they may have acquired thereof,
since the death of the individual.

. ^''.e P"!4*1 ?' *be beginning of the ten years against the one
individual is also that of the ten years against the heirs.
Article 40.?The public minister will be heard on all matters
affecting the interests of individuals confined in lunatic asylums,
even though they arc not under interdiction.

? HI.
(J EX ERA L A It It A X 0 E M E X T S.
nUobeclionco to, or infraction of, ||?. raowure, ^ioned 1')'
Articles <), 8, 11, 1-, or the second paragraph of Article 13 of the
ces 1,7, 17, JO, J1, ami of the last paragraph of Articled
of the existing law, and to the rules rendered under the authority
of the Gth Article, on the part of the heads, directors, or responsible
governors of public or private lunatic asylums, and by the physicians
officiating therein, shall be punished by imprisonment from five days
to a year, and a fine from fifty francs to three thousand francs, or by
one or other of those amercements.

The Article 4G3 of the Penal Code may be enforced.
The present law, discussed, debated, and adopted by the Chamber
of Peers and the Chamber of Deputies, and sanctioned by us this
day, is henceforth the law of the realm.

Given at the Palace of Neuilly, the 30th day of the month of
June, 1838."
(Signed) Louis Philippe.
* I his law has, we believe, undergone some trifling amendments and additions,
but in its main provisions it remains as above detailed.?Ed.
