Autobiography of the Insane
============================

:ref:`j-psychol-med-ment-pathol`
Art Y

The human mind, by reflecting internally upon its own consciousness,
is often enabled to analyze its faculties, and determine the laws by
which they are governed, and by a similar process insane patients
may themselves frequently account for, and throw light upon, certain
states of mental aberration. The history given by them of the
origin and development of their morbid impulses and delusions
opens a curious field for psychological speculation, and one that has
not hitherto been explored in this country. The existence of
insanity, be it remembered,, does not necessarily imply a complete
overthrow and deprivation of all the reasoning faculties; the moral
affections may be thoroughly perverted, and the propensities assume
a wild and uncontrollable career, yet the intellectual faculties remain
absolutely intact. The popular notion of insanity is that the un-
happy lunatic is always in a state of bewilderment and ineolierency;
?hence, Mr. Charles Dickens introduces a madman's manuscript in
his " Pickwick Papers," which, in accordance with this notion, is
conceived in the following lofty and melodramatic strain:?"Yes?
a madman?how that word would have struck to my heart many
years ago?how it would have roused the terror that used to come
upon me, sometimes sending the blood hissing and tingling through
my veins till the cold dew of fear stood in large drops upon my
skin, and my knees knocked together with fright. I like it now,
though?it's a fine name.?Show me the monarch whose angry frown
was ever feared like the glare of a madman's eye?whose cord and
axe were ever so sure as a madman's gripe. Ho! ho! It's a grand
thing to be mad?to be peeped at like a wild lion through the iron
bars?to gnash one's teeth and howl, through the long still night, to
the merry ring of the heavy chain?and to roll and twine among
MS. Record of the History and Progress of Lunacy Cases.
the straw, transported witli such brave music. Hurrah for the mad-
house. Oh, it's a rare place!"
The late professor Charles Bell, in his " Anatomy of Expression,"
observes?

" To represent the prevailing character and physiognomy of a
madman, the body should be strong and the muscles rigid and
distinct, the skin bound, the features sharp, the eye sunk, the colour
of a dark brown yellow tinctured with sallowness, without one spot
of enlivening carnation, the hair sooty black, stiff, and bushy. Or,
perhaps he might be represented, as in the " Faery Queen," of a pale
sickly yellow, with wiry hair.

" His burning eyen, whom bloody streakes did stain,
Stared full wide, and threw forth sparks of fire,
And more for rank despiglit than for great pa:n,
Sliuked his long locks, coloured like copper wire,
And bit his tawny beard, to shew his raging ire."

You see him lying in his cell, regardless of everything, with a death-
like settled gloom upon his countenance. When I say it is a deathlike
gloom, I mean a heaviness of the features without knitting of the
brows or action of the muscles. If you watch him in his paroxysm
you may see the blood working to his head, his face acquires a
darker red, lie becomes restless, then, rising from his couch, he paces
his cell and tugs his chain; now his inflamed eye is fixed upon you,
and his features lighten up into wildness and ferocity. The error
into which the painter may naturally fall is to represent this ex-
pression by the swelling features of passion and the frowning eye-
brow, but this would only give the idea of passion, not of madness.
Or he mistakes melancholia for madness. The theory On which we
are to proceed in attempting to convey this peculiar look of ferocity
amidst the utter wreck of the intellect, I conceive to be, that the
expression of mental energy should be avoided, and consequently all
those muscles which indicate sentiment. I believe this to be true to
nature, because I have observed (contrary to my expectation) that
there was not that energy, that knitting of the brows, that indignant
brooding and thouglxtfulness in the face of madmen, which is gene-
rally imagined to characterize their expression, and which is so often
given to them in painting. There is a vacancy in their laugh, and
a want of meaning in their ferociousness. To learn the character of
the countenance when devoid of human expression, and reduced to
the state of brutality, we must have recourse to the lower animals,
and study their looks of timidity, of watchfulness, of excitement, and
of ferocity. If these expressions are transferred to the human face,
I should conceive that they will irresistibly convey the idea of mad-
ness, vacancy of mind, and animal passion."

Here, then, we have the lunatic as described by the novelist, and
the lunatic as depicted by the critical artist; but in each case it is the
exaggerated representation of a maniacal condition which is always
of short duration wlien it does occur, and .which is very rarely met
with in any asylum. The theory propounded by professor Charles
Bell, that there exists in such maniacal cases a deficiency of mental
energy, and that there is a want of meaning also in the ferociousness
exhibited, is also incorrect, for, on the contrary, during these
paroxysms of excitement, the mind is in the most vigorous state of
exaltation, preternaturally energetic and self-willed, and so far from
such ferociousness being unmeaning, it characterizes an irrevocable
determination and a dangerous intensity of purpose which absorbs
all other passions.

These descriptions of insanity apply to a state of maniacal furor
only; but it is not right to take this as the common type of lunacy;
for not unfrequently the lunatic, instead of being a repulsive per-
sonage exciting alarm and trepidation, proves to be a man of pre-
possessing appearance?fascinating manners?agreeable conversation
?full of wit, learning, and anecdote. Such a person was a patient
with whom we became acquainted. He had taken a fancy that
his family had conspired together to poison him, and he would
reason upon, and even struggle against, the delusion, which was
nevertheless too strong for him to master. Poor fellow !?he died,
and upon a post mortem examination, the valves of the heart were
found ossified; and as physical sensations frequently give rise to
erroneous mental impressions, it is probable that the idea of poisoning
was suggested by the uneasiness which he felt whenever the stomach
was distended with food. Everything lie ate disagreed with him?
the heart laboured to propel the blood through its ossified and con-
stricted passages?the lungs became congested, and the breathing
difficult?and in this state lie was wont to exclaim, " The villains
have been poisoning mo again." Nevertheless, in his happier
moments, a more charming companion we never met with; no one
ever sat down in his society without being amused and interested,
and 110 one went away without having derived some information
from the extent of his reading and the great variety of his scientific
and literary acquisitions. We followed him to the grave, and found
afterwards, among his papers, an essay on the Existence of Good and
Evil in the World, which is conceived in a lucid and elegant tone
worthy even of Tillotson. Compare the manuscript of the imaginary
madman, by Mr. Charles Dickens, with the following " Observations
on Original Sin

" It is certain that considering the world in general, we remark a
design, a order, an harmony, a perfection which announces the wisdom
and power of its author; but considering it in detail, we discover a dis-
order so great, tliat we can scarce tliink at first hut that an unjust or im-
puissant Beingliad formed the universe, or that a malevolent principle
had troubled as much as he could the order established by a bene-
ficent principle. To prove what I advance, it suffices to make some
remarks on our species. Considering this species in general, or in
each of its individuals in particular, man seems at first sight an ac-
complished creature : there is nothing better conceived, nothing more
perfect than his external structure ; nothing better proportioned to
his nature, or his use, than his limbs and sensitive faculties. Ana-
tomy discovers in his body a thousand admirable parts, which by
their connexion, relation, and destination, make a whole still more
admirable.

" Considering man on the side of his mental faculties, he thinks,
he generalizes his ideas, lie judges of their relations and of their op-
positions ; lie determines, he acts ; he invests his ideas with terms or
arbitrary signs; he perfects his imagination and his memory; he
communicates his thoughts, he perfects all his faculties, lie learns arts,
sciences, and entire nature is submitted to him. But these perfec-
tions of man are amply counterbalanced by his defects. This body
so accomplished is a prey to all evils : hunger, thirst, and other na-
tural needs, an infinite number of diseases make war upon him with-
out ceasing ; accidents of every kind surround him ; anything
wounds, tears, bruises, or kills him ; the reciprocal and continued
action of solids and fluids, the varied impressions of the elements
sometimes destroy him suddenly, sometimes they alter him insensi-
bly, and lead him to an unfortunate and insupportable old age, which
is only terminated by death.

" Man is no better oft' on the side of his mind than on that of his
body ; griefs, desires of every kind besiege him continually; pride,
avarice, envy, anger, render him hard, unjust, cruel, and proper to do
mischief to his species, in doing good to himself. In a word, all con-
curs to show that the evil in itself far exceeds the good.

" Thus, as regards man, it is not badly divided from what Ave see;
for all the other species, all other individuals that exist in the uni-
verse, the entire universe, is the same; everything that exists is a
compound of good and evil, of order and disorder, of perfections and
imperfections. This monstrous assemblage of things so opposite
announces then, first, either two eternal, necessary, and independent
principles, which produce all the good and evil that they can, or a
sole principle, who is neither sovereignly good, nor sovereignly wise,
nor sovereignly powerful.

" Such are the objections which might be urged against the pre-
sent state of things ; but as nothing in the universe occurs from
hazard, but from a First Cause (for against the existence of an evil
principle the unity of design amidst all the confusion of good and
evil, is conclusive) which is God. Evil in general, physical as well
as moral, is a real existence, which nothing could not have created,
for its power would then have equalled that of God, which is impos-
sible. God could not have created it, for God is just and good, or
u
what to us as individuals is moral and physical evil, is not so to him,
or to the universe at large : another cause could not have produced
it, for God has created everything that exists.
" Then we have to reconcile moral and physical evil with the
goodness and justice of God.

" That those evils which good men suffer are not mere disorders,
without tendency to the greater good of the whole, which Avill here-
after he set right, is evident; for God does not suffer disorders for no
other end but to set them right afterwards. But they are necessary
to the present state of the universe, and everything here is in order.
Thus far God is good. When in the future mutations of this world,
he shall render to every man according to his works, he will he just,
and neither men nor animals have cause to complain. The murderer
may himself be murdered?the man who has been cruel to his beast
suffer at the hands of another the wrongs which he has heaped upon
animals here. If physical disorders do not break the order of the uni-
verse, neither do moral. Both are much more intimately connected
than is generally supposed.

But errs not nature from tins gracious end,
From burning suns when livid deaths descend,
When earthquakes swallow, or when tempests sweep
Towns to one grave, whole nations to the deep ?
' No, ('tis replied,) the first Almighty cause
Acts not by partial, but by gen'ral laws;
Th' exceptions few ; some change since all began,
And what created perfect ?' Why, then, mau ?
If the great end be human happiness,
Then Nature deviates; and can man do less!
As much that end a constant cause requires
Of show'rs and sunshine, as of man's desires :
As much eternal springs and cloudless sides,
As men for ever temp'rate, calm, and wise.
If plagues and earthquakes break not Heav'n's design,
Why then a Borgia or a Cataline ?

Who knows but He whose hand the lightning forms,
Who heaves old ocean, and who wings the storms,
Pours fierce ambition in a Caesar's mind,
Or turns young Ammon loose to scourge mankind ?
From pride, from pride, our very reas'ning springs ;
Account for moral, as for natural things:
Why charge we Ileav'n in those, in these acquit ?
In both, to reason right is to submit.
Better for us, perhaps, it might appear,
Were there all harmony, all virtue here;
That never air or ocean felt the wind ;
That never passion discomposed the mind.
But all subsists by elemental strife;
And passions are the elements of life.
The gen'ral Order since the whole began,
Is kept in Nature, and is kept iu man.'"

With this extract from Pope's Essay on Man, which is so aptly
applied, the fragment ends. But while he could reason thus clearly
and ably, his moral apprehensions and affections were still perverted;
and if the name of one particular member of his family were alluded
to or mentioned, he would utter imprecations against him, and ac-
company them with the most bitter homicidal threats. Among his ma-
nuscripts was another document which contrasts somewhat strangely
with the above ; it is entitled " My Last Will and Testament," and
clearly indicates the morbid state of his feelings. It is as follows :?
" In the name of God. Amen ! This is the last Will and Testa-
ment of me, . I bequeath all my property, consisting of *
* in the Three per Cents., and about in Messrs.

Bank, and a security upon the Estate of , in the county of ,
which security is in my brother's desk, to Mr. , artist. To all
my own family I bequeathe my curse for having administered and
bribed other persons to administer poison to me by which I am re-
duced to a very weak state, and for having bribed two doctors to
certify me insane, when I was not so, by which I have been confined
for two years and six months without ever being insane. May
Jehovah visit these wrongs upon them is the last prayer of ."
We have intentionally contrasted these two documents?"look
upon that picture and on this:" in the one case we have the clear-
sighted and eloquent logician?albeit, insane?arguing a matter of
profound theological interest: the mind is seen unclouded, reasoning
closely and acutely upon the problem before it; in the other, we are
startled by the evidence before us of the total perversion of the moral
feelings and natural affections?the mind has now passed into an-
other phase, and is seen obviously writhing within the shadow of its own
cruel delusion. But peace be to the memory of our deceased friend!
The grass has scarcely yet overgrown the mound above his grave in
the cemetery of Kensal-green.

The next case Ave shall refer to is that of a patient who has him-
self, since his convalescence, furnished us with the following auto-
biographical sketch of his mental state during the accession of his
malady. This gentleman (about thirty years of age) presented
himself at an early hour in the morning at the gates of the asylum
requesting admission. He was overcome with fatigue, having been
wandering for several days and nights about the streets of the
metropolis and its vicinity. He informed us, when we saw him,
that he Avas a prophet of the Lord on his Avay to Jerusalem, and
that the Holy Spirit had directed him hither to seek food and
rest. He was obviously labouring under religious delusions, and
after communicating with his friends, he was duly certified, and
admitted. There is a popular fallacy abroad that the interior of
Lunatic Asylums abounds with melancholy and revolting spectacles;
the picture of Hogarth, the incoherency, ferociousness, and mental
prostration described by Mr. Charles Dickens and Professor Charles
Bell, arc expected to be universally met with in all such establishments;
but instead of this, under the present enlightened and humane system
of treatment, the insane patients themselves form veiy frequently
an agreeable and cheerful society, which proves mutually beneficial
and even curative to one another ; nay, strange as it may appear,
certain forms of lunacy are actually cured by the society of lunatics.
Thus the man who believes himself to be Julius Caesar finds himself
in the presence of another Julius Caesar ; he starts back, and
challenges the right of his imperial rival to usurp the dignity of the
Caesars. He begins to argue the case with those around him,?
then with himself,?when suddenly a light breaks in upon his brain :
there cannot be two Julius Caesars,?am I under a delusion % The
doubt,?the distrust,?the self argumentation which follow, gradually
lead to the restoration of his reason ; he then discovers, and allows
that he has been deceived, and awakes as from a dream. Such was
the case with , who, after remaining some weeks in the Asylum
without undergoing any. particular medical treatment, became con-
valescent, and returned to his duties in the world. The history
which he has himself given of the mental perturbation which he
suffered upon the accession of his malady is psychologically curious.
He was, it should be premised, a clerk, or steward in a gentleman's
household.

" From July, 1847, to November of the same year, I was highly
nervous, and experienced a considerable loss of strength and liesli;
spoke sometimes so sharply to those around me as to startle them,
and make them fear me. About this time (the beginning of the
attack) I felt great anxiety for the eternal salvation of my employer.
His brother was lying ill, and I begged that I might visit him, but
my offer was refused ; I, therefore, prayed earnestly for his recovery,
and had the satisfaction of hearing next day that he was better.
(Strong hope, mingled with fear, now took possession of me. When
at prayer something would pull at my back, blow in my face as if
in derision, and, hovering round my mouth, try to snatch the words
from my lips. At night, when in bed, I felt something press upon
my chest, and awoke in great trepidation in the middle of the night,
when I sometimes heard music at a distance. These impressions
terrified me so much that I dreaded to lie down; then again, I was
afraid of forfeiting God's confidence by committing some undefined
sin that I could not resist. Therefore I felt a strong inclination to

leave the liouse of my benefactor, "which desire was increased by my
imagining that the persons in it would fall into apostasy. Hence
I had recourse to prayer with all my heart, with all my power; and
while praying nearly fainted. It next occurred to me that my
employer had become rich by unjust gains, and that he and his
wife would be trodden down in the streets and trampled to death.
One evening, while at prayer, I saw a circle descend slowly on my
head, and afterwards told my Avife that I was the anointed of the
Lord, but she did not appear to understand my meaning. Felt
that I was very ignorant of the Scriptures ; but cxpectcd every day
that the power of God would instruct me, and that I should be
commanded to leave the house on a sudden : so I put all things
in order for my departure. On the 9th of March I left ; but I
was greatly agitated, and wept frequently, being unable to restrain
my feelings. About this period, I began to see objects like gnats
floating before my eyes, and thought that they were wicked spirits
watching me ; however, I felt satisfied that I was anointed in a very
high degree, and that my mission from the Holy Spirit was to walk
incessantly about, and convert the people I met with. As I passed
near to them, I believed the Holy Spirit transferred itself from me to
them ; so I selected the most crowded thoroughfares in the metro-
polis for the work of conversion, and extended my walks daily,
sometimes even into the adjoining counties, and I thought the
people often turned round, and looked at me as I passed, with great
satisfaction, as if conscious of the blessing I had conferred on them.
To sec the crowds I had converted greatly encouraged me in my
labours; and now, delighted with my office, I had special revela-
tions. One night, while in bed, I saw the glory of the moon ; it
was like an horizontal pillar across the moon, which increased in
size and radiance as it approached my bed-room window, and I now
believed that I was to be a prince, and the high priest of our
Saviour. Upon the approach of the morning I felt a burning flame
around me, and conceived that it was the glory of God sanctifying
me for the work I had to perform. My sensations frequently
alarmed me ; more than once I was afraid I should go mad, and
then I alternately laughed and wept. One day, I heard my feet
speaking to me, telling me that I should be a king and reign at
Jerusalem ; and I also heard other voices telling me that I was
Dan, the Son of Jacob, and should have large possessions at Jeru-
salem. Thus, having left my home, I wandered over miles of
ground, imagining that I was forbidden to sit down or stand still,
and, after having walked the whole night, one morning I arrived in
Sion Lane, and was, by one of the cottagers, conducted to the
house, Avliere I expected to find food and rest. The proprietor,
I supposed, was a high churchman ) and I expected all the in-
habitants would come while I was asleep, and look at me, in order
that they might be converted. During the first few weeks of my
residence there, many strange fancies came across my brain ; with
my new companions, and the medical gentlemen, I conversed freely,
and gradually became quite conscious that I liad been under delusions
which have happily passed away, and my mental health is now, I
am grateful to believe, quite restored."

The physiological condition of the system in this case,?the dis-
turbed state of the cerebral circulation, indicated by the muscje voli-
tantes and aural illusions?the visions so analogous to those which
imposed on the imagination of Francis Xavier, Jacob Bsehnie, Para-
celsus, and a host of religious enthusiasts and mystics,?the con-
sciousness and dread of impending insanity, and the abnormal
sensations transferred even to the extremities of the body,?are all
symptoms of derangement of the circulating and nervous systems,
suggesting erroneous impressions to the mind. But monomania, of
which this is not an example, inasmuch as the delusion was not
restricted to a single idea, is not, as Fouville has shown, in its
simple form, a disease of frequent occurrence. In the Annales
Psychologique a case of homicidal mania is detailed, which has been
transferred into one of the American journals of Insanity ; it was
officially verified, and supplies a very remarkable autobiographical
account of a state of lunacy, which presents many curious and inter-
esting features.

" I, the undersigned, William Calmeilles, health officer, residing'
in the principal town of the canton of Cazals (Lot), certify to all
whom it may concern, that upon the requisition of the mayor of the
commune of Marminiat, I have this day been to the village of Brunet,
in the aforesaid commune of Marminiat, to decide upon the mental
condition of a person named John Glenadel, a husbandman, dwelling
in the said village of Brunet.

" I found Glenadel sitting upon his bed, having a cord around his
neck, fastened by the other end to the head of the bed ] his arms
were also tied together at the wrist with another cord. In giving
my report, I do not believe that it can be better made, than by
recording the conversation which took place between Glenadel and
myself, in the presence of his brother and sister-in-law.
" Question. Are you unwell ?

" A nswer. I am very well; my health is excellent.
" Q. What is your name 1
"A. John Glenadel.
" Q. What is your age ?
"A. I am forty-three; I was born in '96, see if this is not correct.
" Q. Is it by compulsion or by your own consent that you are
bound in this manner ?
"A. It is not only by my consent, but I demanded that it should
be done.
" Q. Why is this ?
"A. To restrain me from committing a crime of which I have the
greatest horror, and which, in spite of myself, I am constantly
impelled to execute.
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THE INSANE.
49
" Q. What is this crime 1
"A. I have one thought which constantly torments me, and which
I cannot conquer; that I must kill my sister-in-law, and I should do
it were I not restrained.
" Q. How long have you had this idea1?
"A. About six or seven years.
" Q. Have you any cause of complaint against your sister-in-law ?
" A. Not the least, Monsieur; it is only this one unfortunate idea
which troubles me, and I feel that I must put it in execution.
" Q- Have you ever thought of killing any one besides your sister-
in-law ?

"A. I at first thought of killing my mother; this thought seized
me when I was fifteen or sixteen years old, at the age of puberty, in
1812, as I well recollect. Since that time I have not passed one
happy hour; I have been the most miserable of men.

" Q. Did you conquer this unfortunate idea?
"A. In 1822, I could no longer resist, I being at that time,
twenty-five or six years of age, and to remove this unfortunate
inclination, I joined the army in the capacity of a substitute. I was
two years in Spain with my regiment, and then returned to France,
but this fixed idea followed me everywhere; more than once I was
tempted to desert to go and kill my mother. In 182G, they gave
me an unlimited furlough, although it was unsolicited by me, and I
returned to my father's house, my fatal idea returning with me. I
passed four years with my mother, always having an almost irresist-
able inclination to kill her.

"Q. What did you do then %
"A. Then, monsieur, seeing that I should inevitably commit a crime
which terrified me and filled me with horror, I, in 1830, rejoined the
army, that I might not succumb to this temptation. I left for the
second time my father's house, but my fixed idea again followed me, and
at last I almost decided to desert, that I might go and kill my mother.
" Q. Did you have any cause of complaint against your mother?
"A. No, monsieur, I loved her very much; thus, before starting,
said to myself, ? Shall I kill that mother who has exercised so
much care over me during my infancy, and who has loved me so
well, although I have entertained this fatal thought against her? I
will not do it, but I must kill some one.' It was then that the
thought of killing my sister-in-law first occurred to me; I have a
distinct recollection of this, I being at that time in Dax, and it was
in the year 1832. It was then announced to me that my sister-in-
law was dead, which was a mistake, it being another relative who
had died. I then accepted of the furlough they had offered me,
which I should by no means have done, had I known that my sister-
in-law was still living. When I reached my home, and Avas informed
that she was not dead, I experienced such a sinking and depression
oi ^spirits, that I became quite sick, and my idea resumed its course.
. " Q\ What instrument do you choose with which to kill your
sister-in-law.

NO. IX. E
" Here Glenadel was much affected, liis eyes were bathed in tears,
and looking towards his sister-in-law, he replied?'That instrument
which would inflict the least pain!' But however that may he, the
time approaches, I perceive, when she must die, and this is as
certain as that God lives.

" Q. Do you not dread to inflict so much misery and anguish upon
your brother and your little nephews'?

" A. The thought of this has troubled me somewhat, but I should
receive the punishment due to my crime, and should neither see nor
know anything of their affliction; the world would rid itself of a
monster such as me, and I should cease to live; I should not expect
after this to see a single hour of happiness.

" It here occurred to me that M. Grandsault, of Salviat, my
companion and friend, who is at present in Paris, had told me, about
a year before, of a young man who, some years previously, had come,
accompanied by his mother, to consult him as to his own case, which
presented many features very similar to those exhibited by Glenadel;
as these cases are so very uncommon, I thought that, perhaps, this
person and Glenadel might prove to be the same. I therefore asked
him if it was he who had consulted my friend, and he replied in the
affirmative.

" Q. What did M. Grandsault counsel you 1
"A. He gave me most valuable advice, and he also bled me.
" Q. Did you experience any benefit from this bleeding]
"A. Not least; my.unfortunate idea pursued me with the
same force.

" Q. I am about to make a report upon your mental condition,
from which will be decided whether you shall be placed in a hospital .
where you may recover from your insanity.

" A. My recovery is impossible; but make your report as quick
as possible?time presses. I can control myself but a little longer.
" Q. It must be that your parents have instilled into your mind
correct moral principles, that they have set before you good examples,
and that you yourself have possessed a virtuous mind, to have resisted
for so long a time this terrible temptation. Here Glenadel was
again much affected, he shed tears, and replied, 'You are correct
in this, Monsieur; but this resistance is more painful than death; I
know that I can resist but little longer, and I shall kill my sister-in-
law unless I am restrained, as sure as there is a God.'

" Glenadel," said I to him, " before leaving you, let me ask of you
one favour : resist still for some days longer, and you shall not see
your sister-in-law for a long time, as we will so arrange matters that
you can leave here, since you so much desire it."

" Monsieur, I thank you, and I will make arrangements to comply
with your recommendation."

" I left the house, and as I was about to mount my horse, Glenadel
called me back, and when I had approached near to him, he said to me:
' Tell these gentlemen that I beseech them to put me in some place
from whence it will be impossible for me to escape, for I should make
attempts to do so ; and were I to succeed in getting away, my sister-
in-law would have to die, for I could not avoid killing her; tell these
gentlemen that it is my own self who has said this to you. I assured
him that I would do this; but as I saw that he was in a state of
great excitement, I asked him if the cord which bound his arms was
strong enough, and if he did not think that by a strong effort he
could break it. He made an attempt, and then said, I fear that I
might. But if I should procure for you something that would
confine your arms still more securely, would you aceept of it1? With
thanks, monsieur. Then I will ask the commander of the gendarmes
to give me that with which he is accustomed to confine the arms of
prisoners, and I will send it to you.?You will confer upon me a
great favour.

" I purposed to make many visits to Glenadel so as to entirely
satisfy myself as to his mental condition; but after the long and
painful conversation which I held with him, after what my friend
M. Grandsault had told me, after what has been said to me by the
brother and sister-in-law of Glenadel, who are so much afflicted at
the sad condition of their unfortunate brother, I became well
convinced, without farther observation, that John Glenadel was
affected with that form of insanity called monomania, characterzied
in his case by an irresistible inclination to murder; the monomania
with which Papavoine, and others, fortunately but a small number,
were affected.

" Signed at Brunet, in the commune of Marminiat.
"May 21, 1839. Calmeilles, Health Officer."

For twenty-six years was this unfortunate individual haunted by
this single idea ; his general health was good ; and for twenty years
he resisted its impulsive promptings, during the whole of which period
he conducted himself rationally, and maintained the appearance of
being in a perfectly sound state of mind.

In the same journal another case is recorded of a woman, thirty
years of age, named Augusta Willielmina Strohm, who, never having
presented any appearance of melancholy, and without any apparent
motive, killed, with a blow of a hatchet, one of her friends whom
she had invited to her house, and immediately afterwards gave her-
self up to a police officer. Marc, after having reported this case in
detail, continues thus :?

" ^ hen quite young, Augusta Strohm was present at Dresden, at
the execution of a person named Schaefe, sentenced to death for assas-
sination. The preparations for the execution, the procession to the
scaffold,^ all produced upon Augusta Strohm such an impression, that
from this moment she regarded it as the great and most desirable
object of her existence to be able to terminate her life in the same
manner; that is to say, to be prepared for death in the same way,
and to close lier life in as exemplary a manner as she who was con-
demned. This thought never left her ; hut her moral principles for
a long time struggled against it, until, about six months previous to
the event we are about to mention, the execution of an assassin, named
Kultafen, took place at Dresden, &c.

" This second execution, by the circumstances Avitli which it was
accompanied, again made a very strong impression upon the girl
Strolim, and sufficed to arouse the former idea which she had re-
tained, and to impel this girl to the commission of murder. Strolim
was quite young when she was present at the execution, from which
date3 the origin of her fixed idea. It is therefore probable, that for
at least fifteen years did this fixed idea persist without producing any
other disturbance of the mind, the patient preserving all the appear-
ances of reason, notwithstanding the mental struggles she endured."
The persistency of this single idea coexisting apparently with the
perception of its criminality, and the resolution to resist it, would
appear to militate against the unity of consciousness ; but then it is
to be considered that these, instead of being coexistent; may have
been consecutive mental states; for we cannot conceive the mind
occupied with two different and distinct impressions at the same iden-
tical instant. " Omne ens est unurn and upon this principle Lord
Brougham, in a case of appeal heard lately before the Privy Council,
contended that the term " partial insanity," is improperly applied to
these cases; because the mind being one and indivisible, we cannot
correctly speak of its different faculties being diseased. But this ap-
pears to be a mere verbal criticism ; for, as Lord Brougham allows,
nothing can be more certain than the existence of mental disease of
this description : and the difficulty at once vanishes, if, instead of re-
garding these as coexisting, we view them as consecutive states of
mind, following each other with the rapidity which characterizes the
succession of all mental phenomena. The recurrence of an insane
idea at different and distant intervals during a long series of years,
and the consequent return of the same insane impulse, cannot, upon
any materialistic theory of insanity, be explained ; because, supposing
this diseased manifestation originated in some physical alteration in
the structure or condition of the brain, the cause being purely organic
and permanent, the effect would be always present.

Here Ave may remark, that there are tA\'o theories of insanity?the
one materialistic, the other purely psychological ; the one teaches
that the disease originates from, and is dependent upon some phy-
sical change in the structure of the brain ; the other, that the mind
may itself be subject to aberration. Both of these theories may be
considered, as each presents us AA'ith a different form of insanity.

The human mind derives its knowledge from two sources?the one
is external or objective, the other internal or subjective. Impressions
are conveyed to the mind, in the former case, by the senses ; and
when these are diseased, they may unquestionably become the channels
of false impressions. This is not all. As the integrity of all the
vital functions is so immediately dependent on the state of the cir-
culation, any cause which retards or accelerates the flow of blood
through the brain and nervous system, will disturb and variously
affect the mind. Upon the accession of fever there is often a very
remarkable degree of mental lucidity, occasioned, doubtlessly, by the
increased flow of arterial blood through the cerebral substance ; the
perceptions become morbidly acute, and all the intellectual faculties
preternaturally excited.

The physical cause of this state is here obvious. In the latter case,
however, which regards the internal sources of our knowledge, as the
mind subjectively, or within itself originates ideas which are inde-
pendent of external impressions,?so may these, from internal causes
be erroneous oc deranged. The fountain of our rationality may
itself give rise to wrong and inconsistent principles of action. Thus,
when the sense of moral discernment, or the natural power of distin-
guishing between right and wrong, is obscured or perverted, a purely
mental power is affected. The mind through the bodily senses may
receive false impressions; but, independent of these it may, from the
arrangement of its own internal constitution, form false judgments, and
come to irrational and extravagant conclusions. If, indeed, we concede
that the mind is a principle independent of the body, however inti-
mately associated with it in all its organic relations, there can be no
reason for denying that it may, from various moral and psychological
causes, be subject to certain states of aberration ; and although the
term mental disease is applied to the mind in this state, we are not
to suppose that such a condition is at all analogous to any disease of
the body. A state of aberration does not imply any disintegration
of the mental principle ; it is only aberrant with respect to its rela-
tion with the external world.

We believe, indeed, that a diagnosis may clearly be established be-
tween the physical and psychological form of insanity?between that
disease as it arises froms bodily causes, and is dependent on certain
pathological states of the brain and nervous system; and the disease
as it arises from and consists in a certain derangement in the consti-
tution of mind itself. We have in the one instance, evidence of
functional disturbance in various organs of the body?the pulse, the
appetite, and the secretions generally are affected; in the other, the

ON CRETINISM.

same functions remain intact, and tlie general health is undisturbed.
In the one, medical treatment in the early stage of the disease is of
great importance, and the prognosis?which, ceteris paribus, must always
be dependent on age, temperament, and other circumstances?is gene-
rally favourable : in the other, the disease yields only to moral treat-
ment?medicines are of little use, and may even be pernicious?and
the prognosis is almost always unfavourable. This distinction we
have not before seen drawn, but it is fully borne out, not only by the
phenomena of the disease, which we have attentively observed, but
by the result of post-mortem examinations; for it is well known,
that in a vast number of cases of insanity, the most expert and acute
pathologists have failed to detect any morbid appearances whatever
in the brain. These were, in all probability, cases of simple mental
aberration, not dependent on any change in the cerebral substance.
Hitherto philosophers have studied the constitution of the human
mind by reflecting upon their own consciousness, and the analysis so
conducted has laid the foundation of all the metaphysical systems of
any importance that have yet been established; but if these views
be correct, it becomes important to study the different phases of the
mind in states of disease?hence, the account which patients give of
their own thoughts and feelings, impulses and delusions ; in other
words, the autobiography of the insane may throw considerable light
the science of Psychology.
