Congratulatory Address to Samuel Gaskeflt ESQ., F.R.C.S.E
==========================================================

and one of her majesty s commissioners in lunacy, etc, etc.
Dear Sir,?We, Members of the Association of Medical Officers
of Hospitals for the Insane, feeling highly gratified at the selection
made by the Lord Chancellor of you, the Superintendent of the
Lancaster County Lunatic Asylum, and a Member of this Associa-
tion, to fill the office of Commissioner in Lunacy, take the earliest
opportunity of expressing our feelings and congratulations to you;
and the assurance that, in our opinion, no one could have been
appointed to that office more qualified to discharge its duties effi-
ciently, or more calculated to give satisfaction to those of the
medical profession with whom you will thereby be brought into
contact.

We fervently hope that you may long enjoy good health to hold
the same, and to assist us (in your now more elevated position) in
the accomplishment of those objects?viz., "The Improvement of
Lunatic Asylums, the Treatment of the Insane, and the Acquirement
of a more extensive and more correct Knowledge of Insanity"?for
which the Association was founded.

And we remain, dear Sir,
Sincerely and faithfully yours,
J. S. ALDERSON, M.R.C.S., Superintendent of Nottingham Lunatic Asylum.
W. C. REGLEY, M.D., Resident Physician to Ilanwell Lunatic Asylum.
ROBERT BOYD, M.D., Res. Fliy. and Sup. of Somerset County Lun. Asylum.
JOHN BROADIIURST, M.R.C.S., Med. Sup. of Lancaster Co. Lun. Asylum.
J. C. BUCKNILL, M.D., Res. Phy. and Sup. of Devon Co. Lun. Asylum.
"\\. M. BUSII, M.D., Sandywell l'ark, Gloucestershire.
JOIIN CONOLLY, M.D., Vis. Phy. to the Ilanwell Lun. Asylum.
C. C. CORSELLIS, M.D., Res. Pliy. and Sup. of the Asylum for West Riding of York.
E. D. DE YITRE, M.D., Vis. Thy. to Lancaster Co. Lun. Asylum.
JOHN IIITCHMAN, M.D., Res. Pliy. to Hanwell Lun. Asylum.
JOIIN ITOLLAND, M.R.C.S., Res. Med. Officer and Sup. of Surrey Co. Lun. Asylum.
JAMES E. HUXLEY, M.D., Res. Phy. and Sup. of Kent Lun. Asylum.
GEO. T. JONES, M.R.C.S., Sup. of North Wales Lun. Asylum.
J. KIRIvMAN, M.D., Res. Phy. and Sup. of SufTolk Lun. Asylum.
WM. LEY, M.R.C.S., Med. Sup. of Lunatic Asylum for Cos. of Oxford and Berks.
RICIIARD MALLAM, M.R.C.S., Proprietor of the Hook Norton Licensed House.
SIR A- MOIIISON, M.D., ATis. Phy. to Bethlem IIosp. and Surrey Co. Lun. A3ylum.
P. R. NESBITT, M.D., Res. Pliy. and Sup. of Northampton Lun. Asylum.
RICH. OLIVER M.D., Med. Sup. of Lun. Asy. for Cos. of Salop and Montgomery.
II. F. PROSSEIt, M.R.C.S., Med. Sup. of Leicester Co. Lun. Asylum.
ROBERT STEWART, M.D., Res. Phy. and Sup. of Belfast District Lun. Asylum.
A. J. SUTHERLAND, M.D., F.R.S., Phy. to St. Luke's IIosp. London.
SAMUEL S. THOMPSON, M.D., Vis. Phy. to Belfast Dis. Lun. Asylum.
JOHN TIIURNAM, M.D., Med. Sup. of Wilts. Co. Lun. Asylum.
D. T. TYERMAN, M.It.C.S., Med. Sup. of Co. Lun. Asylum, Cornwall.
F. D. WALSH, M.R.C.S., Med. Sup. of Lincoln Lun. Asylum.
R. LOYD WILLIAMS, M.D., Vis. Phy. to North Wales Lun. Asylum.
J. C. WILLIAMS, M.D., Vis. Phy. to Nottingham Lun. Asylum.
F. T WINTLE, M.D., Res. Phy. to Warneford IIosp. for Insane.
JAMES WILKES, M.R.C.S., Med. Sup. of Stafford Co. Lun. Asylum.
SAMUEL HITCH, ) Joint Secretaries to the Association of Medical Officers of IIos-
W. W. WILLIAMS, J pitals for the Insane.
This Address was inadvertently omitted in our last N"umber.
