Insanity of Advanced Life
==========================

Art. V.?

Grey hairs and senility always command respect, even from
y ~ the most thoughtless; but when in old age there is also mental
vigour, no one can look upon the possessor of such qualifications
without feelings of great veneration. But many exceptions to this
venerable condition, alas! prevail; and as the physical frame of man
usually deteriorates with advancing age, the mental faculties, after
the grand climacteric, then become so weakened, that individuals in
their declining years of life sometimes arc as imbecile in mind, as
they were eminent for intellectual power at an early period of their
* A Practical Treatise on the Domestic Management and most important Diseases
of Advanced Life, by George E. Day, M.D., Fellow of the lloyal College of Physi-
cians, 3. T. and W. Boone, London, 1619. pp. 342.

lives. Thus the great talents of a Marlborough seemed confounded
in the latter years of his life, and his powerful mind became im-
paired ; whilst in the same way, also, was extinguished the active
spirit of the celebrated Dean Swift, as expressed in the often-quoted
lines of Dr Johnson.

" From Marlbro's eyes the tears of dotage flow,
And Swift expires n driveller and a show."
According to the experience of physicians, the intellectual faculties
of man generally undergo decay, as the individual advances towards
" the evening twilight of his existence." Amongst other authorities,
Esquirol and Leuret may be mentioned, who have arrived at this
conclusion; and from the evidence afforded by the examination of
12,809 cases, these writers think that the probability of insanity
supervening, increases with advancing years. Other authors might
be quoted in support of the above conclusion; but the observation
of inquirers on this point coincides so generally in opinion, that
farther illustration really seems superfluous.

In discussing the mental diseases of advanced life, the author of
the work before us considers there are four forms which may be
characterized as specially belonging to the period of life, of which
his volume professedly treats. These varieties, according to Dr.
Day, are?

" 1. Insanity connected with the cessation of the menstrual dis-
charge, with the suppression of htemorrhages, or with the rapid
healing of ulccrs or skin diseases.

" 2. Insanity depending probably on a diseased condition of the
cerebellum, or of the prostate in men, or of the ovaries or uterus in
women, and exhibiting itself in abnormal, or excessive erotic desires.
" 3. Insanity usually commencing about the age of sixty, without
reference to sex, and apparently connected pathologically Avith the
altered character of the cerebral circulation, that generally super-
venes about that period.

" 4. Senile dementia or fatuity."

Respecting " the abnormal erotic propensities" alluded to in the
second division, one of our most philosophic and able writers on
insanity, and whose recent death science and humanity so much
deplore, namely, the late Dr Pritchard, says, "have given rise to a
series of phenomena in human actions, which have been considered
to belong to the province of the moralist, or the enactor of penal
chastisements, rather than to that of the medical philosopher. That
this opinion has been founded in error we are fully convinced, and
wc doubt not that the time will come, when the very nanies of many
offences against decorum, now considered punishable crimes, will be
erased from the statute-book; and when persons, now liable to be
sentenced to the pillory or the gallows, will be treated as lunatics."
The treatment of cases comprised within this category is suffi-
ciently obvious, if the cause of the irritation can be clearly ascer-
tained, although it too often happens that the disease is overlooked
or neglected, at least, until the patient commits some gross outrage
against, public decorum, when his malady then becomes but too
manifest to leave any doubt 011 the subject.

Respecting the third form enumerated by the author, and which
has been admirably described by Dr Seymour, in the first volume of
his recent work, entitled "Thoughts on the Nature and Treatment
of several severe Diseases," Ave would refer the reader to Dr Day's
description, contained in the following quotation:?

" The patient becomes morose, is exceedingly distressed and
annoyed about trifles, and frequently has gloomy forebodings of the
future. He suspects his old and best friends, fancies there arc con-
spiracies against him, or has a morbid fear of dying a pauper. We
must beware of suicide in these cases. I have been recently con-
sulted regarding the case of a rich old gentleman about seventy years
of age, of sanguineous temperament and strong frame, who made a
large fortune by his own exertions, and for the last six or seven years
has retired from business. With 110 definite object or resource, lie
has spent his leisure days in pondering over the horrors of a speedy
chartist rule in England, and this predominant idea is so strangely
mixed up with so strong a feeling of the extreme necessity for
economy, that although lie would on no account dispense with a
good dinner and the most expensive wines, there is the greatest
difficulty in persuading him to pay for the most necessary articles of
life. The smallest demand for money is instantly suggestive of the
workhouse, which unfortunately for the poor old gentleman's happi-
ness is actually visible from his library window.

" Tho treatment recommended consisted essentially in an increased
amount of exercise in the open air, (chiefly horse exercise;) alternate
cupping from the nape of the neck, and leeches to the anus at
intervals of a month or six weeks; a sufficient dose of a mixturo of
the common black draught and compound decoction of aloes, to
ensure at least two motions; and an opiate at bedtime.

" He has now been under this course of treatment for about two
months, and I hear that his temper is much improved, that the
moroseness and gloominess have altogether disappeared, and although
the principal delusions arc not altogether removed, that he regards
the impending miseries of his country as a due and proper retribu-
tion, ordained by a wise Providcncc, for the passing of the Reform
Bill. 1 entertain strong hopes of his further improvement."

Insanity of advanced life. 215

In order to obtain a clear perception of the condition enumerated
under tlie fourth head ? viz., " Senile dementia or fatuity," the
author briefly notices certain points connected with the ordinary
state of the mind of old persons, in which he says:?

" The intellectual powers usually remain unimpaired longer than
the physical. We find, however, that the mind (the spiritual life of
Canstatt and other German writers,) seems rather to live on the
matters hoarded up in past times, than to continue to absorb fresh
nutriment through the external senses; for the organs of these senses
have undergone physical alterations, and the impressions conveyed to
the brain are, as it were, dimmed and blunted. Hence while his
judgment and opinion on the things and times of his youth arc
usually correct, the old man is liable to arrive at very incorrect
results regarding the things occurring around him. Whilst his re-
membrance of the acts of yesterday is blotted out, the recollections
of his childhood and youth are strong and deep. Living almost
solely in the reminiscences of the past, the present holds out no
attractions for him. He feels that the years so graphically described
in sacred writ have come, ' when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure
in them,' when ' the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall
fail.'"

The gradual decline of the mental faculties, in so far as the
change bears on the question under discussion, is then alluded to by
the author; and, after mentioning the order in which memory is first
affected, Dr Day remarks, in the words of Dr Holland:?

"The faculty of receiving and associating fresh impressions for
the most part declines earlier than the power of combining and using
those formerly received; and the faculty of directing and fixing com-
binations or successions of ideas, is one of those earliest impaired.
In some cases, a word, or even part of a word, of double application,
will suddenly and without the consciousness of change, carry off the
mind to a new and wholly foreign subject; and in others, in which
the memory is remarkably tenacious as to persons and detailed events
of past life, there is a singular incapacity of associating them toge-
ther by any reasonable link; and the slightest relations of time or
place suffice to carry the mind wholly astray from its subject. In
reference to the decay of memory, the power of recollecting words
and names is lost earlier and more readily than that of events; the
ideas are often sufficiently distinct, while the words required for their
expression are either not forthcoming, or others in no way applicable
are substituted."
Although senile dementia is not the universal fate of old persons,
nevertheless there is often a general tendency towards that condition;
and amongst the various causes which accelerate the supervention of
tliis altered state in the intellectual faculties of old people, the author
enumerates: " 1, Prolonged mental exertion; 2, the too free use of
wine or spirits; 3, venereal excesses."

This affection, likewise, often follows slight attacks of apoplexy,
when its progress then becomes very rapid. In illustration of the
third form, or that arising from venereal excesses, the author quotes
an interesting case, first reported by Sir Alexander Crichton, which
we also transfer to our pages, both as an instructive example of
senile dementia and as a warning to all salaccous old gentlemen:?
"The first case of this kind which occurred to me in practice, was
that of an attorney, much respected for his integrity and talents, but
who had many sad failings to which our physical nature too often
subjects us. Although nearly in his seventieth year, and married
to an amiable lady, much younger than himself, he kept a mistress
whom he was in the habit of visiting every evening. The arms of
Venus are not wielded with impunity at the age of seventy. He
was suddenly seized with a great prostration of strength, giddiness,
forgetfulness, insensibility to all concerns of life, and every symptom
of approaching fatuity. His forgetfulness was of the kind alluded
to. When he wished to ask for anything, he constantly made use
of some inappropriate term. Instead of asking for a piece of bread,
he would probably ask for his boots; but if these were brought, he
knew they did not correspond with the idea lie had of the thing he
wished to have, and was therefore angry; yet he would still demand
some of his boots or shoes, meaning bread. If lie wanted a tumbler
to drink out of, it was a thousand to one, he did not call for a certain
chamber utensil; and if it was the said utensil lie wanted, he would
call it a tumbler, or a dish. He evidently was conscious that he
pronounced the wrong words, for when the proper expressions were
spoken by another person, and lie was asked if it was not such a
thing he wanted, lie always seemed aware of his mistake, and
corrected himself, by adopting the appropriate expression. This
gentleman was cured of his complaint by large doses of valerian, and
other proper medicines."

Speaking generally, in reference to senile dementia, we would
remark, that frequently the character and conduct of the patient is
so much altered, that he often seems quite another being; the
pious often becomes impious; the plenscd and happy discontented
or miserable; the economical and prudent, wasteful or profuse; the
generous, miserly, and the sober, intemperate. Those in whom the
sexual appetite has long remained dormant, sometimes suddenly
become immodest, dissipated, and addicted to all kinds of debauchery.
In short, the entire demeanour of the unfortunate sufferers is often
so altered, that, instead of being, as heretofore, respectcd by friends
and acquaintances for their correct conduct, they arc now objects of
pity and commiseration.

Respecting the management of mental diseases during advanced
life, the author is very concise; indeed, when the complaint is once
firmly established, very little can be accomplished; and he believes
that all remedies will prove unavailing, or nearly useless. In the
opinion of Dr Day, " mild tonic treatment, with due attention to
hygienic precautions, is all that can be suggested;" and this view
certainly coincides with our own experience in similar maladies.
The measures then employed must be generally purely palliative;
and when 110 organic lesion apparently exists, producing this form
of mental disease, if due care be taken to prevent the consequeuces
of delirious paroxysms, should any supervene, appropriate moral and
medical treatment will occasionally do much to ameliorate the symp-
toms, as likewise to improve the condition of the patient. As a
general principle it may be laid down, that the physician should
employ, in the malady under discussion, those remedies which will
remove inordinate action in the patient's system, without reducing
strength; at the same time that appropriate means are used to
regulate the natural functions of the body, to renovate the constitu-
tion, and to occupy, as also to amuse, the afflicted sufferer whenever
practicable.

Notwithstanding the existence of insanity in old people, of even
the most incurable form, human life may be sometimes prolonged to
a very advanced period. This fact is frequently recorded in the
reports of lunatic asylums, and by medical authors; amongst whom
we may refer to a valuable and interesting paper recently published
in the 32nd volume of the " Transactions of the Royal Medical and
Chirurgical Society," by Dr Webster, in which, when alluding to
the incurable patients in Bethlem Hospital, he speaks of the long
period of time some of the patients continued insane. One female
had been twenty-nine years a lunatic, another female nearly thirty
years, and a third forty-two years in the same lamentable condition.
But the most remarkable instance of long-continued lunacy, without
any intermission, was a female patient who had been an inmate of
Bethlem Hospital for not less than fifty-four consecutive years.
This unfortunate and afflicted human being?deprived of reason?
shut out from all worldly enjoyment, by her continuous residence in
this lunatic asylum for upwards of half a century, and having farther
a weak physical constitution, nevertheless attained an advanced age.
Amongst male lunatics, fewer instances of long-continued insanity
were recorded than amongst the insane females. However, two men
had been insane, in both instances upwards of thirty years; whilst
another male lunatic had resided in Bethlem Hospital for forty-two
years continuously. The above cases at least prove that male, but
especially female lunatics may live for a long period, notwithstanding
the existence of their incurable mental malady.

Before taking leave of Dr Day, whose work, irrespective of the
section now more immediately passed under review, we recommend,
not only to our readers, but to all engaged in the practice of medi-
cine, knowing their time will be usefully occupied in its perusal,
we would congratulate him on his reccnt appointment as Chandos
Professor of Medicine in the ancient University of St. Andrew's;
where, although a worthy successor of the late accomplished Dr.
Reid, and now the colleague of Sir David Brewster, so distinguished
in science, and of other able coadjutors, we havo no doubt Dr
Day will realize the expectations friends entertain of his future
professional career. May success attend his labours, and we also
trust his lot may be happy as well as prosperous.
