Near London
=============

 :Author:  Mrs. Bradbury's Establishment
For Tiie Care and Recovers Of Ladies Labouring Under Nervous Affection.




Endeavour to be first in thy calling:, whatever it be; neither let any one go before
tnee in well-doing; nevertheless, do not envy the merits of another, but improve
thuie own talents."?Economv ok Human Life.
Mrs. Bradbury, assisted by a lady in whom she has the
most implicit confidence, receives a limited number of
Ladies, labouring under nervous complaints, at her Estab-
lishment, Earl's-court House, Old Brompton, two miles
from Hyde-park Corner.

Testimonials are subjoined from gentlemen eminent in
the medical profession, as well as from persons of con-
sideration, in commendation of this Establishment. It
has been regarded by tlieiti as affording an eligible retreat,
and as being in every way adapted to all conditions and
circumstances of mental malady,?either where a public
asylum was not required, or the connexions of the patient
considered it unsuitable.

The permanent cure of the disorder is the paramount
object in view. However long it has existed, in the moral
ftnd medical treatment the hope of recovery is never lost
sight of; whilst, at the same time, every attention to the
feelings and inclination of the patients (as far as is con-
sistent with propriety) is always observed. There is no
deviation from the general outline hut such as may be ob-
served in the regulation of a large and well-conducted
private family.

Religious consolation is regarded as an object of primary
importance; not only are prayers, with a portion of Scrip-
ture, read every morning, but the constant attendance of
a clergyman of the established church is afforded, who also
performs weekly service in the establishment, while an
opportunity of attending public worship is always given to
those ladies capable of deriving benefit from its advantages;
(such also are permitted to be visited by clergymen of their
own persuasion at the request of their friends.)

Many are the instances wherein the cultivation, or rather
the re-development, of original acquirements in literature
and the fine arts has proved serviceable : this conviction
induces Mrs. Bradbury to encourage by every possible
means a disposition to renew such attainments.

The medical superintendence is effected by a physician
of the first eminence in nervous diseases, and also by a
gentleman in extensive practice, a member of tho Royal
College of Surgeons, who lay claim to a sound, rational,
and effective mode of treatment of such affections in gene-
ral ; the basis consisting in the temporary separation from
friends and connexions, the absence of all coercion, whole-
some occupation agreeable to the individual's former moral
habits and inclinations, and the application of remedial
means calculated to allay nervous disturbance.
It must be obvious, that cases of recovery in this estab-
lishment, though most interesting, do not, from motives of
delicacy and confidence, admit of publicity ; but undeniable
testimony can be adduced of many who have thus been
restored to the perfect possession of mental enjoyment.
Professional gentlemen attending their own patients,
may confidently rely that their views and directions will
be implicitly adopted, and that there will be no interference
whatever in their medical treatment.

In the construction of the establishment, every suggestion
has been attended to that could minister to the comfort,
amusement, and healthful gratification of inmates so im-
peratively demanding every solicitude and sympathy.
Spacious corridors have been erected, warmed, and venti-
lated, upon the most improved principles, for the purpose
of exercise in damp or inclement weather, where self-acting
musical instruments, with various devices and means of
diversion, are placed; whilst in the garden and grounds
are swings, Merlin and easy chairs, for pleasure and re-
creation. A billiard-room and library are attached, with
periodicals and other publications, and every possible
means adopted that tends to draw the mind from its state
of aberration, and thus progressively prepare it for a
return to home and society.

The house is replete with every domestic convenience,
is fitted up with hot, cold, shower, vapour, and medicated
baths, and is of such magnitude as to admit of being divided
into different compartments for the purpose of complete
separation and classification, often found in such cases so
highly desirable. It is situate on a gravelly soil, sur-
rounded by extensive gardens and pleasure grounds, in
which a farm and cows are included, combining all the ad-
vantages of rural cheerfulness with quietude and repose.
It was long the favoured residence of the celebrated John
Hunter, and is considered by the faculty, from the salubrity
of its temperature, the excellence of its springs, with many
other advantages, to be the Montpelier of the metropolis.
Distinct sitting rooms may be had, with the invalid's ser-
vants, if necessary, with the use of a carriage; and persons
carefully selected for their humanity and experience are
always in readiness to attend ladies at their own residences.
The terms are varied according to the accommodation
and attendance required, and although embracing the most
liberal scale, will not be found beyond the means of a
moderate income.

TESTIMONIALS.
"Dec. 16, 1834.
" Having visited Mrs. Bradbury's house, at Earl's-court,
with great attention, several times, and examined the new
arrangements made in it for the accommodation of its
inmates, in which their comfort and amusement are so
much considered, I do not hesitate to pronounce it the
very best establishment for the reception of insane patients
which I have ever seen.
" HENRY HALFORD,
" President of the College of Physicians."
"Dec. 24, 1834.

" Having repeatedly had occasion to visit Mrs. Brad-
bury's establishment, Earl's-court House, I can very con-
fidently state that, in convenience of accommodation, judi-
cious arrangement, kind and gentle treatment, and the
most ingenious and complete dispositions for affording per-
petual amusement and occupation of mind for the afflicted,
it comprehends greater capabilities for the restoration of
health, and is therefore far superior to those advantages
that can be obtained in any private abode whatever.
" JOHN HOWSHIP,
" Member of the Council of the Royal
College of Surgeons, London.
" Saville Row.''
"Dec. 29, 1834.

" The undersigned lias liad occasion, not unfrequently,
to visit Earl's-court House, and he had an opportunity very
lately of viewing attentively the additions and improve-
ments which have been made there. He considers it but
justice to state, that he has never seen any establishment
(of a similar nature) in which more numerous or more ex-
cellent arrangements exist for administering to the health,
the comfort, and the amusement of the patients: and, in
his opinion, too much praise cannot be bestowed on Mrs,
Bradbury for making such pecuniary sacrifices to render
the house, with its offices and surrounding grounds, so de-
sirable for the reception of ladies affected with the various
forms of mental disease.
" W. G. MATON, M.D.
" Physician to H.R.H. the Duchess of Kent,
and to the Princess Victoria.
" New Street, Spring Gardens."
"Jan. 10, 1835.

" I have visited with attention Mrs. Bradbury's house at
Earl's-court, both before and since the recent alterations
and improvements which have been made there, and I have
no hesitation in stating it as my opinion, that it is an esta-
blishment of a very superior order for the reception of
insane ladies, containing, as it does, not only all the requi-
site accommodation for their management and security,
but being replete also within itself and its surrounding
grounds with every comfort and luxury. I may add, that
it is calculated to secure to the patient, should it bo re-
quired, the seclusion and quiet of a private house or lodg-
ing, in conjunction with all the advantages of a large, airy,J
and commodious mansion.
" W. F. CHAMBERS, M.D.
" Physician to St. George's Hospital.
" Lower Brook Street, Bond Street."
" Feb. 28, 1835.

" I have, with great attention and minuteness, examined
Mrs. Bradbury's establishment, and highly approve of its
numerous and judicious arrangements. It affords all the
comforts and best means of occupying the minds of those
afflicted with the various forms of mental imbecility. It
contains all the requisite accommodation for the moral and
medical treatment of insane persons. It is, in my opinion,
an asylum of a very superior description, and the best cal-
culated I have ever seen for the treatment and cure of in-
sane persons. The greatest praise is due to Mrs. Bradbury
for having expended a large amount of capital on this
complete and unequalled establishment, and for having
devoted it to ladies exclusively. I can also conscientiously
add, that the kind and gentle treatment invariably practised
by that lady to her unfortunate inmates is entitled to the
highest commendation, which, with the advantages of her
judicious system of treatment, tend to the restoration of
health better than any private abode, however excellent.
? M. RYAN, M.D. -
" Editor of the London Medical
and Surgical Journal.
" Great Queen Street,
St. James's Park."
" 15, Welbeck Street, April 20, 1835.

" Mrs. Bradbury's present arrangements of her esta-
blishment for insane ladies may be considered as complete.
All that vigilant superintendence, without irksome or un-
necessary restraint?all that quietude and tranquillity,
without gloom?all that rational amusement and diversion,
without mental fatigue?can achieve in the restoration of
persons thus unhappily situated, is here combined.
" By a judicious division of the premises (which will be
viewed with interest by the medical practitioner, as having
been the residence of the celebrated John Hunter,) an ad-
vantageous classification of the patients is effected;?free
exercise can be enjoyed without the gaze of curiosity, and
without the belief even being excited in the mind of the
convalescent patient that her malady is known to any one
beyond her own immediate attendant. Mrs. Bradbury is
deserving of every encouragement for employing the best
means for mitigating so severe a calamity, and for restoring
those to health who may require for a time a separation
from their families and their affairs.
" G. L. 110UPELL, M.I).
" Physician to St. Bartholomew's Hospital."
" Nov. 24, 1835.

" This establishment of Mrs. Bradbury, at Earls-court,
is Remarkably well suited, in the size and healthy situation
of the house, the arrangement of the apartments, tho ample
extent and disposition of the surrounding grounds, for the
reception and care of deranged persons, and for affording
them every opportunity of exercise, occupation, and amuse-
9
merit. Tliese important advantages are rendered available
in their full extent to the recovery, the safe custody, and
the comfortable residence of the inmates, according to their
various cases, by the amiable and kind feelings, the humane
and judicious management, of Mrs. Bradbury, which I
have had repeated opportunities of observing.
" Wm. la whence, f.r.s.
Whitehall Place."
"Nov. 80, 1835.

" I have recently had frequent opportunities of observing
the general management of Mrs. Bradbury's establishment
at Earl's-court, into which females only are received, and
in my opinion, it is admirably adapted as an asylum for
nervous patients. The house is spacious, and the domestic
arrangements comprise everything calculated to promote
the comfort, the security, and recovery of the insane.
The grounds are extensive and well-arranged; and when
the symptoms of the disorder admit of amusements, the
variety and selection appear to be well suited to the pur-
pose. I can testify with confidence the kindness of Mrs.
Bradbury and her assistants, and that the patients in this
establishment are treated with the greatest judgment and
humanity.
" A. TWEEDIE, M.D.
Montague Place, Bedford Square."
" 19, St. Mary Abbot's Terrace,
" Kensington, July 2, 1841.

" 1 have frequently visited Mrs. Bradbury's establish-
ment, at Old Brompton, and have lately had the opportunity
10
of minutely examining, and, thereby, becoming ultimately
acquainted with all its internal arrangements. Of the
whole, I have much pleasure in speaking in terms of the
highest commendation.
" The establishment is exceedingly well adapted to
promote the comfort, security, and recreation of patients
labouring under every form of mental aberration, and the
very great liberality displayed by Mrs. Bradbury, for the
promotion of these objects, offers greater advantages to
patients thus afflicted, than any other asylum of the kind
with which I am acquainted. I may add, most truly and
conscientiously, that the very kind and judicious treat-
ment ever evinced by Mrs. Bradbury and her assistants
towards her afflicted inmates, is creditable to them in the
highest degree, and renders the establishment peculiarly
desirable for the reception of patients labouring under
every form of mental disease.
" IIEATHFIELD TUPPER,
" Member of the Royal College of Surgeons, and
Surgeon to the Kensington Dispensary."

" If in the moral treatment and custody of the melan-
cholic and insane, kindness combined with firmness,
occupation of the various faculties, intellectual as well as
physical, without satiety; and perfect security without the
impression of restraint, be desirable requisites; tlieso will
be found in the highest perfection, in the establishment
at Earl's-court House, conducted, and presided over, by
Mrs. Bradbury.
" It is due to this lady, to promulgate the fact, that in
addition to the refinement and appliances calculated to
n
soothe, to engage, and to amuse the more tractable of her
inmates, she, more than twenty years ago, adopted and
fully carried out in her establishment, the system of con-
ciliation, and non-restraint, now deemed so essential and
salutary towards the more boisterous. This suggestion, as
well as the discreet administration of the principle, was
the offspring of her own superior intellect, the result of
which, has been great success in the restoration of persons
submitted to her charge. This power is equally displayed
in the management of her whole establishment, (in which
she is now assisted by an energetic and experienced co-
adjutor) which exhibits all the characteristics of a well
conducted family, or a boarding house, rather than an
asylum for the invalid.
" JOSEPH MOORE, M.D.
" Saville How,
" Dec. 1842."

" Having inspected Earl's-court House, I have much
pleasure in saying, that the mild and liberal treatment, and
excellent classification of the patients, as well as the
general good management observed there, reflects the
highest credit upon Mrs. Bradbury, and, in my opinion,
entitles her establishment to be considered one of the best
in this country, for the security and comfort of ladies
afflicted with nervous maladies.
" R. J. HOOPER, Surgeon.
" London Road, Southwark,
" Feb. 11, 1843."
12

" I have had occasion repeatedly to visit Mrs. Bradbury's
establishment for insane ladies, at Earl's-court House, Old
Brompton, and have great pleasure in expressing my satis-
faction with all the arrangements, for the accommodation
and management of the inmates.
? ROBERT LISTON,
" 5, Clifford Street,
" March 25, 1843."

" During the absence of the regular medical attendant,
1 professionally visited Earl's-court House, and thus had
ample opportunity of judging of its superior merits as a
retreat for the nervously affected. It is carried on with
the greatest liberality and solicitude, the mild and affec-
tionate system adopted by Mrs. Bradbury has been most
successful. The number of cures effected, speak more in its
favour than any individual testimony; yet I cannot refrain
from expressing my opinion, that it is invaluable, and con-
gratulate the friends of the mentally infirm that such an
establishment exists.
?
" MATTHEW BAG-NELL LEFEBURE,
" Member of the Royal College
of Surgeons, London.
" Castle Town,
Berehaven,
Ireland,
" April 18, 1843."

" Having ropeatcdly had occasion to visit Mrs. Bradbury's
establishment at Earl's-court, and being acquainted with
13
that lady, and her method of treating those mentally
afflicted, I can conscientiously recommend her system,
under which patients enjoy as much liberty as is consistent
?with their safety, and are rather watched and restrained
than coerced. Her benevolence of character and long ex-
perience in the management of these cases, has taught her,
regardless of trouble and expense, to apply in the most
liberal manner every invention that has yet been devised
to amuse and instruct the patients. By the constant vigi-
lance and perpetual supervision of Mrs. Bradbury and her
assistants, the utmost caution is exercised that the plans
of treatment may be carried out by the attendants with
proper gentleness and respect, and that no undue harsh-
ness shall ever be permitted. It affords me great satisfac-
tion to be able also to testify to the obvious salubrity of
the situation, and to the unusual extent and beauty of
the pleasure grounds. Altogether, the arrangements are
eminently calculated to promote the restoration of mental
and physical health.
? H. P. ROBARTS,
" Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons.
"11, Great Coram Street,
"4th July, 1848,"
"27th July, 1848.

" Having had frequent occasion to visit this establish-
ment, ' so long and highly reputed for the cure and relief
of thoso suffering from mental disease,' I can with much
truth accord to its management, under Mrs. Bradbury,
a constant, untiring energy and devotion towards the care,
comfort, and even amusement of the patients. Earl s-court
14
House is large and well ordered, with a wide range of
pleasure ground, and a cottage detached.
" The institution is quiet and retired, although so near
the metropolis, and was formerly the residence of tho cele-
brated surgeon and comparative anatomist, John Hunter.
"W. TURNER, M.R.S., L.A.C.
"31, Lower Phillimore Place, Kensington."
" I have frequently visited Earl's-court House, and have
had opportunities of examining the arrangements and mode
of conducting Mrs. Bradbury's establishment, and I highly
approve of the kind and judicious method of treatment, as
I have seen the salutary effects of this management very
strikingly exemplified in one case under my care.
" I would strongly recommend this retreat to the notice
of all parties desirous of securing the advantages of kind
and conciliatory attention to tho insane. Tho grounds aro
spacious and airy, and the house is in every respect suit-
able for the reception of ladies nervously affected.
" JAMES C. CUMMING, M.D.
" Lowndes Street, Belgrave Square,
" 1st October, 1848."

" I have great pleasure in affording my testimony to the
kindness and order with which tho establishment at Earl's-
court House, under the care of Mrs. Bradbury, is con-
ducted. Not only is everything done for tho peculiar class
15
of cases which are treated under its roof, which medical
science or humanity can suggest, but the situation of the
place itself is one peculiarly well adapted for assisting
the judicious efforts of Mrs. Bradbury and her coadjutors.
I have jDersonally witnessed the arrangements at Earl's-
court House, and can conscientiously state that they meet
with my cordial approval, as being well adapted to promote
a restoration to health, where such an event is possible ;
and where it is not, to secure the greatest amount of com-
fort and enjoyment compatible with the condition of its
afflicted inmates.
"EDWIN LANKESTER, M.D., F.R.S.,
" Physician to the Royal Verulam Dispensary.
" 22, Old Burlington Street,
" 12th October, 1848."

" From a knowledge of Earl's-court House during several
years, I can bear testimony to its excellent management
under the very judicious superintendence of Mrs. Bradbury,
and to her admirable arrangements for the care, kind treat-
ment, and recovery of the insane ladies under her charge.
Tlio house is spacious, airy, well situated, and excellently
adapted for these important objects. The grounds are ex-
tensive and well laid out, combining ample accommodation
for the recreation and exercise of the patients, with perfect
security for their safety and retirement.
" R. I. POLLOCK, Surgeon.
" Path Place, Kensington,
"Oct. 13, 1848."
JG

" Having some time since had the medical superintend-
ance of Earl's court House, conducted by Mrs. Bradbury,
I was enabled to observe closely the internal arrangements,
as well as the judicious classification adopted in this im-
portant establishment.
" Nothing can, in my opinion, contribute more to the
restoration of a disordered mind, than the peculiar salubrity
of the air, extent of pleasure grounds, most admirably
arranged, as well for the amusement as the security of the
unfortunate inmates, which this retreat affords in an
eminent degree. To these advantages are added the long
and extensive experience, humane and zealous treatment
of Mrs. Bradbury, and her able coadjutor, which cannot
fail to render it one of the most desirable asylums in the
neighbourhood of London.
" JOHN PROPER!'.
" New Cavendish Street,
"Oct. 14, 1848."
Kavill k Edward*, Printer*, 1, Cliando* Street, Covent Harden.
