Towards Mental Health in School
================================

:Author: C. Roger Myers, M.A., Ph.D. University of Toronto
Press, pp. 151. 7s.

This is an excellent little book written for
teachers. It is brief, clear and, if in places a
little too dogmatic and unduly optimistic, it is
none the worse for that.

As the author says, education is largely a
waste of effort if the recipient is not in good
health, but while teachers have done much in
the past to promote physical health, they pay
scant attention to the mental health of these
pupils, which is even more important.

If we are to keep mentally healthy we must
face facts, and two chapters are devoted to the
exposition of the true facts, as to the frequency
and nature of mental illness and to exploding
false notions commonly held by the lay public
regarding them.

The next two chapters are devoted to mental
defect, which the author very rightly describes
as a minor problem compared with mental
illness. This is a point that might well be taken
in this country, where intellectual impairment
is still erroneously regarded as far more impor-
tant than emotional impairment. The causes
of mental deficiency are discussed; and if the
author lays less stress on heredity than some
would consider justifiable, he rightly points out
that while mental defectives cannot be improved
in their mental capacity, they can all be raised
to the limits of their capacity by careful and
suitable instruction. Many teachers would do
well to take to heart the remark, " It would be as
senseless to whip a weak child for failing to lift
a heavy weight as to punish a mentally defective
child for failing to add or spell correctly."
The mental diseases are next discussed with
remarkable accuracy, considering the simple
language used. Exception might be taken to the
implication that the functional psychoses are
nothing but perpetuations of faulty habits of
adjustment to environment acquired in child-
hood, but nothing but good can come of the
exhortation to teachers to do their best to help
children to free themselves from, or better still
to avoid faulty attitudes towards life. Amongst
the methods, perhaps one of the most important
is the avoidance of too much competition,
especially speed tests, for in these the same
children will almost always lead and the same
group will always fail, and whether the over-
weaning conceit induced in the first group or the
inferiority of the last is the greater evil is a
moot point.

In the second part of the book, which deals
more specifically with the problem of the child
in school, these faults are excellently described
and the proper attitude of the teacher is outlined.
The latter is specially warned that the naughty
child is much more likely to be emotionally
healthy than the over-good child, and a very
true adage is quoted: "There are three main
principles to employ in the treatment of the
timid child ", or, indeed, of any child. " The
first is tact, the second is tact, and the third is
tact." Finally, there is a valuable chapter on
the preservation of the teacher's own mental
health, for, as has been statistically proved, it is
found that there is a greater proportion of
emotionally unstable children in the classes of
teachers who are themselves not well adjusted
in their emotions, than in those with a sane
and calm outlook on life.

Altogether an admirable little book which all
might read with profit.
