The Measurement of Abilities
=============================

:Type: Book Reviews
:Author: P. E. Vernon,
M.A., Ph.D. The University of London
Press. 10s. 6d. net.

This book is intended for teachers and
examiners, and for psychologists with scientific
or clinical interests. The author makes no
attempt to describe in detail the large variety of
mental tests at present in use. He outlines the
principles of test construction and procedure and
gives a brief comprehensive list of available tests
with particulars as to the publisher and nature
of each. He draws attention to the difficulties
and dangers which arise in using mental tests
and indicates the chief methods of interpreting
the significance of the results obtained.
A considerable part of the book is devoted to
a discussion of the defects of examinations and
Present day methods of marking. The reader
introduced to simple statistical methods of
tabulating marks and calculating the Mean and
Standard Deviation of a normal distribution.
The author shows the way in which the standard
deviation can be used for the measurement of
Cental ability, discusses the merits and limita-
tions of other methods of measurement and
illustrates the method of estimating the relia-
bility of, and correlation between mental tests.
The author's treatment of the principles of
correlation and the statistical analysis of
numerical data is neither as simple as he promises
the reader it will be nor as clear as the student
with more scientific interests would wish, and
?ne is left to apply algebraic formulae by rule of
thumb with no very adequate idea as to the real
nature of the calculations carried out.
The qualities of good mental tests are carefully
considered and much sound, simple advice is
given concerning the choice and use of appro-
priate tests.

The last few chapters of the book are devoted,
almost entirely, to the possible improvement of
Present day examination methods. The writer
ls keenly aware of the problems involved?
alniost too keenly. The book will appeal to
teachers and examiners more than to students
and psychologists interested in scientific or
clinical work, but the author's contact with his
Particular problem, his experience and balanced
Judgment, make the book well worth reading by
those who are interested in the uses of mental
tests. As an introduction to the principles
Underlying mental measurement it undoubtedly
covers the ground better than any one book yet
Published.
J.C.R.
