Your Brain and Its Story
=========================

:Author: R. J. A. Berry,
M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.S.E., Director of
Medical Services, Stoke Park Colony,
Bristol. Oxford University Press. 7s. 6d.

The curiosity aroused in most people by the
sight of a human brain delivered from its
covering membranes is often damped by the
intellectual effort required to understand the
complicated architecture of this amazing machine.
Many anatomists have tried to tell its story
simply in books designed for the lay public.
Professor Berry, unlike some others, has been
at great pains to make his design suit his public.
He has enlisted the help of three lay representa-
tives, an education officer, a lawyer, and a
journalist, all of whom gave advice on the
manuscript.

The book surveys a vast amount of knowledge.
It traces the evolution of the nervous system
during the ages of geological time from simple
beginnings in the worms of the Cambrian mud,
through fish, and giant reptiles (" four times the
height of a man and not quite the length of a
cricket pitch ") to mammals and so to man.
The brains of these various animals are very
clearly described and contrasted. Professor
Berry then describes the many sense organs of
man, and also the microscopic structure of that
part of the brain which subserves intellect. He
illustrates the nature of nervous reflex action by
such familiar annoyances as toothache and
blushing, and by a contemplation of the neuronic
machinery concerned in the vocabulary of
Shakespeare. There are two chapters on mental
deficiency, in which the writer tilts at the
antiquated McNaughton rules, and toys, perhaps
too seriously, with euthanasia, without any regard
to the evil social reverberations which might
follow its practice.

An extraordinary amount of information is
conveyed in these 158 small pages. Although
the argument is greatly condensed, the reader
must not expect to find it correspondingly
simplified. The reading demands much thought.
Professor Berry scores, and scores heavily, over
other popular writers on the brain with his
diagrams and photographs. These are many,
all excellent and some exquisite. So apt and
informative are these illustrations that the book
can be re-read from them alone. They are
Printed with that masterly clarity which we
exPect from the Oxford University Press.
T. A. Munro.
