Some Reconstructive Movements Within the Kindergarten
======================================================== 

 :Author:  Luella A. Palmer,
Assistant Director of Kindergartens, New York City.

Within the past few months interest has been renewed in the
discussion of the value of the kindergarten as training for little children. This is largely due to the somewhat different methods which
are being offered by Signora Montessori' in her Italian schools.
Many educators and parents have expressed opinions showing that
their ideas of the kindergarten are based upon a belief that it holds
to a certain theory and practice which in many ways and in many
places havef been outgrown. Where kindergartners have accepted
Froebel's attitude towards education rather than confined themselves
to the details of his pedagogy, there is a steady and progressive
change going on which augurs well for the future of the kindergarten
as an institution.

Froebel studied little children, their interests, their actions,
their questions, their responses; he studied the world about him,
its ideals and social forms; he studied the way in which the individual
grew into acceptance of race judgments. He concluded that education ought to be the guidance of the human being toward social
standards and values through the utilization of the individual energy
which was seeking an outlet. In formulating this idea definitely as a
method he made many mistakes according to the beliefs of today, (1)
because he knew so much less than we do of the child's instincts and
the development of his mental powers, (2) because social as well as
educational standards and values have changed, and (3) because
life itself rather than abstract formulae has been found to present
the most efficient means for education. Yet?there is so much
which is fundamental and vital in even the details which Froebel
suggested that through following these, educators have found it
possible to take the step which now enables them to look back and
pick out the flaws.

Froebel's ideas in pedagogy were so different from those prevailing in his time that the first Froebelian teachers needed to be persons
of deep insight and faith to accept them. All of his ideas were
received with equal enthusiasm. Since his time our knowledge of
philosophy and psychology has grown and in pedagogy some of the
ideas which Froebel first stated are taken as axioms. Misunderstanding of the kindergarten is arising because it is not known that
many kinclergartners are discarding what is outgrown in the philosophical, psychological and scientific views of Froebel while still retaining the name, "kindergarten". It is felt that the name belongs not
to any body of distinctive formulated practices but to an institution
where Froebel's attitude is maintained in the education of five year
old children.

The following are a few points which have only lately been
accepted as truths and the realization of which has greatly influenced
pedagogical practice in the kindergarten.

I. Education is a continuous process. In order to make the
kindergarten felt as an influence in the educational world, it was
necessary, at first, to insist on its peculiar features. When both
school and community held that all education worthy of the name
came through impressions gained from books, the kindergarten stood
for the exercise of self activity guided in the right channel^ by giving
materials for self expression. In order to convince unbelievers that
there were values in such activity, the kindergarten had to place
stress upon those results which were more in line with the accepted
standards in education. Such results were the scientific facts obtained
in any experiencing, the morals inculcated in the subjects of the
games, or the form and number emphasized in handwork.

Now that the expression of self-directed energy is felt as the
educational means for human beings of any age, the kindergarten
has lost all excuse for setting itself apart. It gladly takes its rightful place as the step between the home and the elementary grades.
It builds upon what the child brings from the home and by guiding
and developing the interest and instincts ripening at this age, most
effectively prepares him for work in the grades. Many kindergartners
of the present welcome every opportunity which is offered them
to cooperate with other teachers, for they know that education
is as continuous as life itself and that the best education will be that
which constantly appeals to the same ideals, uses the same general
method and only alters its special method to respond to the changing
child nature.

II. Complete development of the present stage is the best
preparation for the next stage. When the kindergarten felt itself
to be distinct from the school, having different ideals as well as
practices, it felt that it must prepare in its own peculiar way for some
distant time when its knowledge would be of value, that it must
complete the lines of knowledge which it started out to give, as the
next grade would ignore them entirely. This led to the telling of
stories which were entirely beyond the comprehension of kindergarten children, it led to playing games too elaborate for them and
hand work containing geometrical and mathematical complications
suitable for high school children.

When great fault was found with the kindergartner because she
did not prepare better for the immediate work of the next grade, she
felt misunderstood. She knew that the child was developing under
her care by means which were vital. The pressure from above
made her emphasize the more formal side, of her work, for which she
found full sanction in Froebel's description of the details of his
method. With the introduction of stories, games and handwork
in the grades, the pressure to try to complete these subjects is
removed and there is time to let the children live and learn what is
most interesting to them at the present moment and to gain knowledge which is of use in the present situation.
In giving opportunities for experiences of different kinds, many
a kindergartner now feels that it is her share to awaken a child's
interest to the best aspects of his environment, and to help him gain
enough knowledge about them to want to learn more. In other
words, she tries to develop in the child an attitude of alertness to his
environment, of selecting for consideration the best that there is in
it and of learning something worth while about it. She does not need
to exhaust its details, the child will have an opportunity to develop
the subject later in the school. In the games the kindergartner is
learning to give those only which the child enjoys, as she realizes
TABITHA
A MEMBER OF THE KINDERGARTEN FAMILY.
TABITHA
A MEMBER OF THE KINDERGARTEN FAMILY.
100 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.

that the more advanced forms will be played afterward. It is the
same with the handwork, she dares to linger over the kinds which
develop the children in all directions.

The particular interest which is ripening between four and six
years is the social interest. Children when they come to the kindergarten have seldom been in a group of equals of the same stage of
development, although they know how to associate with those older
and younger. When they enter the kindergarten they are very
individualistic, they want a toy for themselves, merely for the sake
of possession. Gradually they become willing to share the toy with
some other child and before they are six they gladly control themselves
(for a short time) in order to be fair in waiting their turn. Many of
the exercises of the kindergarten give opportunities for a child to
develop in his own peculiar individual way but at other times the
little citizens learn to take their places in a democratic community
where each one has his fair chance. This of necessity means subordination of individual desires for the sake of justice or a combined
aim.

Although this finding of one's place in a little community is
developed in many of the exercises of the kindergarten, it is seen most
plainly in the games. In the early games, the children all take part,
performing the same action, later the children are found -willing
and able to take many different parts. The later games are of a more
organized type, where the different parts work together to produce
a diversified yet complete whole. Such games show the gradual
organization of the social instinct which takes place at the kindergarten age. To deprive a child of the fellowship of his equals at
this age retards his later development. Most of the experiences
which he lives through should be given social channels for expression
in order that his nature may receive the kind of education which is
demanded to complete this stage of development.

III. Development is through actual experiencing. Froebel's
great book of method is the Mother Play. In it he shows how the
mother can educate her child by selecting for interpretation the
objects in the child's environment. In this way the mother starts
the child's interest in the right channels. Unfortunately the early
kindergartners in America used for its content this book which was
intended only as an indication of method. Instead of choosing from
the environment around the American child, the experiences which
would have brought to him the same values as the Mother Play did
to children of Germany a century ago, Froebel was followed to the
letter instead of in the spirit. As many of the topics in the Mother
Play are entirely different from experiences which can be gained
here, and as the types of experience chosen by Froebel were supposed
to form a sequence and a complete whole for experience, the pictures
in the book were used as a basis around which to weave the thought
for the week in the kindergarten. However faulty Froebel's notion
may be of the act as preceding instead of being part of the idea, he
was nearer the new psychology when he emphasized act than his
followers were when they made their starting point the pictures.
Words about the pictures took the place of conversation about vital
experiences. As kindergarten games were at that time developed
into the same sequence and complete whole for experience many of
them were divorced from the child's real interest, they were merely
forms of activity through which the child was coaxed for the sake of
a content and logical order which a child could not grasp.
Many kindergartners are trying to give their children actual
experiences. Children in fortunate neighborhoods plant gardens
and raise their own crops of quickly growing vegetables and flowers;
less fortunate ones plant in window boxes and take trips to the park
to play on the grass, to see the flowers. The fireman, baker, blacksmith, carpenter, grocer, toyman, living near a kindergarten are
quite accustomed to annual visits from the children. On windy
days groups of children may be seen flying kites or running with
pinwheels; on sunny days, the same group may be seen chasing each
other's shadows.* Rabbits and doves have the freedom of the kinderI
garten room. Butter from the children's own churning and cookies
from their own baking are served at Thanksgiving time. Dolls
will be seen dressed in clothes that are crude, but these are made
by the children and kept clean by their washing.

IV. The materials used in the handwork of the kindergarten
are not distinctive in character. When Froebel sought to impress
upon his contemporaries the educational value of handwork for little
children, he found geometrical relations between certain types. As
he was of a mystical temperament, he felt that these relations were
symbolic of some inner reality and that this reality was also within
man's nature. He developed a series of forms which would completely
symbolize to man his whole nature. Froebel did not have time
to study the child and his reaction to these types of handwork, or
child student that he was, he would probably have discovered that
the psychological response to them did not lead to the logical conclusions which he thought were implicit in them.
Formerly the gifts were uged in a certain series of orderly ways
to help the child to discover "the appreciation of the unity and conJUMPERLY
sciousness of the evolution of nature." Today the time which was
spent in persuading the child that he realized this, is often taken in
giving the actual nature experiences and helping him to express his
own ideas. It is felt that only self expression which is founded upon
a rich foundation of experience can be guided to organize the experience and so bring to consciousness logical values. Experiences
socially shared and therefore enriched have become the subject
matter of the kindergarten and the basis for expressive activities.
It is only very lately that kindergartners have dared to follow
the attitude of Froebel rather than the technical details of his directions. With the denial on the part of all educators of technical knowledge as the end and aim of education, kindergartners have found
themselves free to acknowledge boldly their new attitude toward the
distinctive Froebelian materials and toward other handwork. Many
have discarded whatever was uninteresting or injurious to the children
such as tablets, card sewing, pricking, fine weaving, peaswork, and
have substituted such occupations as sewing dresses for dolls, washing
doll clothes, making toys of various descriptions as wagons, kites,
or doll house furniture. Instead of "gift" and "occupation" the
kindergartner is now inclined to say "manual work" as the former
are technical terms and seem to indicate that there is something
peculiar about the handwork done in the kindergarten.
Much of the Froebelian material appeals to the deepest and
Used by permission of Teachers College.

most permanent instincts of childhood such as the blocks for building,
the seeds and sticks for outlining. Where kindergarten material
cannot be found, children will be seen piling spools on top of each
other, making pictures with matches and edging the doorsteps with
stones. The cubes and bricks pf the building "gifts" with their
divisions are very adaptable and supply the different proportions
in the material which the child demands in his increasing control
over form and balance. Kindergartners have generally been quick
to detect the lack of interest on the child's part and the least interesting material has gradually vbeen collecting dust on the top shelves.
Another modification of materials has been caused by the
criticisms of physicians. The handwork which strains the eyes or
uses the smaller muscles has been largely discarded. Small blocks
will be replaced by large blocks as soon as funds can be raised to buy,
them and closets provided to store them.

New materials are being introduced which are found to be of
value in developing children. Wherever possible there is construction with wood, or cardboard, and objects are made with which the
children can play, such as wagons and tops. Cloth is used for sewingduster bags or dolls' dresses. A very little of the more difficult
Montessori apparatus may be adapted in the near future if it is
found to promote the best development of the child.

V. The child is the center of the curriculum. In the early days
of kindergarten practice the "gifts" and "occupations" as well as
the Mother Play were felt to contain a complete circle of knowledge.
To omit one part was to break the continuity and to introduce any
other was needless and perhaps harmful. The curriculum of the
kindergarten was then a process through which each child had to
pass regardless of what he brought to the kindergarten in the way
of experience or powers. This formula was supposed to give each
child the same amount of education. The curriculum centered
about a certain mystical unity which was inherent in the relationship of materials and which corresponded to some unity within the
child.

This feeling has given place to the idea of the child as the center,
his instincts, interests and powers. It is the nature of the child which
is to be developed in its manysidedness. The materials which are used
in many places, are there now because of their psychological appeal
rather than because of their logical relation to each other. They
are supplied in such a way that the child will develop in the coordination and organization of his powers. Such materials as the doll and
dollhouse will teach a. child to concentrate and hold fas Qwn energy
to one line of effort for some length of time.

Each child is considered (as far as possible with our large
classes) as an individual and that particular material and method is
supplied which will develop his nature toward social ideals. Formerly
it was the invariable rule for all children to follow the dictation of
the teacher and make the same form in the same way. Now, in
many kindergartens this is done only rarely as it promotes a very
crude form of social feeling to follow a self-appointed leader and all
do the same thing at the same time. A much higher kind of social
feeling is developed when the children are making different forms,
each one of which will be needed to complete some object, for instance
when the children work on different kinds of furniture for the doll's
house. Another method which develops good social spirit is to let
the children experiment and find out the best way to make an object,
for instance a soldier's cap, and then have all copy the form best
suited to the purpose; in such a case there is a vital reason for following a leader and arriving at uniform results.
The early kindergartners limited creativity to the puttingtogether of elements, "spots, lines, angles" to make a whole. This
is accidental invention. For the highest type of creation one must
start with some purpose however vague, which one is inspired to
desire, then pick out the elements needed to arrive at it and combine
them to attain the self-determined end. Instead of dictation or
arbitrary limitation in the use of material, problems are now presented
to the children which seem vital to them and which they are anxious
to solve. The visible results may often be the same as those achieved
by the earlier methods but they have developed within the child
an entirely different attitude. He becomes alert to problems in his
environment and to reasoning out the ways in which they can be
solved. By these means a child is developed not only individually
but also socially. The bond holding the little community together
is strengthened by the feeling that all have the same interests. This
kind of education is useful at the present stage of development and
also for the next step.

VI. Health is the first consideration in the education of little
children. Most of the kindergartners have discarded the occupations
which were found injurious to the children's eyesight, very few overstimulate with nervous excitable play, and practically none forget
to pay attention to the demand of the little bodies for free muscular
movement. Yet the crying need of our kindergartens is for still
better hygienic conditions. This is seldom the fault of the kindergartner; she knows the value of fresh air and sunshine, of space for
free activity, of large blocks for building, of digging in the ground,
of opportunities for individual children to rest or exercise as they
desire, but many kindergartens are placed in such conditions that
these good things are denied to the children.

We have grown much since Dr Stanley Hall in the Forum of
January 1900 criticized the kindergarten, particularly with regard
to health conditions. Most kindergartners do the best they can in
this respect. Wherever possible they have work in the open air,
they ventilate the room, sometimes clean it themselves if janitors are
careless, they keep the light out of the children's eyes, they try to
have comfortable seats, to alternate periods of rest and activity, to
have the atmosphere of the room quieting to the nerves, and they
wash the children who come dirty,?often the first weeks of kindergarten are devoted to different methods of impressing cleanliness. At
mothers' meetings the topics are care of the child, his food, rest, and
play. Where the kindergartner can choose her conditions they are
ideally regulated with regard to the children's health. Where the
kindergarten has been annexed to the public school as the last addition, it must often take the space allotted to it?a room not wanted
for other purposes. As the kindergarten session is only two and a
half or three hours long it is not thought to be so necessary for the
little children to have hygienic conditions as for the older ones who
spend longer hours in school.

In the investigation of schools carried on in New York last year,
the report on the Elementary Schools gave four standards by which
to judge the effect of teaching, these were: (1) the development of
purpose or motive, (2) the consideration of values, (3) attention to
organization, (4) exercise of initiative. In speaking of the kindergarten it says, "Specific and childlike aims tending to call out a high
degree of effort are very prominent in the kindergartens." "The
kindergartner makes noticeable provision for relative values."
"Most kindergartners endeavor to organize more or less random and
instinctive activities of even their youngest children." "Kindergarten teachers have an enviable opportunity for encouraging the
exercise of initiative and individuality of children, because uniformity
is not demanded." While there are several ways in which these
broad statements are qualified, the reference to the kindergarten ends
with,?"We feel little hesitation in saying that the kindergarten as
a whole meets the test of the four standards set up, in a satisfactory
manner and that therefore the instruction there rests on the higher
plane, i. e. it is good at present and promising for the future." Kindergartners of today welcome all intelligent criticism. It helps them
to become conscious of their failings and their strong points. The
encouraging words quoted above give us credit for what has been
attained and inspire us to press on toward a higher goal.
