The Posture of School Children, With its Home Hygiene and New Efficiency Methods for School Training
=====================================================================================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

 :Author:  Jessie H. Bancroft. New York: The Macmillan
Company, 1913. Pp. xii-f-327.

Since "the posture of the spine, chest, and shoulders throughout the growing period influences profoundly their ultimate contours and proportions," the
carriage of the body during school life, Miss Bancroft demonstrates, is an important factor in the efficiency as well as the beauty of the individual. For here as
elsewhere, beauty and efficiency go hand in hand. Since the archaic beginnings
of art, sculptors and painters have delighted in representing the erect, finelypoised, exultant human figure; but medicine has come very slowly to an understanding of the truth which has so long been axiomatic in art. It is only in the
last decade, as Miss Bancroft points out, that physicians have undertaken to
study the behavior of the internal organs under varying conditions of bodily
attitude. Indeed it was as recently as 1909 that Dr Joel E. Goldthwaite
and Dr Lloyd T. Brown published their paper, "The Relation of Posture
to Human Efficiency and the Influence of Poise upon the Support and Function
of the Viscera,"?a paper which Miss Bancroft pronounces "indispensable to the
technical worker and adapted also to popular reading."

In discussing the posture of school children, Miss Bancroft has behind her
an experience as assistant director of physical training in the public schools
of New York City, and the authorship of two or three other books. She
approaches her subject from every possible angle, and leaves no point untaken
which could add to the strength and thoroughness of her treatment. There are
no "loose ends" in her book. One cannot praise too warmly the masterly way
in which she has organized her material, and the convincing clearness of her
style. The illustrations are numerous and excellent, and the bibliography of
170 titles comes marvelously near perfection.

It would be unfair to disparage Miss Bancroft's splendid book by calling
it optimistic, yet it raises a hope, a dream, and a vision. If the children of today should all acquire habits of erect postuie, walking with heads up and
feet straight forward, is it too much to expect, that thirty years hence we
shall see but rarely upon American streets a middle-aged man or woman with
sunken chest, pendulous abdomen, and flat feet? Some there will no doubt always be, victims of accident, or unusual hardship or a childhood spent under
difficulties in a foreign country, but these unfortunates will be looked upon with
the thoughtful pity which is the due of cripples. They will certainly not make
up so large a proportion as they do now, of the people who once passed through
the public schools.
A. T.
(198)
