Artistic Anatomy
=================

jajJOLT nve-anu-cwency years ago, JJr. Jvnox was m tlie zenith oi Ins
fame. He enjoyed, as an anatomist, an European reputation; and was
one of the best and most expert Demonstrators attached to any
British School of Medicine. His popularity in the north was
unbounded. His practical knowledge of the organic structure of the
dead body, as it lay stretched on the table before him, while he stood
by like a necromancer about "to perform some mystical operation; the
graceful manner with which he addressed his class; the insinuating
tone of voice and smile of fascination (such as artist never yet depicted);
the flowery and poetic language with which he described the articula-
tions of the vertebral column, the ligaments of the knee-joint, the
anatomy of the axilla; above all the ineffable feeling of scepticism
which seemed to thrill through his very scalpel as he unfolded the
convolutions of the brain, laid bare its ventricles, and exposed even
the commissura mollis to the wondering gaze of the most remote pupil
in his gallery; impressed upon the mind the conviction, which has not
since been disturbed, that if Kemble or Edmund Ivean, whose wonderful
* A Manual of Artistic Anatomy, for the "use of Sculptors, Painters, and
Amateurs. By Robert Knox, M.D., F.R.S.E. London: Renshaw. 1853.

Shakspearian impersonations Iwe have often watched with thrilling
and breathless admiration, were great actors, so also was Knox in his
own theatre in Surgeon' s-square, the walls of which have resounded
with applause as loud, as prolonged, and as enthusiastic as ever shook,
or seemed to shake, the Theatre Royal Drury Lane to its foundation,
in the most palmy days of dramatic art. Five-and-twenty years have
since then passed!
" Eheu fugaces?Posthume ?Posthume
Labuntur anni."

The University of Jacobus Sextus?ever time-honoured and revered
?has, during this hiatus memorabilia, lost many of the great lights
which then ruled the day; and the school without, but still underneath
the shade of the academic Avails which Barclay, Gordon, the younger
Cullen, Fletcher, Mackintosh, Milligan, adorned with their eminent
talent and learning, has undergone we know not how many vicissitudes.
There are, however, many bright constellations which still linger in
the departing twilight of an age which will hereafter be esteemed
memorable; and ever and anon a something crosses our path which
biings back to our recollection scenes, incidents, persons, and
associations, which abundantly verify the old prediction of iEneas ; for
they are indeed "pleasant to remember."

Here is, to wit, a small octavo volume on "Artistic Anatomy," by
Dr Knox, from which it would appear that, although his sun may be
no longer traversing the ecliptic of the northern hemisphere, it has not
yet set, but sheds even now its light upon the difficult and dreary
path which the artist?whether sculptor or painter?is doomed to
tread before he can reach the temple which he deifies I But we have
spoken of Dr Knox only as an anatomist. He has higher claims.
His " Lectures on Comparative Anatomy" were conceived in a truly
philosophic spirit, and were listened to with instruction and admiration
by pupils who had attended the celebrated courses on the same subjects
by Cuvier, Lamarck, and Geoffroy St. Hilaire. His translations, too,
of Icedemann, Meckel, and Cloquet's great work on "Descriptive
Anatomy"?at a period when these illustrious authorities were little
known in this country?conferred upon schools of Medicine, generally,
invaluable service. In addition to which his various discoveries in
Physiology, which he communicated from time to time to the Royal
Society of Edinburgh, and published in desultory scientific journals,
have o-iven Dr Knox a conspicuous and enviable position among the
great and original thinkers of his age. There is a class of men so
restless, from the prodigality of their powers of invention, that they
cannot remain satisfied with the discovery of simple truths. There are,
we verily believe, philosophers, who are so superabundantly ingenious,
so curiously and inexpressibly desirous of discovering new combinations
in the phenomenal world, that they would turn Lord Rosse's telescope
itself into a kaleidoscope, rather than survey in a straightforward man-
ner through its gigantic lenses the naked majesty of the heavens, reveal-
ing amidst its clustering groups of stars the gaps, so finely described by
Humboldt, which appear to open into the illimitable regions of space.
It were an easy matter, one might have supposed, for so thorough and
so accomplished an anatomist to have shown the relation which exists
between the structure of the human body and its representation in the
highest works of art, whether in sculpture or painting: but has he
accomplished this in the manual before us ? Does not Dr Ivnox, at
every step of his progress, throw in our way some semblance of a
paradox?some seemingly incomprehensible proposition which startles
us, and challenges contradiction? Before we have even crossed the
threshold, in the first paragraph of his Introduction, he tells us that
his object " is not merely to teach the artist how to draw or to sculpture
the human frame correctly; he has a higher aim." He then continues,
and we beg to call attention to our italics:?

" The fine arts to which I limit my present view, sculpture and paint-
ing, most unquestionably are not, as M. Quatremere de Quincy seems to
have thought, merely imitative arts ; such an expression is inapplicable
in every sense to the compositions of Michael Angelo, the Cena of Da
Yinci; the Cartoons of Raphael, the Apollo and Venus of antiquity,
and generally to the inimitable works of the unknown antique sculptors.
The Parthenon was not the product of an imitative mind; no mechanical-
inincled Saxon could have imagined or designed Egyptian Thebes ....
Assured of the soundness of my views, I will yet go further ; the rustic
scenes of Teniers and Ostade, the landscapes of Cayp, of Hohbima and
Vanderveld, the interiors of Gerard Dow, the compositions of TVou-
vermans, are no more imitations than the grand conceptions of Raphael,
and are as much unlike their modern imitators as Astley's Theatre is
to the Coliseum."

Here we may well pause, and ask what our learned anatomist really
means ? The highest conceptions of genius cannot transcend the
sphere of our own consciousness. We can disintegrate or combine
objects in any way we please; but can never create or imagine an
object, the form of which is not already impressed upon the senses.
All the heraldic anomalies emblazoned in the Herald's College, our
griffons, our sphinxes, our centaurs, our unicorns, our double-headed
eagles, what are they more than "combinations of disjointed things"?
Proceed higher; what can the finest landscape of Claude, or Salvator
Rosa, or the most sublime conception of Poussin, be more than nature
herself portrayed under her most lovely, her wildest, or .most
sublime forms ? The " Last Judgment" of Michael Angelo, on the
plafond of the Sistine Gallery, when analysed, presents to us clouds,
figures, heads, which, in the midst of their majestic array, have their
types in nature. Look at the " Last Supper," by Leonardo da Vinci;
are not those apostles, sitting round the table of their Blessed Master,
in figure, face, and gesture, in every sense human? Are not those
hands laid upon the table designed after the very likeness and fashion
of the hand as it should be studied by every painter who would
faithfully delineate it P Or take the picture of " Our Lady of the
Immaculate Conception," by Murillo, the purchase of which from
Marshal Soult's collection lately excited such a fervour of contention
in Paris. What have we here ? A female figure, with " grave, sweet
eyes and golden hair," and beautiful features, her hands crossed on her
bosom as if in prayer. She is supported on clouds. From her head,
as from a sun, radiate streams of light; under her feet are visible the
horns of the crescent moon. Beneath the clouds is seen the outline of
the globe, on the surface of which a serpent is gliding along. " To
those conversant with the mysteries of religious art," says the eloquent
artistic critic from whom we have taken this description,* "this
picture has a meaning which the uninitiated cannot penetrate. The
Virgin is here represented not only as ' Maria purissima sin pecado
concebida,' but as the second Eve, whose seed was to bruise the head
of the serpent. The painter has endowed her with the attributes of
the Woman of the Apocalypse, 'clothed with the sun, having the moon
under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.' " Now,
there is not an image in this magnificent composition, with all its
veiled, emblematical, and allegorical meaning, that is not borrowed
from, and suggested by, imitative art. Still more unfortunate for Dr.
Knox's paradox is his reference to the Dutch school of painting: the
pictures of Teniers are literally a transcript of living nature ; and for
the interiors of Dow ; a lady once observed to us, in the Louvre, when
we were looking at the "Cottage Scene," where the family had
assembled at a table, " You might see the threads of the very cloth!"
Every artist knows?and indeed Dr Knox would not have troubled
himself to have written this artistic Manual himself if he also did not
know?that Art is, and must ever be, strictly imitative, however genius
may invest its productions with suggestive representations, and lights
and shadows which carry the imagination beyond the dim confines of
humanity.

We are next told by Dr Knox, that " no mechanical-minded Saxon
could have imagined or designed Egyptian Thebes/" and hereupon he
throws at our feet this reproof: " A taste for the Fine Arts, and of con-
sequence the condition of these arts, is about as low in Britain as it can
* Edinburgh Review, January, 1853.

well he." Again we pause, and would break a lance with this " learned
Thehan." What does Dr Knox mean, not only in this Manual, but in
his book on the " Races of JSten" by disclaiming against what he is
pleased to call the "Saxon race"? Who are they? Whence came
they ? If, as would appear from the context in different portions of
his work, Dr Knox levels these aspersions against the English, as a
people, we inform him that his anthropology is at fault! It was very
well for Daniel O'Connell and " the Agitators" of Ireland, as they styled
themselves, during a period of great political commotion, to declaim
against the " Saxon;" but this was adopted as a mere political war-cry,
such as conflicting parties always have had recourse to during the
excitement of great civil conflicts. The French of yore shouted
" Montjoye the Normans, " DieuAide the Flemish, "Arras;" the
Augeoines, " Ralie the Bretons, " Alallon and why should not the
Irish in the nineteenth century, in rousing the passions of their Celtic
followers, cry out, "the Saxon"? But Dr Knox is too good an
ethnologist to recognise the existence really of any such race, which,
according to his own non-transmission theory, must long ago have
been as extinct as the Saxon Heptarchy itself! He must know, that
the English people are now a-days no more " Saxons" than they are
Danes or Normans. But apart from this, if Dr Knox seriously enter-
tains the opinion concerning Art which he has above expressed, does
he not lay himself open to the question whether his information
respecting the state of the Fine Arts in this country is sound ? Did
he never hear of Sir Joshua Beynolds, Morland, Wilkie, Turner,
Haydon ? If he will walk into Sir John Soane's Museum, in Lincoln's
Inn-fields, some fine afternoon, he will there find the pictures of an
insignificant personage named William Hogarth, who is supposed
("'mechanical-minded Saxon" as he may have been) to have had some
genius and feeling for his art! If still sceptical, we would invite him to
accompany us to Hampton Court, and admire with us (if he have any
taste or love for woman) the Beauties of the Court of Charles II.
Here, however, as ladies are in the case, we might possibly, albeit the
age of chivalry is gone, wax warm, and would in that case challenge
him to repair with us to France, not for the purpose of measuring
distances and drawing our rapiers, but for that of visiting the charming
Palace of Versailles; and there, perambulating the polished floor of
its long galleries, we would call upon him to select from the whole
range of celebrated portraits, the idolized beauties of France, from
the reign of Francis I. to that of Louis XV.; from the host of
Vallieres, Maintenons, De Pompadours, any pictures equal in artistic
excellence to those of Sir Peter Lely and Sir Godfrey Kneller.
We could pursue this subject much further if our space per-
mitted; but we cannot dismiss it without reminding Dr Knox that
we have artists now living among us of whose genius any nation might
he proud?if genius were limited, which happily it is not, to climes and
races. Indeed, we have the triumphant satisfaction of knowing that,
30 long as David Roberts, Lance,* Stanfield, Danby, Eastlake, Knight,
Gordon, Grant, Maclise, Sir Edwin Landseer, Cooper, &c., &c., con-
tribute their annual offerings at the shrine of British Art, our own
Royal Academy will every successive year give a flat contradiction to
the reckless assertion of Dr Knox, that the state of the Fine Arts is as
low in this country as it can be. Our only astonishment is, that any
author attempting to write a Manual for the guidance of the English
student in sculpture and painting should so grievously commit himself;
but as we proceed, kicking out of our way paradox after paradox which
some evil genius must surely have scattered on the path of Dr Knox,
Ave stumble upon one which our footsteps refuse to pass without some
special mark of indignation! "What shall we do with it ? How handle it ?
Where throw it p How crush it F We walk round it, like a traveller who
meets with some curious monstrosity in the highway, almost afraid to
touch it lest it sting him. Surely we were mistaken. We read it again.
No ! Our vision did not deceive us. Here is the very passage:?
"Experience," says Dr Knox?Mark! gentle reader! for we believe
fair eyes do sometimes glance over our pages?" Experience had told
me that woman's mind had no real sympathies with the Fine Arts (!)?
that she does not understand their meaning or their object (!!) Nature's
landscape itself, whether spread out before her or represented on canvas,
she passes heedlessly by (! ! !) Her mind is a matter-of-fact mind?
delicate, tender, soft; but clear, observing of detail, devoted to the real.
To her, next to herself, man is all! Fashion obeys; she commands
and creates it?jewels, rich garments, tapestry, gorgeous carpets,
display V Fie! fie! Dr Knox. Is it thus you speak of the sex
whom you are known so much to idolize, and who, if report speaks
truly, you are capable of so greatly fascinating by the sauvity of your
manner and the charms of your conversation ? We will empanel a
jury of ladies to try the question of libel. Were we to do so, we
suspect they would pronounce a summary verdict, and that the learned
Doctor, before being dismissed from behind the bar, would have to
* In Haydon's "Autobiography," reviewed in a previous number of this
Journal, the following entry occurs in his diaryI have educated two great artists
?Lance and Eastlake." Why, we ask, is not this " great" and inimitable artist
a Royal Academician, or even an Associate ? George Lance is unquestionably
unrivalled in this, and we believe in every other country, in his own specialty
and is certainly entitled to have honorary distinction conferred upon him. Apart
from his extraordinary artistic talent, he possesses many intellectual, amiable,
and estimable moral and social qualities. His admission into the Royal Academy
would not only reflect a lustre upon that distinguished body, but give general
satisfaction to all admirers of genius and true lovers of British Art.
il il 2
kneel, and according to an old but not obsolete custom, " sue the mercy
of the court."

As we set out with stating, so we repeat, that Dr Knox is an
excellent anatomist, an accomplished physiologist. The anatomical
descriptions contained in the work before us are deserving every praise
?clear, concise, and graphic. They will be useful to the young artist,
who must commence with the study of anatomy, and who should
remember that when Michel Angelo wished to begin a statue he made
first a paper on the skeleton, afterwards upon another paper the same
figure clothed with muscles; in this way he executed the statues of
Christ, in the Church of Minerva, at Rome, many of which studies
were long preserved. So also G-oethe remarked, that " The human form
cannot be comprehended merely through seeing its surface; it must
be stripped of its muscles, its parts separated, its joints observed, its
divisions marked; its action and counter-action, the hidden, the reposing,
the foundation of the apparent, searched, if one would really see and
imitate what moves as a beautiful inseparable whole in living waves
before the eye." Let the young artist treasure up these observations;
and whatever taste, or talents, or even genius he may possess, or fancy
himself to be endowed with, let him endeavour to acquire a thorough
knowledge of the fundamental principles upon which he must work
out his conceptions. If the marble from its shapeless block is to be
chiselled into a symmetrical, graceful, almost breathing statue, such
as might, like the fabled Pygmalion, descend from her enchanted
pedestal;?if the blank and naked canvas is to be made to glow with a
living picture, the visible impression of all that can be imagined
beautiful in earth or sublime in Heaven!?the master-hand that brings
into palpable existence such wondrous conceptions must know even
mechanically how to deal with the details ! There is no Promethean
spark lying hidden in the unmodelled clay, waiting to leap into life at
the sculptor's touch ; there is no magic power, concealed charm-like, in
the palette upon which the poor artist must make up and blend his
colours, which are of themselves of " the earth earthy ;" he must toil,
toil, toil. No men ever laboured harder in their vocation than the
great artists of antiquity! Talk, indeed, of the mechanical-minded
Saxon!?declaim idly and untruly against the present state of British
Art,? how can such mistaken views assist the young artist industriously
plodding at his easel ? It is an old saying, that, " there is no royal road
to geometry ;" nor can Genius itself, without patient study, master the
difficulties which lie at the threshold of every science. Let the
student, therefore, persevere. He may rest assured that the deeper
the foundations of knowledge, the more secure and perfect will be its
superstructure. Let him, therefore, be guided by the practical anato-
mical details in the Manual before us, which he will find really valuable
to him, and not pursue apocryphal opinions which evince more
ingenuity than judgment. We have seen, during the last half century,
many stars in the ascendant?not a few of which have set; but the
brightest, the most refulgent and enduring of any have been those
