Elements of Psychological Medicine
====================================

24
Art. II.?
 
An Introduction to the study of Medical Psychology, edited upon the
plan of Tennemann's "Manual of the History of Philosophy," is much
wanted; we therefore hailed with satisfaction the announcement of
Mr. Noble's work, and were induced to regard it as a good sign, indi-
cating the progress of a science which admits of being taught in an
elementary form?but we have been disappointed; the book of Mr.
Noble does not supply the desideratum which exists ; and we are more-
over bound, in all fairness, to make known that its contents do not
correspond with its title-page.

In the high courts of literary criticism, it has always been esteemed
a grave offence to put forth any book under a fictitious title ; for
observe the result! Allured by an attractive title-page, the scholar
in pursuit of knowledge orders a copy of the work from his book-
seller ; it is sent to him, and when too late, he discovers that it is not
what he expected. He finds himself in the position of a country cousin,
who, upon visiting London, allows himself to be seduced by a
gasconading bill of the play into a theatre, where the performance
disappoints him ; and, we believe, in neither case, according to the law
of the Medes and Persians, is there ever any money returned at the doors.
Upon this lax principle, we have heard of fashionable publishers occa-
sionally ordering books to be written up to the title?ce n'est que le
premier pas qui coute?and, unfortunately, the title-page of a book is
often its sole recommendation. Speaking generally, men of science,
we believe, are obliged to sail a little nearer to the wind. We do not
expect to find, under the title of Elements of Mineralogy, speculations
on geology, nor under the superscription of Elements of Psychological
Medicine did we expect to meet with a series of commonplace lectures
on the nature and treatment of insanity. But of this anon! When
such books as the present have come before us, we have often wondered
what evil genius prompted some men to become authors. It would
be a curious revelation, if it were possible, by any psychological
analysis, to arrive at the real motives which urge some men to that
species of moral suicide, which at once destroys that reputation
for learning and ability, which the good-natured over-credulous world
is almost ever ready to award io persons who look wise and maintain
prudential silence. The portentous shake of Lord Burleigh's head, in
* Elements of Psychological Medicine : an Introduction to the Practical Study
of Insanity. Adapted for Students and Junior Practitioners. By Daniel Noble,
F.R.C.S., Medical Officer to the Clifton Hall Retreat, and Lecturer on Psycholo-
gical Medicine at the (Shatham-street School of Medicine, Manchester. London:
John Churchill. 1853.

" The Critic," carries with it a world of wisdom?it is a fine moral
lesson! We can understand an enthusiastic and youthful dramatic
poet?snubbed by Garrick in the green-room, and Curl at his office
door?rushing into the street, manuscript in hand, exclaiming,
" 'Sdeath! I'll print it, and shame the fools!" We can enjoy the sly
satire of the noble poet.

" 'Tis pleasant, sure, to see one's name in print;
A book's a book, although, there's nothing in't;
Not that a title's sounding charm can save
Or scrawl or scribbler from an equal grave."
We can make every allowance, too, for the foolish vanity which induces
some men of imaginary genius to imitate the example of Pygmalion,
and fall down in admiration before the creation of their own hands?
but why a well-to-do steady-going medical practitioner should step out
of his path to make himself conspicuous as an author, when he has
nothing new to say on any subject, is to us an inexplicable enigma.
The excuse of having been constrained to publish, at the urgent request
of many friends, we had supposed an exploded joke ; almost as absurd
is the apologetic plea set forth in the preface of the volume before us,
that it contains the bond fide substance of a course of lectures delivered
at a Neo-Platonic School of Medicine in one of the back streets of
Manchester. We see, in plain English, no reason for the publication
of a work which does not approach the void in medical literature which
it pretends to fill; for instead of being an Introduction to the study of
Medical Psychology?or Psychological Medicine (we are indifferent
how the words are played upon)?we find the volume split into eight
lectures, presenting us with nothing more than a flimsy elementary
treatise upon insanity, unworthy of any place upon a shelf near
Prichard, Burrows, Morrison, Haslam, Arnold, to say nothing of
Esquirol, Pinel, Brierre de Boismont, Georget, and a host of authors
upon cerebral and mental diseases, which are at the command of every
well educated student. We do not speak with more severity than the
occasion warrants?nay, Mr. Noble himself assumes in his preface a
tone of such marvellous self-complacency, that we need feel little com-
punction in taking him to task; he tells us plainly, that if his book fail
to realize his little expectations, he may feel " a little disappointment,
but certainly no mortification." The soothsayer, it will be remem-
bered, when wounded in the Temple of Apollo, drew the arrow from
his side, declaring that it would enable him ever afterwards to deliver
oracles. We have, therefore, no scruple in dealing very candidly with
so amiable and so self-willing a martyr.

We have declared?and the charge is a serious one?that Mr.
Noble's book is not what it professes to be ; and in proof of our asser-
tion we now quote the following passage from the preface.

" The author's design, in the present work, has been to treat only of
what is commonly understood by insanity, or mental derangement?
the condition, in fact, so recognised by law and custom?in such a
manner as to introduce the topic in a scientific form to those who have
previously given it no special consideration." (p. xiii.)
Why not fairly, therefore, give the book a title corresponding with
this design ? The title-page, as it stands, has, we have reason to know,
deceived many persons, who naturally expected to find the elements
of Psychological Medicine here set forth in a way somewhat similar,
perhaps, to that which has been so well accomplished by Feuchsters-
leben, in his Principles of Medical Psychology. The substantive words
Psychology and Insanity are clearly not synonymes; in point of fact,
medical psychology embraces a much wider field than comes within the
range of insanity, inasmuch as it comprehends the study of all mental
phenomena, whether normal or abnormal; while the word Insanity,
applied as it may be to all the different forms of mental derangement,
has a much more restricted meaning. But this is not all. When a.
new work is announced as containing the " Elements" of any given
science, we naturally expect to find therein the rudimentary principles
and facts upon which such science has been founded. All university
text-books are compiled expressly with this view; but in the present
case, Mr. Noble's " Elements of Psychological Medicine" is a book
which does not supply the student with the slightest elementary know-
ledge of medical psychology. He sets out with defining "Psychology"
truly as a word of Greek derivation, signifying a discourse on the soul;
but this done, he starts off at a tangent, and very ungratefully drops
the adjective which he has so prominently emblazoned on his title-
page. Nay, more: in dealing with Insanity, he plunges at once in
medias res;?nor can we discover, through the hazy light of his first
introductory lecture, that he gives his pupils any elementary knowledge
whatever?not the slightest clue to guide them through the labyrinth
into which he introduces them. He tells them that insanity, as all
are aware, is the generic term which comprehends the class of mental
diseases ; and he adds?" I very much doubt if any definition that can
be given will suggest to the student a clearer understanding of the
subject than does the term itself." This certainly is cutting the Gor-
dian knot of a difficulty which has puzzled many learned authors. The
students of the Chatham-street School of Medicine, we presume, forth-
with closed their Lexicons, fully satisfied that the etymology of a
word is not likely to throw any light upon its signification or proper
use. We beg to call the attention of the Philological Society to this
important discovery, which may very materially abridge many of their
curious speculations.

" In almost every department of knowledge," continues our recon-
dite lecturer, " definitions have been given that utterly defeat the in-
tention of all definition, which is to render the subject more intelli-
gible than it was before; and this is remarkably so in the matter of
insanity."

"We are by no means certain that this definition of a definition ren-
ders the meaning of that word a whit clearer; but this much is evi-
dent, that if the word Insanity be so expressive in itself as to super-
sede the necessity of any further definition, the author need not have
hazarded a definition professedly of his own, which appears to us tho
very worst we ever met with, inasmuch as it is a definition which does
not comply with the logical requirements of a definition, and contains
as many blunders as it does words. " For convenience," says the lec-
turer, " and with reference to the views which I shall advance in the
course of these lectures, I will venture upon a brief definition of my
own, and ivill define Insanity to consist in chronic disorder of the brain,
inducing perversion of ideas prejudicial to, or destructive of the free-
dom of the 10111" We had always supposed that a definition aimed at
explaining a thing by its essential attributes?those which are common
(genus) and those which are proper (difference)?and that three things
were considered necessary to a good definition?viz., that it should be
universal, that it should be appropriate, and that it should be clear;
instead of complying with which several conditions, the definition
before us is a jumble of unintelligible theories, and, in point of fact, it has
no pretension to being even called a definition. This the author seems
himself conscious of; for he adds, very coolly?" Of course, it may be
objected to this definition that it defines nothing?that every part of it
requires itself to be defined.'''' (p. xxi.) Why, if it define nothing, then
put it forth as a definition ? Why tamper with the understanding of the
intelligent audience which doubtless listened with profound admiration to
these lectures ? But what follows? " I am well aware," continues Mr.
Noble, " that numerous questions underlie the category which I have ad-
vanced apparently so simple." (Ibid.) So then, by a curious kind of
metaphysical harlequinade, the category becomes the definition, and the
definition the category! It is evident enough that the learned author
never puzzled himself in studying the Organon of Aristotle, or the
dialectics of the Cartesian, Wolfian, or Kantian philosophy; but we
venture to hint, that .even from humbler sources, it would be useful
for a public lecturer to ascertain, and bear in mind, the meaning
of the elementary terms which are employed by all logicians in
reasoning upon philosophical subjects. To return, however, to the
so-called definition: what does Mr. Noble, in a physiological or patho-
logical point of view, mean by defining Insanity as consisting in
chronic disorder of the brain ? Has Mr. Noble, in the course of his
domiciliary visits at Clifton Hall Retreat, never met with a case of
acute mania??and if so, has he not observed the rapidity of the
pulse?the hurried breathing?the flushed countenance?the wild
glistening of the eyes?the fierce expression?the contracted forehead
?the corrugated eyebrows?the throbbing at the temples?the burning
scalp?and the intense exaltation of all the sensorial functions ? Has
he not noticed the lightning-like rapidity with which ideas rush appa-
rently through the brain, unconnected with each other, giving rise to
that strange confusion and incoherence of thought and feeling which
has been perhaps as finely described by Coleridge, in his " Pains of
Sleep," as by any medical author.

" A lurid light, a trampling throng,
Sense of intolerable wrong,
And whom I feared, those only strong !
Thirst of revenge?the powerless will
Still baffled and yet burning still!
Desire with loathing strangely mixed,
On wild or hateful objects fixed ;
Fantastic Passion's maddening brawl,
And shame and terror over all;
Deeds to be hid which were not hid ;
Which all confused, I could not know
Whether I suffered or I did."

This state of mental anarchy, this confusion of thought and feeling,
perplexing and bewildering consciousness itself, we can understand,
when we consider that the consecutive relation between ideas is de-
stroyed by excessive cerebral excitement; and it cannot be disputed, for
it has been proved by ocular demonstration, that in all such cases there
is an increased flow of arterial blood to the brain, which lights up an in-
flammatory action, and this we find constantly taking place in the
incipient stages of insanity.

Or we may venture to ask Mr. Noble if he has never attended the
post-mortem examination of persons who have died from an attack of
acute mania ??and if so, whether he has not observed the brain and its
membranes presenting all the signs of recent acute inflammation; pro-
digious congestion of the superficial bloodvessels; the pia mater and
arachnoid membranes highly injected; adhesions between the convolu-
tions ; the grey matter of the brain preternaturally vascular; minute
extravasations and bloody points dispersed through the substance
of the hemisphere; ventricular effusion, and other signs, indicating
plainly that here we have had acute, not chronic disease, disturb-,
ing the normal relation between the mind and its material organ. We
readily grant that we have, in many cases, insanity obviously depending
upon chronic disease of the brain?our public asylums are unhappily
crowded with such cases; but in its incipient stages the disease con-
stantly assumes an acute form; we therefore emphatically repudiate the
proposition (we will not call it a definition) that " insanity consists in
chronic disorder of the brain."

Nor is Mr. Noble more fortunate in describing insanity as consisting
in " perversion of ideas prejudicial to, or destructive of, the freedom of
the will." All misstatements and blunders may be more or less en-
tangled with a certain amount of truth ; thus, in some cases of insanity,
false perceptions may exist from some obscure lesion of the organs of
sense or morbid condition of the brain; hence a variety of visual or aural
illusions may arise, which will communicate false impressions to the
mind; as when the notable knight of La Mancha mistook a flock of
sheep for an army, and a windmill for a giant. There may also, in
some cases?as in impulsive insanity?exist a perversion of ideas, accom-
panied by an irresistible desire to commit some insane act, which the
will, as the controlling faculty of the mind, cannot restrain. But, on
the other hand, the perceptions of the insane are, in other instances,
marvellously clear, and they will not unfrequently reason upon a variety
of subjects with almost preternatural lucidity. It by no means follows,
therefore, that we shall find, in all cases of insanity, a perversion of
ideas, or a lesion of the power of volition; indeed the will of the insane,
so far from being paralyzed or destroyed, frequently evinces a remarkable
power of self-sustaining energy. The will of the insane is often, too, as
much under their command as the will of the sane; and the persever-
ance and intensity with which it effects its purpose greater in the former
than in the latter. Look at the prodigious perseverance a lunatic will
take to carry out any wild scheme. With a rusty nail, he will, to effect
his escape, for weeks and months work day and night, striving to
disintegrate a stone wall; and when not so occupied, affect a perfect in-
difference respecting his detention, and evince a conscious self-command
over all his actions. The indomitable will of the insane (however mis-
directed) must be familiar to all who have had any experience in lunacy ;
indeed, we apprehend that no satisfactory definition of insanity can be
based upon the lesion or aberration of any one mental faculty. We
know that Cullen ascribed the disease to false perception of external
objects, giving rise to erroneous judgment; Battie and Ferriar con-
ceived that false perceptions gave rise to confusion of ideas ; while Mason
Good, following Locke, argued that the judgment was principally at
fault; but from the views which psychologists have recently adopted,
we are led to regard the mind as a perfect unity. "To conceive of
mind," says Morell, " under the idea of a multiplicity of powers and
operations, will always, in the long run, prove untenable. We know
that it is one. The unity of consciousness is at once the deepest,
surest fact of our nature, and the most rigid condition for a complete
mental philosophy."* Perception, attention, memory, judgment, volition,
imagination, may all be more or less implicated in the disease; hut we
cannot dissect out either of these faculties from, the mind, as we might
the different parts of a bodily organ, and say it is the lesion of this or
of that particular faculty which constitutes the true pathology of the
disease. Hence the failure which has attended the definitions of in-
sanity, proposed by so many eminent medical authorities, upon psycho-
logical distinctions which are purely arbitrary. Hence, strange as it
may appear, unprofessional authors, being, it may be presumed, un-
shackled by physiological or pathological theories, and those observers
of nature who have aimed rather at giving a description than a definition
of insanity, have succeeded better than some of our best nosologists, not
excepting Cullen, Sauvages, Yogel, or Mason Good. We cannot afford
space for the digression, or we might illustrate the truth of this obser-
vation by extracts from many popular writers; we may, however, be
permitted to quote the following passage, which will be met with in
Hartley Coleridge's very charming essay on the character of Hamlet:
" To be mad is not to be subject to the common laws whereby mankind
are held together in community; and whatever part of man's nature is
thus dissociated is justly accounted insane. If a man see objects or
hear sounds which others, in the same situation, cannot see or hear, and
his mind and will assent to the illusion (for it is possible that the
judgment may discredit the false intelligence), such man is properly said
to be out of his senses, though liis actions and conclusions from his own
peculiar perceptions should be perfectly sane and rational."+ It was
Percy Bysshe Shelley if we remember right, who condensed this
view pithily in a single line?

"And lie was mad?if madness 'tis to be unlike the world.'"
But the true cause of the difficulty of giving a successful definition in
any science, Professor Whewell has clearly pointed out to consist in
this?that there must be a clear conception of the nature of the thing
to be defined; it must be thoroughly understood in all its relations
before it can be formally expressed; for which reason, writers on logic
in the middle ages made definition the last stage in the progress of
knowledge. We do not marvel, therefore, that Mr. Noble should have
failed in fixing upon a definition which, albeit enunciated as his own,
and impressed with the seal of his originality, is nevertheless an almost
literal travesty of a passage in Dr Prichard's " Treatise of Insanity,"
where we find, at p. 7, insanity described as a " chronic disease," mani-
fested by perversion of the feelings." By substituting the word
* "Elements of Psychology," p. 18.
4" "Essays and Marginalia," vol. i. p. 163.
ideas for feelings, and involving clumsily the freedom of tlie will, Mr.
Noble appears to have arrived at the above apocryphal definition. We
do not accuse Mr.. Noble of open, barefaced, plagiarism?amounting to
what Dogberry would call " flat burglary as ever was committed"?
but there is, certes, a very suspicious family likeness between the
parallel passages.
The hypothesis which Mr. Noble's theory involves, that insanity
consists in a chronic disorder of the brain, necessarily vitiates, in limine,
his ex cathedra instructions upon the nature, treatment, diagnosis, and
pathology of the disease. Acute mania is necessarily excluded from his
nosography, and the ordinary classification of insanity superseded by
one of his own?as original, by the way, as the above definition. All
writers and statistical records, Mr. Noble tells us, " have then* cases
of mania, melancholia, and dementia; and other familiar terms are
constantly employed. These, however, do but exhibit the more salient
groups of the pathological picture; and in many instances they have
little more fixedness than so many dissolving views. For a case of
melancholia may become one of mania; or the two affections may be
present simultaneously" (p. 124). This is obviously very superficial
reasoning. It is quite true that a state of mania may succeed to a state
of melancholia, and vice versa, or the two forms of the disease may
occasionally appear to be blended; but, notwithstanding this, the type
of mania and the type of melancholia has each its specific characteristics.
Disease of the heart may supervene upon phthisis, or both terminate in
dropsy, which may co-exist with either disease; but nosologists describe
each as a different disease. So also mania may subside into melancholia,
melancholia into dementia, and dementia into idiocy, but each of these
different forms of insanity being characterized by specific features,
lecturers very properly describe' them separately for the instruction of
their pupils. Above half a century ago, the learned Dr Arnold pro-
posed subdividing insanity into ideal insanity (the intelligential of Mr.
Noble), notional insanity, and appetitive insanity (which corresponded
with our descriptions of emotional insanity). This arrangement was
rigorously criticised by Dr Alexander Crichton, in his '? Inquiry into
the Nature and Origin of Mental Derangement, and did not maintain
its ground in our medical schools, because the classification is obviously
founded upon psychological distinctions, which are so much less obvious
than the physical signs which induced Esquirol and Pinel to adopt the
classification which Mr. Noble regards in the light " only of dissolving
views." Under the head of notional insanity he includes monomania;
and under that of intelligential (ideal) insanity, idiocy, dementia, and
mania. We may observe, en passant, that Mr. Noble makes no allusion
to this classification having been originally suggested by Dr Arnold;
in fact, throughout these lectures he does not refer his pupils to a
single authority upon medical psychology, which would doubtless
have moved the wrath of honest old Burton, who tells us, in his
"Anatomy of Melancholy," that he cites and quotes his authorities,
because he holds, with Synesius, that it is a greater offence to steal
dead men's labours than their clothes?Mcigis impium mortuorum lu-
cubrationes quam vestes furari !

To return. The views of Mr. Noble respecting his subdivisions of
intelligential insanity appear to be not a little mystified; he tells us
that "the conventional terms, idiocy and dementia, will express the
negation and the deterioration of the intellect" (p. 141); and shortly
afterwards he states that " dementia in its actual phenomena is identical
in a great measure with idiocy ; in both conditions the essential feature
consists in the absence or notable diminution of intelligential power"
(p. 150). Here again we are at issue with the learned lecturer, inas-
much as the word dementia does not express a state of mental negation,
neither is it in any measure identical with the word idiocy. What is
the approved meaning of this word, dementia, as propounded by Pinel ?
It is that form of insanity, says this eminent authority, which is cha-
racterized by " rapid succession or alternation of insulated ideas, and
evanescent and unconnected emotions, continually repeated acts of
extravagance, complete forgetfulness of every previous state, diminished
sensibility to external impressions, abolition of the faculty of judgment,
perpetual activity." In'dementia we have, as here described, a host of
incongruous ideas busily passing through the mind; but idiocy is a
state of mental negation presenting us with the very opposite condition,
for from some natural defect of the understanding consequent upon
imperfect organization, the mind of the congenital idiot is, as Locke
has well described, incapable of receiving or retaining any ideas. If Mr.
Noble had ever observed the phenomena of acute dementia, assuredly
he never would have described it as a form of disease identical with
idiocy. In the next page, it is true, he draws a shadowy diagnosis
between these two mental states; still he fails to give his pupils any-
thing like a correct description of either mental condition. He is not
much more fortunate with his description of mania, which he illustrates
by a rambling letter addressed to himself by a patient at Clifton Hall.
In each lecture Mr. Noble attempts a variety of pathological obser-
vations, all of which are extremely vague, and amount literally to
nothing; indeed, nearly at the end of his course, at the beginning of
the fifth lecture, we were taken with surprise by the following de-
claration :?

" In the varieties of mental derangement described in the last lecture,
in the cases wherein the presence either of normal illusions or of marked
disturbance of the intelligence constitutes the leading characteristic, we
are led by considerations both physiological and pathological to regard
the hemispherical ganglia as the special site of the ailment. But whether
the several modifications which these varieties offer involve distinct
portions of the grey matter of the convolutions, or consist rather in
some difference of pathological alteration which the affected structure
undergoes, I feel it impossible to say. I am unacquainted with any
facts capable of throwing satisfactory light upon the subject, and unpre-
pared with any speculations tending to elucidate it." (p. 165.)
In a state of such profound and confessedly hopeless ignorance,
" unacquainted with any facts,"?" unprepared with any speculations,"
we not only marvel that Mr. Noble should have had the temerity to
deliver this course of lectures, but that he should afterwards have
presumed to publish them as setting forth the " Elements of Psycho-
logical Medicine." Before assuming the professor's toga, Mr. Noble
ought to have better qualified himself for the discharge of his duties;
he ought to have "read up" for the occasion, as lawyers do when they
get up special cases, and he should have taken care to have had a more
elaborate brief before him; for it was obviously Mr. Noble's duty to
obtain such information as might enable him to lay before his pupils
the facts which are known respecting cerebral pathology in connexion
with mental disease. The suicidal confession of his being unacquainted
with any, recoils upon himself, and would imply that he is wholly
ignorant of the researches and observations of Foville, Parcliappe,
Guislain, Brierre de Boismont, and a host of French pathologists ; nay,
if Mr. Noble had only given himself the pains to examine the Annates
Psychologiques, or?and we affirm this without exposing ourselves to
the least charge of vanity?if he had consulted many of the numbers of
our own Journal, he might have alighted upon some facts Avhich would
perhaps have materially dispelled the darkness of which he complains.
To allege that no progress has been made in the pathology of the brain,
either abroad or at home, and that no facts exist which throw light on
the structural changes which take place in certain mental diseases, is
simply absurd, and would suggest the propriety of the lecturer changing
places with one of his more intelligent pupils, for he evidently wants
the information which he professes to teach. In such a position we can
readily understand that Mr. Noble was, as he states, " unprepared with
any speculations tending to elucidate the subject," for theories are
suggested by facts, and Mr. Noble avows that he has none at his com-
mand. In such an extremity, therefore, he could not, like Mephis-
topliiles guiding his scholar Faustus through the Brocken, even hail a
single ignis fatuus to cheer his benighted class.

In the course of these Lectures, Mr. Noble formally announces to the
scientific world that he has ceased to be a phrenologist. " The system
of phrenology," he says, " cannot, I am convinced, be sustained by a
just philosophy." We may here, perhaps, be permitted a slight
digression, for " thereby hangs a tale;" In the year 1846, Mr. Noble
published a goodly octavo volume, entitled " The Brain and its Phy-
siology," which is, from page 1 to page 450, written avowedly upon
phrenological principles ; and therein he goes out of his path to revive
a controversy which, by his own confession, had been disposed of
about sixteen or seventeen years ago."* The facts we believe to be
briefly these : The late Dr Milligan?the learned translator of Celsus
?in the Appendix to his Translation of Magendie's " Physiology,"
suggested that instead of bringing the light artillery of wit and ridicule
to bear upon the system, or fighting upon obscure metaphysical grounds,
a direct experimentum cruris should be made, and different heads and
characters compared with each other. The celebrated Sir William
Hamilton, now Professor of Logic in the University of Edinburgh,
thereupon instituted a very interesting, and, at that time, a very
curious, series of experiments; and after weighing brains, measuring
crania, &c., he came to the conclusion that not only was phrenology
untrue, but that its several propositions led to the very antipodes of
truth. This induction was ably followed up by Dr Stone ; thereupon
Mr. Combe buckled on his' armour, and then a fierce Junius-like con-
troversy took place, and we can scarcely remember which party came off
victorious; but, sixteen or seventeen years after this, it was not a little
ludicrous to find Mr. Noble taking the field in a Hudibrastic fashion,
to again and again slay the already slain. The attack which Mr. Noble
made on Sir W. Hamilton and his contemporaries was, of course, highly
successful! How could it be otherwise ? He had no enemy to contend
with; the field had been already left; the victory therefore rested, as
the book on the Brain before us assumes, with Mr. Noble ; so have
we seen, in our boyhood days, a victorious army sweep across the
stage of Astley's Theatre, followed at a distance by Mr. Merryman
on an ambling nag, blowing a penny trumpet, and congratulating
himself upon the victory. But mark what follows ! Seven years have
now elapsed?the true Pythagorean period for the regeneration of fallen
humanity?and behold Mr. Noble comes out in the Lectures before
us a veritable anti-phrenologist?nay, takes up the very arguments (of
course, without acknowledgment) which were formerly used by the
men whom he assailed. He tells us that his "doubts of the validity of
phrenology were first occasioned by the perusal of an article by Dr Car-
penter, in the "British and Foreign Review" (Preface, p. x.) ; and in
his " Lecture on the Physiology of the Brain and Nervous System"
(pp. 36?83), he details the reasons for his secession?or, in more
fashionable language, for his "perversion"-?from the true Church of
* Noble on the Brain, p. 279.

Phrenology, with as much circumstantial detail as if it were an event
of as -great importance to the world as the conversion of Constantine to
Christianity, or the apostasy of Julian. We apprehend, however, Mr.
Noble's apostasy from phrenology will give the friends of that science
as little concern as his attacks gave the anti-phrenologists, who, we
believe, never took the least notice of them. He will now, we fear, be
respected by neither party, tlms illustrating the truth of the old
proverb, propounded by no less a philosopher than Seneca?inter cluas
seUas deciclium.

We repeat, in conclusion, that Mr. Noble's book, addressed to those
who are engaged in the practical study of insanity, will not supply
them with the information it professes to give; it is, de facto, not a
work on the Elements of Psychological Medicine; and we feel fully
justified in endorsing the volume before us with the Virgilian caution,
"Nimiurn ne crede color i" which we may freely translate?"Never buy
a book from its title-page !" N
