On The Causes and Morbid Anatomy of Mental Diseases
===================================================

:Author: JOIEST WEBSTER M.D., F.R.S.
Fellow of the Ttoyal College of Physicians, Sfc.

Much attention being now paid to the study of mental alienation, and its varied
phases met with in the human constitution, I am induced to bring under the
notice of my professional brethren some facts illustrative of the causes produc-
ing insanity, as also the pathological appearances observed after death, which,
it is hoped, may be deemed worthy of perusal by the readers of the Psycholo-
gical Journal. As the data recorded?embracing amongst other points a
synopsis of 115 dissections of insane patients?were all derived from the regis-
ters of Bethlem Hospital, they consequently possess greater value; whilst the
deductions enunciated being based upon an extensive series of figures, collected
during the last six years at that public receptacle for lunatics, they seem quite
sufficient to warrant the opinions I have ventured to promulgate.

Without further preamble I would therefore observe, in reference to the sub-
jects proposed for investigation that, since the 1st of January, 1848, to the 31st
of last December, the total insane curable patients admitted into Bethlem hos-
pital amounted to 1720 individuals; of whom 1058 were females, and only 062
male lunatics; thereby showing mental diseases prevailed to a much larger
extent amongst the former than the latter sex ; the difference being nearly 60 per
cent, more female than male patients placed under treatment at the above
institution. This conclusion entirely coincides with similar statements I have
elsewhere made, respecting the marked frequency of lunacy in females, and
proves, according to more recent Experience, that mental diseases mucli oftener
attack women than men, throughout the metropolitan population.
Respecting the season when insanity most frequently prevails, it may be
asserted confidently, the warmer the weather, so will morbid affections ot the
mind supervene in greater numbers, than during the colder months. This pecu-
liarity is conclusively established by the larger amount of insane persons
admitted throughout spring and summer, than in the autumn and winter months.
For example, during the six half years, ending the 30th September, of the entire
period included in the present communication, 920 insane patients were received
into Bethlem Hospital; whereas, only 800 entered during the more inclement
six months of the above years; thus giving an increase of 15 per cent, in the
former over the latter period. This result is certainly at variance with the
generally entertained opinion, that madness prevails most commonly in London
uring the cold weather of winter; when suicides are also said to be frequent,
especially in the murky month of November. Such an assumption is, however,
erroneous; seeing insanity is not only met with to a greater extent during hot
weather, but more cases of self-murder arc usually recorded, both in England
and France, throughout June and July, than during the eolder season.

Believing the time of life at which mental diseases most frequently affect the
human frame is a point of considerable interest to physicians, I would state, as
one feature characterizing these maladies, that more individuals became attacked
by mania, speaking generally, from their thirtieth to the fortieth year than at
any other period?474 cases, out of the total 1720 lunatics admitted, being
reported to have attained that age; hence, giving upwards of one quarter of the
entire number, or 27*55 per hundred admissions, affected at the above time of life.
With reference to sex, it also deserves mention that the insanity oftenest super-
vened in females about their 30th year; whilst males became insane in a greater
ratio from their thirty-fifth to fortieth year, than at any other period.
The domestic condition of the lunatics attacked next deserves notice; Of
whom upwards of half the entire number admitted, or 873 patients were mar
ried ; 'tlie largest proportion being however males, 351 individuals of that sex,
or 53 per cent., being so described; whereas, the number of married women
was 522, or only 49'24 per hundred admissions. Of single persons, the amount
was 73G, or 42'79 per cent.; but, were the two sexes compared, the greatest
ratio occurrcd in bachelors, who seem, like married men, oftener affected by
insanity than single females, although the difference only ranged about one per
cent. The result was, however, different betwixt widows and widowers, 25
individuals of the latter description being enumerated amongst the 6G2 male
lunatics admitted, which thus gave less than 4 per cent.; whereas, the number
of widows amongst the total 1058 female lunatics placed under treatment having
been SG, the ratio, consequently, reached to upwards of 8 cases per hundred
admissions; hence showing that insane widows exceeded as two to one the
male patients of a similar category. This fact is curious, and would almost
warrant the conclusion of mental maladies being less likely to supervene in men,
than women during widowhood and its attendant bereavements.

Suicidal propensities, and violent or dangerous symptoms, whereby lunatics
frequently commit injury upon others or themselves, being often common cha-
racteristics of their mental malady, the ratio in which the above types were
observed, in the cases attacked, therefore becomes an interesting subject of
inquiry. Amongst the 1720 lunatics recently admitted, upwards of one-third,
or 624 individuals, were reported to have either meditated, or attempted to
commit suicide. This number constitutes a large proportion, and indicates how
frequently the propensity to self-destruction accompanies mania. Amongst the
female lunatics, the suicidal patients reached nearly 29 per cent.; whilst, of the
male inmates, exliibiting a similar feature, 32 cases were reported hi every hun-
dred admissions. Respecting the number of inmates considered violent and
dangerous, the ratio rose much higher than in the former division; since
upwards of 52 per cent, of all the cases admitted, or 909 individuals, were thus
classified. Like the suicidal propensities also often manifested by lunatics, more
males were found violent and dangerous patients than females; seeing 554 of
the former against 355 of the latter sex were so enumerated; which makes the
comparative ratio amount to_83'78 per cent, amongst the male, but only to
33*55 per cent, of the female inmates.

The apparent causes reported to have produced mental alienation in the
1720 insane patients referred to in the present paper, form the next subject of
inquiry. Of these, the largest proportion of cases arose from moral influences;
nearly one-half, or 48 per cent., being of that description. Physical causes
weie, on the other hand, assigned in 402 instances, or 24 per cent, of the
aggregate admissions, although hereditary tendency to insanity was, at the
same tune, reported to exist in many patients comprised within both divisions;
besides others, in whom no obvious cause, excepting their hereditary predis-
position, could be clearly traced; whilst no satisfactory information could be
obtained in about one-tenth of the total cases admitted. Respecting the actual
number of lunatic patients in whom mental disease was hereditary, 552 persons,
or 32 per cent., exhibited that predisposition. Amongst insane males, however,
this distinctive feature appeared less marked than in females?a larger propor-
tion of the latter than of the other sex coming within that category. This fact
becomes in a greater degree interesting, seeing mothers, compared with fathers,
more frequently transmit mental maladies to offspring: particularly by the
former parent to their female children.

Upon making a more minute inquiry respecting the moral causes producing
mental disease with reference to sex, it appears that, in male patients, anxiety
became the most frequent cause; 93 instances, or 14 per cent, of the entire
admissions, being so reported. Pecuniary losses followed next in frequency;
50 examples, or 7 55 per cent, being thus enumerated. Excessive study pro-
duced madness in 41 male lunatics, or G'34 per every hundred admissions.

628 ON THE CAySES AND MORBID ANATOMY

Through religious excitement, 29 men lost their senses; and 1G from grief.
By love, 14; and through fright, only 4 male persons became insane; although
tins cause, like the tender passion of love, oftener produced mental aberration
in women than men, as the following facts demonstrate. Thus, through fright,
22 females lost their senses, and 43 from disappointed affections; winch makes
double the ratio noticed in male patients, and still farther corroborates my
opinion elsewhere expressed, that insanity is oftener occasioned by Cupid's
powerful influence when acting upon the more susceptible imaginations of
' women than men, speaking comparatively. In reference to other moral causes
which frequently excited mental disease iu females, anxiety occupied the first
rank, as it did in male patients; 123 instances, or 1T62 per cent, bein? of that
description. Grief produced madness in 70 cases, or 7 per cent. Through
religious excitement, 53 women became mad. "From pecuniary losses, 3G
females, or only half the comparative ratio noticed amongst male lunatics;
whilst, in consequence of excessive study which occasioned insanity, as pre-
viously stated, in 41 male inmates, only 2 females were reported, who thereby
lost their senses. Regarding the physical causes which induced mental
derangement, it may be briefly stated, that intemperance proved the most
frequent amongst men?G1 male persons, or 9'21 per cent, of the entire admis-
sions having become insane through intoxication; whereas amongst females the
proportion only reached half that amount, or 45 examples out of 1058 admis-
sions. The most common physical influence which occasioned insanity amongst
women, was unquestionably puerperal, of which description, 70 examples were
enumerated. Uterine disturbance, as also prolonged lactation, and change of
life, were besides often recorded as the apparent physical cause inducing mania
in females; but these were by no means so frequent as either puerperal
influences or intemperance.

Various other causes might be specified, both moral and physical, besides
those mentioned, which frequently produced attacks of mental derangement in
each sex; but this seems superfluous. However, misconduct of relatives,
jealousy, desertion of husband or of wife, family strife, quarrels, and unjust
accusations, were all assigned in both sexes as the exciting moral causes of
mania; whilst exposure to the sun, blows on the head, ana previous bodily
illness were by no means rare. In short, many impressions which acted power-
fully upon individual and susceptible minds, especially if the physical health
was previously deranged, were occasionally reported, but whicli need not be
farther particularised, seeing the chief and most frequent causes to which
attacks of mania were mainly ascribed have been prominently mentioned in
previous paragraphs.

TVhen perusing the report of autopsies I now subjoin, it should be understood,
if no mention is made of the chest or abdomen in any of the cases, neither of
these cavities exhibited any diseased alterations of structure.

SYNOPSIS OF DISSECTIONS.

No. 1.?M. set. 23. In hospital nine months.?Head: Infiltration of pia
mater, and increased quantity of fluid in ventricles.?Chest: Left lung con-
solidated, and completely impervious to air, throughout. General tubercular in-
filtration, with purulent excavations of various sizes, containing thick yellow pus.
Lung covered by an uniform adventitious coating of recently organized fibrine,
uniting with lobes. Cavity of pleura contained about two pints of fluid. Tuber-
cles, and consolidated portions of pulmonary tissue, scattered irregularly through
the right lung.?Abdomen: Mucous membrane of ilium and colon of a dull livid
red colour, from vascular congestion.

No. 2.?F. ait. 39. In hospital four days. ? Head: External vessels
perfectly empty; those of membranes, and brain, turgid, more especially in
substance of cerebrum: where bloody points were universally numerous and
large. Medullary substance generally presented a very faint pink appearance,
so as to seem mottled. Slight serous infiltration of pia mater, and a doubtful
increase of fluid in ventricles.

No. 3. ? M. set. 38. In hospital four days. ? Head: Considerable
opacity and infiltration of pia mater; also large and numerous bloody points on
Cut surfaces of cerebral substance.?Abdomen: Urinary bladder empty. On its
posterior surface, beginning a little below its fundus, and extending from above
downwards, an apparently lacerated opening with irregular margin, about two
inches in length. In abdominal cavity, a few ounces of dark fluid, discoloured
by blood were found, with some very small portions of bloody coagula. Peri-
toneum and viscera discoloured, but not inflamed.

No. 4.?M. set. 37. In hospital twenty-five days.?Head: Fulness of
all internal vessels, and great vascularity of cerebral substance throughout.
Arachnoid thickened and opaque, over convexities of hemispheres. Much
infiltration of pia mater: infiltrated fluid being reddish and tuxbid. A thin
layer of cortical substance came away with membrane, in a few situations.
Cerebral substance everywhere softer than usual, and yielded to slight pressure.
?Chest: The 4th, 5th, 8th, and 10th ribs on right side were broken; and
the four nearly corresponding ribs on left side also fractured. With one
exception, the fractures were in the cartilages, near their junction to bone; but
without displacement. From appearances, fractures must have taken place
prior to patient's admission, as there was suppuration around fractured parts:
especially between ribs and pleura. Violent inflammation of pleura cortalis on
both sides: but extending in less degree to pleura puhnonalis. Thickening of
membrane, and effusions of soft yellow fibrine. Left pleura contained, at least,
two quarts of opaque bloody fluid with flakes of fibrine; and about half that
quantity of similar looking fluid on right side.

No. 5.?F. fet. 49. In hospital seventeen days.?Head: Adhesions of dura
mater to bone so strong that detachment of skull cap required unusual force.
Its vessels, and those of bone, very turgid. Serous infiltration of pia mater,
with increased_quantity of fluid in lateral ventricles.?Chest: Inferior lobe of
left lung in an incipient state of hoepatisation throughout: with slight fibrinous
deposit in its serous covering; and thin edge of superior lobe in the same
condition at one part; also similar appearances in small portions of right lung.
In centre of one, which seemed about the size of a walnut, the deposit of fibrine
was as large as pea.?Abdomen: Considerable disease of left ovary, consisting
principally of various sized cysts; the two largest containing nearly a pint of
fluid each: the others appearing much smaller. In centre of cysts a firm mass
of fibrous and vascular structure. Internal surfacc of ilium, congested, with
ulceration.

No. C.?F. set. 37. In hospital seven weeks.?Head: Upon dividing dura
mater, cerebral hemispheres bulged over cut margin of skull, as if liberated
from pressure. Arachnoid transparent, and considerable effusion of serous
fluid ni pia mater. Gut surfaces of cerebrum exhibited numerous bloody
points: and ventricles contained about an ounce of fluid; with considerable
quantity also of serous fluid at base of skull after removal of brain.?Abdomen;
Great congestion of mucous membrane of ilium and coecum; with superficial
sloughing and ulceration. Peyer's patches enlarged by morbid deposit, and
converted into ulcers, varying in size trom a fourpenny piece to a shilling.
No. 7.?M. set. 35. In hospital six years and fifteen weeks.?Head: Upon
removing skull-cap, contents of cranium bulged over osseous margin, as if
liberated from pressure. Vessels on surface ot brain full of blood. Arachnoid
dotted with opaque white spots. Pia mater infiltrated with clear serous fluid;
and convolutions?apparently compressed?were separated one from another,
so as to allow end of finger to be inserted between. Brain firm, its cut surfaces
presented numerous red points; and ventricles contained about half an ounce
of clear serum.?Chest: Opposed surfaces of right pleura universally adherent.
Both lungs swelled, and partially emphysematous, were occupied, in their whole
extent, by various sized tuberculous deposits; some recent, others of older date,
and all opaque or softened. About root of lungs, several concretions?the size
of peas?were noticed, and numerous cavities existed in that organ, com-
municating with large bronchi. In coats of aorta, just above semilunar valves,
a mass of yelloAvish coloured deposit was observed.?Abdomen: Accumulations
of tubercles in mesenteric glands of larger size than natural.

No. 8.?M. set. 33. In hospital three years and five months.?Head: Dura
mater very firmly adherent to bone. Internal vessels turgid. Brain closely
filling cranium, so as to bulge a little over its cut edge. Arachnoid nearly free
from moisture.?Chest: Considerable portion of right lung, towards back part,
converted into a dense, tough substance, of nearly black colour, and totally
impervious to air. Similar changes, to a less extent, in posterior part of left
lung.?Abdomen: Mucous membrane of ilium dark coloured, from intense
serous congestion: with partial ecchymosis of submucous tissue. Slight opacity
of external covering of liver, of old date, but without adhesion.

No. 9.?F. set. 29. In hospital eight months and three weeks.?Head: All
vessels of brain and membranes extremely turgid; those of pia mater everywhere
appearing as if minutely injected with blood. Cerebrum and cerebellum
presented a deeper pink tint than normal state; cortical substance darker, so
as to offer a stronger contrast than usual to medullary matter. Blood flowed
over surface, wherever substance of brain was cut into. Arachnoid partially
opaque over hemispheres, as also at base of brain. Cellular tissue of pia mater
generally infiltrated. About an ounce of perfectly limpid fluid in each lateral
ventricle; and much fluid likewise remained in base of cranium, after brain had
been removed.?Chest: Bight lung connected to pleura by slight adhesions of
old date. Left lung highly congested, and breaking down easily on pressure :
but still crepitant. The surface of upper lobe, at back part, had a dark, almost
black appearance, but without any change in state of pleura, and a portion of
pulmonary substance, equal in size to a small orange, was quite black, which
exhaled, when cut into, gangrenous foetor.

No. 10.?M. set. 34. In hospital six months and three weeks.?Head:
Arachnoid slightlv opaque. Some effusion into pia mater: convolutions
flattened. Brain white and soft. Yentricles distended by about five ounces of clear
serous fluid, but septum lucidum entire. A considerable quantity of fluid also at
base of skull after removal of brain.?Chest: Opposed surfaces of right pleura
universally adherent, and the auriculo-ventricular valves appeared slightly opaque.
No. 11.?P. set. 36. In hospital ten months and nine days.?Head:
Skull cap heavy ; frontal bone thickened, and cancellous structure obliterated.
Its inner surface rough and projected into cranial cavity, pressing against dura
mater, which was thinned almost transparent, and caused flattening of front
portion of hemispheres. When skull-cap was removed, brain bulged over sawn
edge of bone, as if liberated from pressure. Cerebral substance, white and
soft. Lateral ventricles distended enormously^ and contained full four ounces
of clear watery serum; much fluid being also effused at base of skull, after re-
moval of bram.?Chest: Opposed surfaces of both pleurse adherent. Lungs
consolidated at posterior part, and their cut surfaces presented numerous
cavities, some containing pus and others softened tubercle; the right lung being
especially diseased. Intervening pulmonary substance, between depositions of
tubercle, compressed and in great part impervious to air.?Abdomen: Gall-
bladder full of bile. Lower part of small intestines, and commencement of
colon, with its ccecal appendage, occupied by numerous ulcers, some of which
had nearly penetrated the tube; mucous membrane dark-coloured and congested.
Ovaries large in size, and full of clear vesicles, or yellowish white cavities, from
whence ova had escaped.

OF MENTAL DISEASES. G31

N. 12.?P. set. 26. In liospital one month.?Head: Dura mater very
firmly adherent to inner surface of cranium. Substance of brain dotted with
numerous red points, and of firm consistence.?Chest: A few old adhesions, at
posterior and upper part of cavity.?Abdomen: Kidneys large, with cortical
substance of pale yellow colour. Ovaries small, having few traces of escaped
ova. Uterus small, and in its virgin state. P.S. On the right side of this
patient's neck, who died of erysipelas, the cuticle was separated, and patches of
skiu exhibited a darker hue than natural.

No. 13.?P. set. 70. In hospital two days.?1lead: Vessels within
cranium tinged, as in cases where death was caused by strangulation. Some
serous infiltration of pia mater, and fluid in ventricles slightly increased in quan-
tity.?Chest: Eight cavities of heart and large venous trunks loaded with
blood. Walls of left ventricle thick, and muscular substance compact.?
Abdomen: Convex surface of liver connected to abdominal parietes, by a few
adhesions of old date; also similar adhesions of ascending colon.

No. li-.?M. set. 42. In hospital tliree months.?Head: External vessels,
and those of dura mater, rather empty. Convolutions of hemispheres somewhat
flattened. Fluid in lateral ventricle slightly beyond normal quantity. Bloody
points everywhere numerous in cerebral substance, when cut: and medullary
matter had throughout a faint pink tinge. Brain firm.?Chest: Bight pleura
contained about a pint of serous fluid. Right lung rendered unnaturally heavy
by great cedematous infiltration; particularly in its posterior two-thirds. Sub-
stance broke down under pressure, and fluid poured out in abundance wherever
cut by knife. Left wing exhibited same state, but slighter in degree. Some
fluid in cavity of pericardium, with serous infiltration in lieu of fat, under
reflected portion of membrane.?Abdomen: A few ounces of fluid in peritoneal
cavity; with some old adhesions of coecum and colon. Intestines bloodless and pale.

No. 15.?M., set. 28. In hospital six weeks.?Head: Vessels in cranium
turgid, and general evidences of increased activity of cerebral circulation. In-
ternal surface of skull-cap uneven, though bone did not present any morbid
appearances. ^ Vessels of hone full, so as to give it a liver-like aspect when
held against light.?Chest: Pericardium distended far beyond its usual size, in
contact with sternum, for a breadth of nearly three inches, in lower half of
chest; and it ascended to within an inch of upper margin. Cavity contained
some ounces of an opaque, yellowish, sero-purulent fluid. Surface, both of
pericardian sac, and portion of membrane, reflected over heart, covered univer-
sally by an irregular layer of soft yellow fibrine. An ordinary sewing needle,
about two inches in length, had penetrated the left ventricle obliquely. Eye of
needle lay a little below the surface, but could not be seen until an incision
had been'made; point of needle projected into cavity. Ventricle hard and in-
compressible ; muscular substance, which resisted the knife from its firmness,
appeared very compact, and rather paler, than in normal state. Distension of
pericardium had so_ depressed diaphragm, that it pushed left lobe of liver and
stomach into umbilical region. _ Both pleurse inflamed, with slight partial effu-
sions of fibrine, this inflammation being most considerable on leftside; and
recent agglutination of lung to pericardium.

No. 16.?M. set. 65. In hospital fifteen days.?Head: Strong adhesion of
dura mater to bone, so that membrane was extensively torn hi separating skull-
cap. Infiltration of pia mater. About an ounce of fluid in each lateral ven-
tricle ; and numerous large bloody points on cut cerebral substance.? Chest:
Some ounces of turbid fluid in right pleura. Considerable effusion of soft yellow
fibrine in inferior lobe of right lung at posterior part. Lobe dark coloured, and
partially consolidated; "with a portion in centre, large as a walnut, mortified.
No. 17.?M. set. 30. In hospital seven years, ten months, and a half.

Head: Skull-cap very firmly adherent to dura mater. Arachnoid opaque.
Effusion of reddish yellow fluid in pia mater. Ventricles contained about an
ounce of clear serum. Substance of brain firm, but presenting numerous red
points upon its cut surface. Considerable quantity of fluid about base of skull
after removal of brain.?Chest: Some clear fluid in pericardium. Both lungs
adherent to parietes of thorax, through old effusions of lymph between opposed
surfaces of pleura. Substance studded throughout whole extent with semi-
transparent grey tubercles, in masses of various sizes, some of which, at apices
of lungs, had softened and formed vomicae.?Abdomen: Mesenteric glands en-
larged by deposit of tubercle. Some old adhesions between transverse colon,
and under surface of liver. Both upper and lower extremities anasarcous. In
left iliac vein, from root of inferior cava to popliteal space, a firm adherent
coagulum existed, a portion of which had a yellowish red colour, from being
partly deprived of its red corpuscles. Left common iliac artery contracted,
and of a deep brown tint, for about an incli of its course. Upon being laid
open, inner and middle coats were found divided, as if by the application of a
ligature, while above this point, as also below, the arterial coats were jagged
and torn, whilst the surrounding cellular sheath seemed stained with blood.
No. 18.?M. set, 41. In hospital eleven months and ten days.?Head: An
incised wound upon forehead, of a yellowish green colour, and offensive odour.
After removing skull-cap, dura mater was found to cover a brain which had
passed wholly into state of decomposition, semi-fluid, of green colour, and
emitted a most offensive smell. Cut portion of every bone perfectly black, the
osseous substance being stained by decomposed blood.?Chest: Both lungs
emphysematous. Muscular substance of heart soft and discoloured. Peri-
cardium contained about an ounce of turbid red serum.?Abdomen : Viscera
contained much blood, were soft, and of dark colour. Liver almost black;
spleen large and soft. Kidneys weighed 22i ounces, and dark coloured, like
liver, throughout their whole substance. General anasarca, especially affecting
lower extremities.

No. 19. ? P., ret. 34. In hospital nine months.?Head: Vessels of
cranium full of blood. Arachnoid opaque, of dull whitish colour, and dotted
over with white points. Considerable effusion of turbid red fluid in pia mater.
Cerebral vessels distended with blood, and cut surfaces of brain presented very
numerous red points. Ventricles contained a small quantity of clear fluid, and
a large quantity of turbid serum about base of skull, after removal of brain.?
Chest: Pericardium contained a greater quantity of clear yellow serum than
natural. A white spot upon front of right ventricle, easily stripped off, left
rough surface behind. Bight side of heart full of coagulated black blood, but
left cavities empty. On both parietes of thorax, old adhesions of pleura, with
some recent effusions of lymph on right. Both lungs extensively diseased by
tuberculous matter, apices on each side hollowed out by large cavities containing
pus and softened tubercle. Best of lung consolidated by deposit of highly-
organized semi-transparent grey tubercle, A portion of right lung converted
into dense reddish-brown, fleshy-looking mass, which submerged, but did not
completely sink in water.?Abdomen: Gall-bladder empty. Mcnscnteric glands
much enlarged, and full of tubercle. Along course of alimentary canal, but
especially in neighbourhood of CcCCum, numerous deposits of tubercle between
peritoneum and muscular coat of intestine, mucous coat being oceupicd by
numerous ulcers, some equal in size to a shilling. Kidneys large and deep-
coloured. A considerable-sized corpus luteum in right ovary.

No, 20.?M., set. 47. In hospital eight weeks.?Head: Much reddish
fluid in arachnoid cavity, together with a few thin coagula of blood, partly on
surface of brain, and partly adhering loosely to surface of dura mater. Largest
of these deposits, in middle fossa of basis cranii, on right side,,where thin and
loose coagulum covered a surface measuring about an inch and a half each way.
Others did not exceed the size of a sixpence or shilling. Great infiltration of
pia mater over whole extent of hemispheres. Bloodvessels of brain greatly con-
gested, bloody points on cut surfaces being everywhere large and numerous.
Between two and three ounces of fluid in lateral ventricles, and much also re-
mained in basis cranii, after brain was removed. Cerebral substances soft,
without any change of structure, but presented, partially, a very faint pink
tinge.?Chest: Numerous and large_ white patches on heart, especially right
ventricle, with several on right auricle. Auricula-ventricular valves partially
thickened and opaque.

No. 21.?P., set. 34. In hospital twenty-five years and four months.?
Head: Great and general infiltration with clear fluid of pia mater covering
hemispheres. Several convolutions considerably shrunk, leaving intervals occu-
pied by infiltrated pia mater.?Chest: Both lungs contained small tubercles,
numerous in upper lobe, particularly of left, and irregularly scattered in smaller
number through other lobes. Partial thickening and opacity of pleura covering
upper lobe of left lung. One of eight true ribs diseased; it adhered firmly to
lung for an extent about equal to a shilling. On separating lun^, a small
cavity was exposed, containing thick yellow pus, with a piece of dead bone com-
pletely detached. Rib penetrated by similar disease, though no external
swelling or suppuration had existed.?Abdomen: Covering of liver slightly
thickened and opaque, over nearly whole of convex surface, with similar change
to less extent on concavity of organ. Uterus moderately enlarged, unusually
vascular, and small firm deposits irregularly scattered over surface. Broad
ligaments thickened and hardened, their component parts being confused by
adhesions to each other, and surrounding organs. A convolution of ileum
adhered to fundus uteri, and on tearing it away, some drops of thick pus re-
mained in uterus. Thick reddish pus escaped, without offensive odour, from
the os tinea. Entire fundus lined with stratum of yellowish, apparently inor-
ganic matter, from two to four or five lines in thickness, which could be easily
scraped off with knife. In colour, consistence, and absence of vascularity, it
resembled tubercular deposits found occasionally in testes. Cervix uteri
ulcerated throughout, surface being red and irregular.

No. 22.?-M., set. 3G. In hospital five years and seven months.?Head:
Skull-cap thin. Partial opacity of arachnoid. Slight serous effusion into
pia mater. Cerebral substance firm, but upon cut surface, orifices of nume-
rous vessels, larger in size than natural, were noticed. About an ounce of
limpid fluid in lateral ventricles. ? Cliest: Heart contained considerable
quantity of fluid blood, with two or three soft and loose coagula; the latter
of scarlet colour, and collapsed.?Abdomen: Capsule of spleen thickened in
one spot, the size of half-a-crown, and organ puckered up in that situation.
Inner surface of duodenum stained with decomposed blood, hi three or four
spots. About three inches above ccecum, mucous membrane studded with
numerous yellowish-white deposits, the size of pin's heads, and having the
consistence of tubercle. Membrane, in its course towards rectum, became
of deep red colour, and superficially ulcerated. In some parts deep reddish
brown, whilst surface seemed covered by shreds of decomposed tissue.
Whole of large intestines exhibited similar appearances, and walls of tube
thickened.

No. 23.?M., pet. 45. In hospital thirty-two days.?Head: Infiltration of
pia mater on hemispheres. Slight increase of fluid hi lateral ventricles, and
much remained in base of skull, after brain was removed. Bloody points
on cut cerebral substance everywhere numerous, and orifices of divided
vessels unusually large.?Chest: Lungs ahnost universally comiected to parietes
of thorax by old strong adhesions, strongest being on posterior aspect of each
lung. Left organ could not be drawn out without extensive laceration of sub-
stance. Circumscribed abscess on this side, between surface of lung and chest.
Upper lobe of right side entirely diseased throughout, partly in congestive
state of pneumonia, and partly hepatized. In solid portion, three or four
abcesses; largest?size of lien's egg?contained dark stinking matter. Sides
of cavity irregular, shreddy, and ? partially broken down. Others contained
reddish pus.?Abdomen: In left kidney, an excavation about size of a nut, ap-
Sroached hear surface of gland, where its situation was marked by puckered
epression. Internal surface presented reticular appearance, and it contained
some thin dark fluid of offensive odour.

No. 24.?M., a:t. 25. In hospital fifteen days.?Head: Skull-cap heavy.
Vessels of brain full of blood. Arachnoid transparent. Lateral ventricles con-
tained an ounce of fluid.?Chest: Inner surface of both pleura; lined by con-
tinuous thick layer of soft yellow fibrin, slightly adherent to parts upon which
it rested. Very little fluid in pleural cavities. Both lungs floated in water,
but substance in part softer than natural, and infiltrated by fluid. Numerous
elevations, varying in size from a pin's head to split-pea, studded over surface.
When cut, exposed cavities circumscribed by an irregular yellow line, which
contained putrid, offensive fluid. Although several seemed about bursting into
pleura, neither orifice nor escape of contents was discovered.

No. 25.?M., ?ct. 41. In hospital twenty-six days.?Head: Arachnoid
thickened, opaque, and of milky whiteness, over superior and lateral aspects of
both hemispheres. Considerable infiltration of pia mater. Membranes, when
stripped from surface of brain, formed a thick, firm mass, instead of thin,
delicatc, normal covering. Slightly increased quantity of fluid in lateral
ventricles, and much fluid in base of skull after removal of brain. Slight
softening of corpus collosum and fornix at back of these parts.?Chest: Lower
portion of inferior lobe of right lung mortified to considerable extent, sur-
rounding margin being adherent to diaphragm. Space circumscribcd by adhesion
contained an offensive, dark, purulent fluid. Corresponding surface of diaphragm
dark, but not disorganized, and adjacent portion of liver similarly discoloured.
Posterior part of right lung generally, and that of left highly congested, being
so far softened as easily to break down on pressure.
No. 26.?M., oct. 56. In hospital thirty years and two weeks.?Head:
Partial opacity of arachnoid. Pia mater considerably infiltrated. Convolutions
of hemispheres shrunk, so as to leave, in several situations, intervals filled by
infiltrated pia mater. About two ounces of serum in lateral ventricles. Much
fluid remained in base of skull, after removal of brain. Eight corpus striatum
shrunk, and had lost much of its convexity; towards anterior part, slight de-
pression of light yellowish-brown colour. Cortical substance underneath ex-
hibited same colour, and slightly broken down. Adjacent to posterior part,
cavity existed nearly an inch long, but not quite so broad, and with smooth
sides, of colour above described. It contained only a little fluid. These appear-
ances were obviously the remains of cerebral hcemorrliages, and thus explained
the attacks of paralysis formerly experienced by this patient.?Chest: Old ad-
hesions of lungs, and slight oedema at back of right lung.

No. 27.?M., a:t. 29. In hospital five months and three weeks.?Head:
Extensive lacerated wound of scalp, and right parietal bone denuded to con-
siderable extent; also numerous ecchymoses over whole head. Exposed bone,
and subjacent dura mater more vascular than usual. Arachnoid transparent,
but pia mater infiltrated by serum. Ventricles contained about an ounce and a
half of limpid fluid... Cerebral substance softer than natural, and bloodless.?
Chest: Sac of right pleura filled by a large quantity of sero-purulent fluid, in
which flakes of recent lymph floated. Lung compressed, but connected by old
adhesions at upper part to thoracic parietes. Pulmonary substance aark-
coloured at posterior portion. Numerous old adhesions of left pleura. A white
spot upon part of right ventricle of heart.

No. 28.?P., set 42. In hospital five weeks. Head: Arachnoid covering
hemispheres partially opaque, particularly in intervals of convolutions, where it
exhibited milky whiteness. Cellular texture of pia mater infiltrated, and fluid
of lateral ventricles somewhat increased in quantity. Slight pinkish discoloura-
tion of cerebral substance in some parts of structure.

No. 29.?P., cet. 62. In hospital one month.?Head: Bones of cranium
thicker and more dense than usual, so that skull-cap was very heavy. Internal
surface generally uneven, though bony substance presented no morbid change;
vessels of bone full of blood, giving internal table a livid colour. Pia mater
greatly infiltrated over whole hemispheres, fluid being of reddish colour at several
parts of right hemisphere. Lateral ventricles contained each an ounce of
limpid fluid, and foramen Monro formed a direct round opening between the
two cavities. Cerebral substance softish throughout.?Abdomen: Mucous mem-
brane of small intestines congested, especially near termination of ileum.
Cancerous ulcer of os tiiicic, about size of half-a-crown, but disease had not
made much progress.

No. 30.?P., int. 43. In hospital six weeks.?Head: Some opacity of arach-
noid, particularly along line of longitudinal fissure. Brain, generally bloodless,
but of firm consistence. Lateral ventricles distended by about two ounces of
limpid fluid, and a large quantity at base of skull after removal of brain. Choriod
plexuses pale and bloodless.?Chest: Areolar tissue in front of pericardium in-
filtrated by soft, recently-effused yellow lymph. Right lung covered, at lower
back part, by layer of recent lymph, and considerable quantity of yellow serous
fluid in sac of pleura. Left pleura distended by several pints of turbid yellow
serum, mixed with flakes of lymph. Left lung compressed to back part of
chest, and impervious to air.?Abdomen: Stomach distended by flatus, so as to
conceal greater part of abdominal viscera. Bight ureter contained some thin
purulent fluid, which escaped from pelvis of kidney.

No. 31.?M., set. 31. In hospital five months and threft weeks.?Head:
Cavity of arachnoid contained small quantity of reddish fluid. Convexities
of hemispheres, in anterior two-thirds, covered by very thin, delicate, semi-
transparent film, of dilute scarlet colour. At first, supposed to be eccliy-
mosis of pia mater; on closer 'examination, film could be raised by gentle
scraping with knife, subjacent surface being healthy. Similar appearance, to
less extent, on internal surface of dura mater, some parts being thick; consist-
ing, obviously, of coagula of blood, having dark vinous colour, and about thick-
ness of a sixpence, Coagula not so numerous on left as on right side; while
those in dura mater were in separate, nearly circular, portions of various size,
but longest, not exceeding a shilling, extended into middle fossa of basis cranii.
All the vessels of brain and membranes gorged with blood; and several pro-
cesses of pia mater, between convolutions, were in a state of extreme conges-
tion, with ecchymosis hi one instance. Cerebral substance firm.?Chest: An
old adhesion of right lung at apex. Inferior lobe in congestive stages of pneu-
monia, with incipient hepatization hi one part, and a little soft fibrine on pleura
covering lobe. In left lung, on inferior lobe, one portion, not exceeding size
of a walnut, congested and partially consolidated.

No. 32.?M., jet. 34. In hospital five months.?The body, hi this case, was
that of an emaciated man, who, having retired as usual to the sleeping apart-
ment, was found lying on his face dead next morning. Blood had gravitated
to anterior part of corpse, giving a dull red hue to face, neck, and thorax.?
Head: skull-cap thin; cerebral substance firm and pale.?Chest: Posterior sur-
faces of both lungs adherent to parietes of thorax; pulmonary texture dark
coloured and easily broken down, particularly in lower lobes.?Heart: soft and
pale, showing fatty degeneration of muscular tissue; transverse strife in fibrils
very faint, and in many situations entirely obliterated.

No. 33.?P., ait. 55. In hospital ten days.?Head: Dura mater adhered so
firmly to skull-cap that it was torn into shreds upon raising bone. Considerable
effusion of serous fluid in pia mater; vessels of arachnoid full of blood. Cerebral
substance more vascular than natural, anterior lobes being narrow and flat.

Much fluid at base of skull, wlieu brain was removed.?Chest: Both luugs con-
nected to parietes of thorax by old adhesions. Heart full of blood; left ven-
tricle contracted, and of red colour, when cut into by knife.?P.S. Right arm
of this patient extremely swollen, cuticle loose upon hands and lingers, which
were also discoloured, as if in a state of partial mortification.
No. 34.?M., set. 57. In hospital eight weeks.?Head: Dura mater adhered
to bone so strongly, that membrane became torn into shreds when skull-cap
was separated. Vessels, both of bone and dura mater, full of blood. Arach-
noid transparent, with slight infiltration, and serous fluid in sub-arachnoid
spaces at base of brain. Pia mater thin and transparent; cerebral hemispheres,
particularly left, compressed; convolutions flattened, and entire upper surface
of brain bulged over sawn bone. Some eccliymoses upon upper surfaces of
both hemispheres, under arachnoid. In posterior lobe of left, a cavity, about
size of small apple, contained a soft black clot of recently effused blood. Brain
softened, and dotted with reddish black spots. Fluids in lateral ventricle had
a light red colour, but clear and more limpid in opposite. Some extravasations
under arachnoid upon cerebellum.?Chest: On front part of right ventricle of
heart, a white spot, with a sccond, size of shilling, upon corresponding surface
of pericardium. Tricuspid valves opaque and thickened. Left ventricle much
increased in weight, magnitude, and thickness of walls; muscular fibres being
deep red coloured, with columnse carnse thick and prominent.?Abdomen: In-
ferior extremity of right kidney continued forward over front of vertebral
column, pursuing course of third portion of duodenum, and crossed by ureter.

No. 35.?E., set. 38. In hospital four days.?General emaciation of body,
and blood-vessels nearly all empty, excepting those of heart and lungs.?Head:
Vessels of cranium, both external and internal, remarkably free from blood.
Slight infiltration of pia mater, and a few drachms of serum in ventricles.?Abdo-
men: About five or six pints of dropsical fluid in peritoneal cavity; viscera
nearly bloodless; uterus somewhat enlarged, hard, and partially, yet firmly, ad-
herent to surrounding parts. Substance schirrous; neck and portion of cervix
destroyed by ulceration, the immediately adjoining part being softened and
vascular. Fimbriated openings of Fallopian tubes completely closed by firm
adhesions to broad ligaments, tubes being dilated and filled with fluid. Left
ovary changed into cyst, size of an orange, and contained fluid of watery con-
sistence.

No. 3G.?M., set. 50. In hospital eleven days.?Head: Dura mater adhered
firmly to skull-cap. Slight milky white opacity of arachnoid, along line of
superior longitudinal fissure; considerable effusion of clear fluid into pia mater.
Ventricles contained about an ounce of limpid serum; cerebral substance firm,
and white coloured.?Chest: A few old adhesions in upper part of left lung,
connecting opposed surfaces of pleura;.

No. 37. M., set. 62.?In hospital fifteen days. Head: Vessels of brain and
membranes all extremely tinged. Dura mater firmly adherent, and torn on
detaching skull-cap. Arachnoid of cerebral hemispheres slightly thickened, and
of milky whiteness, for about three inches on each side of great longitudinal
fissure.?Chest: Heart large, so that pericardium was in immediate contact with
front of thorax for at least two inches.?Abdomen: old adhesions to consider-
able extent, in form of elongated threads and plates, with an almost cellular
appearance, between concavities of liver, gall-bladder, and neighbouring organs;
also in and above pelvis.

No. 38.?M., set. 56. In hospital nine months.?Head: Skull-cap heavy:
and internal surface irregular, as if from increased deposition, particularly in
central portions of frontal and parietal bones; although without abnormal ap-
pearance of bony substance itself. Arachnoid thickened and opaque over hemi-
spheres, as also fissura Sylvii. Pia mater infiltrated. About two ounces of
perfectly pellucid fluid in each lateral ventricle.?Chest: Left lung irregularly
puckered, and partially consolidated at apex, where organ adhered to cavity.
Consolidation extended partially into substance for about an inch. Slight old
adhesions of right lung: inferior lobe being in conjunctive state of pneumonia,
with partial consolidation.

No. 39.?M., ajt. 49. In hospital three weeks.?Head: Dura mater adhered
so firmly to bone, that shreds were torn off upon separation of skull-cap.
Cranial bones thick, heavy, and of dark colour, vessels being full of blood. In
arachnoid several opaque white spots, but membrane generally transparent.
Yessels of pia mater distended with blood, presenting, on surface of brain, a
closely woven pink-coloured network. Cerebral substance firm; bloody spots
upon cut surface large and numerous; and ventricles contained about an ounce
of limpid fluid.?Chest: lliglit lung connected to parietes by old adhesions at
apex; over upper portion, a long irregularly depressed part, hard, and of dark
colour, resembling a cicatrix, which measured full three inches in long diameter.
Several masses of tubercle, and whole lung solid. Heart soft, easily torn, and
exhibited fatty degeneration of muscular iibres.

No. 40.?F., set. 50. In hospital six months.?Head: Dura mater pearl-
coloured and bloodless. Arachnoid clear and transparent; considerable effusion
of limpid fluid in pia mater, between convolutions of brain, which were shrunk
and atrophied. Ventricles contained about an ounce of limpid serum.?Chest:
Old adhesions of pleurae.?Abdomen: Mucous membrane of intestines inflamed,
and blackish brown from cxtravasatcd blood; walls of canal thickened, soft,
dark coloured, and contained cicatrices.
(To be continued.)
