News and Notes
===============

Short Course for Magistrates in Connection with the Lunacy and Mental
Deficiency Acts.

There is every prospect that this Course, tentatively announced in our July
number, will take place in London, probably from March 18th to 21st inclusive,
as applications in response to the notices which have been issued, are coming in
well.

The proposed arrangements for the Course have been approved by the Lorp
Chancellor and the Home Office and facilities have been granted which will
enable the students to visit Prisons for Remand and Observation cases, as well
as Mental Hospitals and Certified Institutions.

A full syllabus of the Lectures and demonstrations will be issued as soon as
the necessary minimum number of applications for the Course has been received,
and meanwhile preliminary notices and any other particulars that may be desired
will be gladly sent to enquirers who write to the Hon. Secretary, C.A.M.W., 24,
Buckingham Palace Road, S. W. 1.

We are anxious that the Course should be made known as widely as possible,
and solicit the co-operation of readers of this Journal in giving it publicity.
Short Course for Teachers of Mentally Defective Children.

The next Short Course to be organised by the C. A. M. W. on behalf of the Board
of Education will be held at Liverpool from March 25th to April 16th, 1924.
In addition to students "selected" by the Board of Education, it will be
possible to admit a few private students paying their own fees and maintenance
expenses. Enquiries for further information on this point should be addressed
to Miss Evelyn Fox, 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.

The Problem of the Mentally Abnormal Child.
-----------------------------------------In our last number we quoted the official opinion of the Board of Education
on the question of Special Schools as revealed in its report for 1921?22.
We now have before us the report of Sir George Newman, Chief Medical Officer
of the Board,* who examines the subject in all its ramifications dealing with it
not only as an administrator struggling to meet the demands of ' 'economy,'' but
as a medical man concerned with the needs of this special section of the nation's
children who are under his care.

The two sections of mentally abnormal children with which the Board of
Education is concerned are, of course, (a) the dull and backward, and (b) the feebleminded, and in this Report each receives due consideration.

(a) The Bull and Backward Child.
In a sub-section headed "The Social Burden of Backwardness," Sir
George?taking as a basis statistics worked out for London by Dr Cyril Burt
?estimates that in the country as a whole there are not less than 600,000
' 'backward children'' of school age. He further points out that ' 'this group
is unable to respond with proper benefit to our educational system and adds
50,000 recruits to our industrial army every year who are not only unprepared
by mental retardation to meet effectually the demands of a full life, but who
* ' 'The Health of the School Child." II .M. Stationery Office. 1 s, Gd.
furnish society with the bulk of its inefficient adults?criminals, paupers,
mendicants and unemployables."

The educational solution of "this most preventable problem" he considers lies along two lines:?

(1) The need for schooling under the best health conditions?open-air
facilities, adequate feeding, exercise, rest;
(2) The need for a proper understanding of the mentally debilitated child
which shall reach his mind and fortify it adequately?and this means
individual, intelligent and practical teaching.

"Special Classes" in the ordinary school should be organised for these
children, he contends, wherever their number and their degree of backwardness
indicates this possibility, but they should be segregated as little as possible
and should always join the others for physical exercises and games. The
one immediate necessity is that every Local Education Authority should
consider the problem.

(&) The Mentally Defective Child.

It is still very difficult to estimate reliably the number of educable
feebleminded children in the country. Reports from School Medical Officers
m 1922 record 29,250*, but taking as a criterion the percentage in London
(where "the system of diagnostic examination is particularly good") viz.
12 per 1000 in average attendance, there should be in the whole country
upwards of 50,000, and the discrepancy between this and the actual number
reported indicates either "inadequate or unequal ascertainment" or "wide
differences of incidence."

Sir George Newman is impressed by the way in which Local Education
Authorities continue to fail to carry out their duties under the Education
Act 1921, (Section 55 (1) ) and the Mental Deficiency Act (Section 31) and
emphasises the fact that "much of the trouble and misery suffered by and
caused by, adult defectives is due to the inaction of Local Education Authorities in regard to mentally defective children."

The great difficulties in the way he considers to be (1) the lack of any
"fixed and final medical basis" for diagnosis of mental defectives, (2) the
lack of any definition as to the meaning of the words ' 'proper benefit'' and as
to the kind of education which should be provided for the feebleminded child,
with the inevitable consequence that there is no standardisation of Special
Schools and (3) the question of expense.

At present Day Special Schools cost ?30 a head a year and Residential
Schools ?90 in comparison with the Elementary Schools' ?12.

Nevertheless, despite these difficulties, Sir George urges Local Education
Authorities to recognise their responsibilities in the matter and makes the
following specific recommendations for their consideration:?

(i) & (ii) That "Ascertainment" should be vigorously carried out and
the cases so discovered ' 'cleared'' according to the provision of the
Mental Deficiency Act and the Education (Defective and Epileptic
Children) Act.

Th there were reported 4,850 imbecile children and 850 idiotsChildren) VetSection of the Act which incorporates the Education (Defective and Epileptic
(iii) That such children as cannot be provided for in Special Schools or whose
mental condition makes hard and fast classification difficult should be
kept under "exact and suitable supervision" and that the following
possibilities should be considered by the Authority concerned:?

(a) Notification to Local Control Authority in exceptional circumstances.
(b) Training in Occupation Centres.
(c) Training of higher grade cases in Special Classes with dull and
backward children.
(d) Devising a simpler and cheaper form of Special School or Class.
The Criminal Defective and the Mental Deficiency Act.
The Annual Reports of the Commissioners of Prisons and the Directors of
Convict Prisons always contain much illuminating information as to the extent
to which the Mental Deficiency Act is succeeding in rescuing the defective from
imprisonment, and this year's report* is no exception to the rule.

The following statistics merit attention:?
Cases Certified Transfer Handed over to
under M.D. Act under Local Authority
during sentence. Section 9. for detention in
''place of safety.''
Local Prisons 66 50 14
Convict Prisons 5 5 ?
Borstal Institutions 10 12 ?

The number of defectives dealt with by the Courts under Section 8 (1) (b) of
the Mental Deficiency Act and sent direct to Institutions was 165; this represents
an increase on previous years, but lack of institution accommodation continues
to limit the numbers so dealt with and the Commissioners declare emphatically
that they consider the provision of more institutions ' 'a matter of urgent public
importance'' for only by this means will the 'evil of the detention of defectives
in prison' be brought to an end.''

The Commissioners devote a considerable amount of space to a review of the
difficulties that are experienced with regard to the Mental Deficiency Act as it
effects prison administration?a matter which they state is ' 'continually watched.
Four difficulties confronting medical officers are specially stressed:?
(1) Committal of a suspected defective to prison under ordinary sentence, the
Court declining to investigate the question of deficiency, but leaving it to be
dealt with by the prison authorities and the Secretaries of State under Section
9 of the Act.
(2) Committal of a defective to prison, pending the presentation of a petition
under Section 8 (1) (a) of the Act, instead of direct committal to an institution for defectives under Section 8 (1) (b).
(3) Non-removal, or delay in removal, of certified mental defectives from prsion.
(4) Some local authorities have claimed, in effect, to review, through their own
Medical Officers, the certificates given by prison Medical Officers, and by the
outside specialists who are called in to assist them. After such review, they
have frequently declined to accept the cases.

* To be obtained from H .M. Stationery Office. Price 2s,
The serious results arising from this last difficulty are illustrated by four
specimen cases, and it is evident from the Report that it has caused the Commissioners grave concern. Efforts have been made to ascertain the true legal
position and the report states that the Board of Control and the Secretary of State,
after fully considering the problem from this point of view, concur in the opinion
that 4' a Local Authority has no right to review certificates given by the medical
practitioners selected by the Secretary of State to deal with cases under Section 9.
Moreover the Commissioners point out that if such an Order is made the Local
Authority '' is bound to provide accommodation.''

In one of the Appendices of the Report (" Extracts from Annual Reports of
Governors, Chaplains and Medical Officers") there is an interesting note by Dr.
Hamblin Smith, Medical Officer of Birmingham Prison, on the importance of the
part played by mental conflict in producing criminal conduct while several other
Governors and Medical Officers refer to the problem of the unstable and sub-normal
prisoner?a problem which, with increase of knowledge and understanding, the
passage of time seems to accentuate rather than diminish.

We are glad to record a tribute paid by the Medical Director, Dr E. B.
Griffiths, to the work of Local Voluntary Associations who are, he states, now
rendering valuable assistance by supplying early histories of defectives in prison
under observation, and by providing After-Care on discharge for those not certifiable under the Mental Deficiency Act.

"Mental Inefficients. Treatment or Punishment."
-----------------------------------------------Another Report of the working of this Scheme for the treatment of the^ mentally inefficient delinquent" has been presented to the Birmingham Justices, by
the General Purposes Committee of the Birmingham City Council.
The position, as recorded in the Report does not differ materially from that
?f the previous year.

Of the 146 cases remanded in custody for special examination by Dr Hamblin
Smith only 20%, i.e. 27, were sentenced to imprisonment. Of the remainder 9
were placed on probation, 3 were fined, 4 were bound over, 68 were dismissed
?r adjourned," 20 were certified insane, 13 were certified under the Mental
Deficiency Act, and 2 were still pending at the time of writing the report. Dr.
Hamblin Smith continues firmly to adhere to his view of delinquency as pre
eminently a 4 psychological problem'' and places on record his regret t at ac
?f the necessary staff prevents him from examining all the prisoners whom e ee s
need this special treatment.

The weak part of the scheme continues to be the failure to refer for examination cases of apparently abnormal or subnormal delinquents not remanded in
custody. Dr Potts records with regret that he was only called upon to deal
with four such cases during the year.

The Mental Deficiency Act in Scotland.
-------------------------------------In their last Report the Commissioners of the Board of Control for Scotland
pointed out that the development of work under the Mental Deficiency Act was
seriously checked by the instructions which had been issued by the Treasury prohibiting any increase in the number of defectives dealt with.

In the Report for 1922*?recently issued?it is recorded that this embargo,
as the result of representations made by the Board, has been lifted and the Treasury have consented to a further sum of ?5,000 per annum being contributed from
the Imperial Grant towards the cost of provision and maintenance of 200 additional mentally defective persons. Plans have accordingly been made for the
provision of some of the additional institution accommodation so badly needed,
and the District Boards of Lanark, Govan, Glasgow, and Edinburgh, have all
had schemes (some of which have already materialised) approved by the Board
of Control.

A further piece of progress recorded in the Report is the nucleus of a State
Institution in the setting aside of ten beds for criminal defectives in the Criminal
Lunatic Department of Perth Prison. All such cases will be first sent to the
Glasgow District Board's Institution at Stoneyetts, and only transferred to Perth
if they are found unsuitable for the less drastic regime of an ordinary institution.
An interesting section of the Report is that concerned with the subject of
defectives boarded out in private dwellings?the Scottish equivalent of "guardianship"?a total of 810 cases (representing an increase during the year of 79)
being dealt with in this way. The concensus of opinion on the part of the Boards'
Medical Inspectors seems to be that for defective boys of a certain type this method
of treatment works very well, but that it can only be successfully used for defective girls in a limited number of cases. Whilst the shortage of institution
accommodation, however, continues it is considered generally better to take this
action than none at all.

On the 1st January 1923, there were in the 10 certified Institutions n the
country 1358 patients?an addition during the year of 43.
917 children were reported by Local Education Authorities as ineducable or
as leaving Special Schools at 16: the percentage of educable mentally defective
children between 5 and 16 is estimated from returns furnished by the Scottish
Education Department as being .47 of the total school population.

Working Hostel for High-Grade Mentally Defective Women and Girls.
The information given below has been supplied to us by Miss Winifred Gibson >
Secretary of the Surrey Voluntary Association, and we have much pleasure in bringing it to the notice of our readers:?

The Surrey Voluntary Association for Mental and Physical Welfare has for
some time given special thought to the needs of the high-grade type of defective,
who may be quite capable of partially earning her own living under favourable
conditions, and who has often had experience of factory work or domestic service
before the occurrence of the events which lead to her certification and confinement
in an ordinary Certified Institution.

For the past 18 months the Association has been working to establish a Hostel
for this type of defective, and the scheme is now nearing completion.
The age limits are to be 16?35.

The aim of the Hostel will be to provide a rather freer and more normal life
than is possible to any great extent in the ordinary Certified Institution. Work
outside the Hostel will be found for its inmates, and one great factory in the neigh,
bourhood has already undertaken to employ a certain number who may be suit.
* Board of Control for Scotland. 9th Annual Report. H.M. Stationery Office. 2$,
able for its particular work. Other openings in daily domestic service, ^ndrywork, and small workshops, will be sought for the gn s as soon a ...
opened. They will return to the Hostel at night for sleep and reereation and will
be under its supervision and control. mnoh
The great difficulty has been finance, but ^Association has r^eived muc
support and encouragement both from the Board of on ro an , establishCouncil, and the latter has now votedasub.tant.al
ment expenses. In addition over ?-00 has be ? ,kq?c in the Countv
towards equipment expenses, and certain of the Boards of Guardians m the Co y
of Surrey have promised to subscribe. . . i_v f
The Association is therefore in a position to advance and is now m t,^
the lease of a very suitable house at Mitcham. It is hoped that the Hostel
cil cases, defectives from other counties will be a m ,1
suitable for the work and life of the Hostel. in another
No defectives will be admitted who have not spent ^ome time ?ther in another
Certified Institution, or in a Voluntary Home, where they have .ece.ved training
in habits of work and discipline.

A Leeds Workshop and Occupation Centre for Feebleminded Men.
Our readers may remember that in a former issue
the successful effort made by the Leeds Voluntary ommi e f scheme
establishment of a Workshop. The following report on the progress of the schem
has been kindly supplied to us by the Secretary, & r. orma . . ? ,
On the 11th October, 1923, the Lord Mayor of Leeds 0
Fountain, J.P.) officially opened a Leeds Works op an ti was held in
Feebleminded Young Men. After the opening; ceremon;y audience which
the Queen Street School Rooms adjoining the Workshop,and yoluntary
included members of the City Council, Magistrates, J^ ^erick winis (Chairman
Care Committee listened to interesting speeches y mmksioner of the Board
of the Board of Control) and Mrs. Ellen F. P.nsent (a Commissioner ot the
of Control.) The Chairman of the Mental Deficiency Acts Committee
Voluntary Care Committee Dr Hawkyard J-P-) Presi e . warehouse at 21
The Workshop is carried on in premises ??eiJ It . on weekdays
and 23, Queen Street, Leeds, at an annual rental of ?75. ? >s open ,
from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. (Saturdays 9 a.m. to 12 noon) with dinner hour m> ^
1P-m. The 28 trainees in attendance bring their mi - ay making and
are employed in boot repairing, firewood cutting ant tQ be ciassified
cardboard box making. These industries ena firewood department,
according to capacity. The lower grades are wo^'" ^aki is a useful occupation
Boot repairing is the most profitable industry. J on hysicai grounds, are
especially for a percentage of the trainees who, J?ki is an occupation in
only fitted for this class of work. Cardboard box mak: g grades.
which the higher grade trainees take part with t e assi ^
The Centre is conducted as a business concern and the work
CharThS; trainees receive weekly allowances which arc gradually increased according to merit.

The instructor in charge of the Centre is a skilled boot repairer with special
experience of work among defectives.

It is not anticipated that a Centre which is manned with inefficient labour
will pay its way. The deficit on the year's working will be met from grants.
The Board of Control and the Leeds Local Authority have given every
enouragement to the Scheme.

Mental Welfare Work in Liverpool.
--------------------------------The West Lancashire Association for Mental Welfare have during the past
year made a vigorous effort to raise additional funds for their voluntary
activities which has resulted in a total of ?407 9s. 7d. Of this amount, ?150
was given by an anonymous donor for the development of Occupation Centres,
and the remainder was collected by means of a " Buttercup Day " combined
with a widely circulated appeal throughout the city of Liverpool.

Those who know the difficulty of obtaining voluntary subscriptions will
realise that this achievement of Liverpool is no small one and the majority of
other Local Associations will look upon it with envy.

C.A.M.W. Conference, 1924.
-------------------------As we go to press, the question of the next Conference of the C.A.M.W. is
coming before the Council, who are being asked to consider the proposal that it
should be held in the Central Hall, Westminster, on May 28th and May 29th.
The sub-committee responsible for Conference arrangements is always glad
to receive suggestions for subjects for discussion and these will be placed before
them if forwardsd to Miss Evelyn Fox, 24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.I.
A
