News and Notes
===============

The C.A.M.W. and the Royal Commission on the Administration of the
Lunacy Laws.

At the July meeting of the Council of the C.A.M.W. a member raised the
question as to whether the C.A.M.W. should offer evidence before the Royal
Commission on the Administration of the Lunacy Laws, just set up by Parliament.
The subject was felt to be of such importance that it was referred for consideration to a Joint Committee of the Medical, Education and Parliamentary
Committees, who were to report upon it to the October Council.

The Joint Committee met on September 29th and its decisions were embodied
,n a report which was approved by the Council on October 13th. The chief
points of the report are set out below.

It will be remembered that the Royal Commission's terms of reference are as
follows :?
(1) The existing Law and administrative machinery in England and Wales
in connection with the certification, detention and care of persons who
are, or are alleged to be, of unsound mind ;
(2) The extent to which provision is, or should be, made in England and
Wales for the treatment without certification of persons suffering from
mental disorder.

With regard to (1) the Council has decided that no evidence shall be offered
on the subject of mental deficiency, as this is not strictly within the terms of
reference of the Commission. Some members of the Council, moreover, are
strongly averse from running any risk of the administration of the Mental
Deficiency Act being brought into closer touch with that of the Lunacy Laws. At
the same time the Council decided that the C.A.M.W. should watch carefully the
evidence given before the Royal Commission.

With regard to (2) the Council have authorised the Medical Committee to
prepare a Memorandum on the subject of " borderline " cases, and cases of
disordered conduct as a result of encephalitis lethargica. It was felt that the
C.A.M.W. and its Local Associations might possess valuable information, not in
the possession of any other body, on these types of cases, and that such information ought to be available for the information of the Royal Commission.
This Memorandum is to be presented to the Council in January, 1925, and it
will then be decided what further action, if any, should be taken. Should any
necessity arise for immediate action before this date, the Officers of the Association
and the Chairman of the Medical Committee are authorised to take such steps as
they deem advisable.

National Special Schools Union Conference,
----------------------------------------A very successful Conference was held in Glasgow by the National Special
Schools Union on October 9th, 10th and 11th.

The papers included four on subjects of special interest to Mental Welfare
Workers, viz., " The Special Schools and the Importance of their Position in the
Social Organisation," by Dr Ivy Mackenzie, Consulting Physician, Glasgow
District Board of Control ; " The Problem of the Uneducable Child," by Dr.
Letitia Fairfield, Assistant Medical Officer, L.C.C. Public Health Department ;
" The Place of the Colony in the Permanent Care of the Feeble-minded," by
Lady Leslie Mackenzie, and " Some Observations on After-Care of the Mental
Defective," by Mrs. Fern, Renfrewshire Education Authority.

During the Conference, facilities were given to delegates for visiting various
Special Schools in Glasgow and the neighbourhood.

We are informed that the papers read at the Conference will shortly be
published at the price of 1 /- a set, and orders for them should be sent to Miss
Aitchison, Broomloan Road School, Govan, Glasgow.

The British Medical Associetion and the Prevention of Mental Deficiency.
At the Annual Conference of the British Medical Association, held at Bradford
in July, one of the Sessions was devoted to a discussion on the " Prevention of
Mental Deficiency," when the opening paper was given by Dr A. F. Tredgold.
A debate of great interest to Mental Welfare workers followed, but we regret that,
owing to pressure on our space, we are obliged to hold over a report of it until
our next number.

The First English '' Hostel'' for Defectives.
-------------------------------------------Although, as Miss Winifred Gibson in sending us the following account
points out, the Hostel recently opened by the Surrey Voluntary Association is as
yet only in its difficult initial stages, we arc glad to have the opportunity of
bringing the experiment to the notice of our readers, as it is the first of its kind
yet actually launched in this country :?

" The Eagle House Hostel, Mitcham, was opened at the end of May this
year, and there are already 14 girls in residence. The type of girl admitted is the
high-grade certified defective who has already had experience of Institution life
in an ordinary Certified Institution, and who has shown by her general behaviour
that she is fitted for wider opportunities of increased liberty.

The girls at Eagle House are encouraged to look upon it as their own home.
They not only do the housework, but provide small accessories themselves. So
far their chief work has been to get the house and garden in order and to equip
themselves with outfits, but one or two have already been tried in factory work
with considerable success. The difficulty here is to obtain speed equal to that of
the normal girl in a somewhat complicated operation, but great improvement
has already been shown. The girls sent to the Hostel up to the present time are
also rather above the age of those usually employed in the factory, but we hope
to have some younger girls soon.

The additional liberty given to the girls has been fully justified. They shop,
do errands, and go backwards and forwards to work without any escort, and have
given no trouble whatever. One or two of them have been home to see their
relatives. The chief difficulty is to find enough suitable work outside the Hostel
but near enough to make daily work practicable. The second difficulty has been
the very serious ill-health of long standing of many of the girls admitted.
The general spirit in the Hostel is excellent. The cliques and animosities
which were very evident at first are gradually being broken down and a spirit of
comradeship is taking hold. At first the girls were ultra-sensitive about their
mental condition, and when one or two slightly lower grade cases were admitted,
there was resentment on the part of the first comers.

The experiment is as yet only in its initial stages but the results so far are
hopeful and encouraging.

The Work of the Metropolitan Asylums Board for Mental Defectives.
The Annual Report of the Metropolitan Asylums Board, recently issued,
contains a section on Mental Diseases which should be of great interest to Mental
v> elfare workers, who perhaps do not always fully realise the extent of the Board's
activities in connection with Mental Deficiency.

On December 81st, 1923, there were in the Board's five Mental Hospitals?
Cater ham, Leavesden, Tooting Bee, the Fountain and Darenth?4,956 mentally
defective patients, 3,125 of whom were certified under the Lunacy Act, and 1,831
under the M.D. Act and there are now provided for :?
(a) Chronic and harmless cases of all forms of insanity.

(b) Idiots and imbeciles who come within the terms of the Lunacy Acts.
(c) Feeble-minded persons as approved by the Local Government Board in
1897 and 1911.*
(d) Cases covered by the Mental Deficiency Act, with the exception of those
who have been found guilty of any crime of violence and of moral
imbeciles.

A careful system of classification is in force. Thus the Fountain Mental
-^ospital is reserved for children under 7, unimprovable boys up to the age of 9,
and unimprovable girls up to 16. Caterham takes healthy unimprovable adults
and unimprovable low-grade and trainable children, including large numbers of
b?ys passed on from The Fountain on reaching the age of 9. Leavesden is regarded as an infirmary institution accommodating unimprovable adults, most of
whom are suffering from some form of chronic infirmity. Darenth caters for trainable children and for adults capable of industrial training.

The Report devotes considerable attention to the subject of training and
occupation, and an account of Caterham Mental Hospital contains a section on
the methods adopted for dealing with the low-grade children there, for whom
classes have recently been instituted, with the help of one of the C.A.M.W.
Occupational Organisers, under the direction of an experienced teacher. The
school department is also a prominent feature of the work at The Fountain, despite
the fact that the majority of the children sent there are received as " unimprovDuring the year several scientific researches bearing on different aspects of
* E.g., Patients who " by reason of mental defect, are incapable of receiving proper benefit
from ordinary instruction, or cannot be properly trained in association with other persons in
ordinary schools or institutions, or are incapable of using ordinary means or precautions for
protecting themselves from injury or improper usage or treatment, or are incapable of maintain,r,g themselves by work," mental deficiency have been made by the Board's medical staff and in the Report
papers are included on the following subjects :?" The Diagnosis of Mental
Deficiency," by Dr E. B. Sherlock, Chief Medical Officer in the Mental Hospitals
Service ; " Syphilis as an Aetiological Factor in Mongolian Idiocy," by Dr R. M.
Stewart, Medical Superintendent of Leavesden, and Dr D. O. Riddell, late
Assistant Medical Officer ; " An Application of the Methods of Industrial
Psychology to Mentally Defective Persons," fry Dr P. D. McGowan and Dr John
Rose, Assistant Medical Officers of Darenth Training Colony ; and " Cases illustrating the After Effects of Encephalitis Lethargica," by Dr Charles Glen,
Assistant Medical Officer at Darenth.

The Mental Diseases Section of the Report is published separately and can
be obtained from the Offices of the Metropolitan Asylums Board, Victoria
Embankment, E.C.4, price 1/-.

Mental Defectives and Sexual Offences.
-------------------------------------The liability of mentally defective persons to commit sexual offences is a
question which is manifestly of great practical importance and must be taken
into account in any discussion as to the necessity of the provision of institutional
care. It is a question, however, upon which we lack data in the shape of definite
facts and figures, and any contributions which can be made towards building up
such a body of knowledge should be welcomed by mental welfare workers.

In our April number we recorded some investigations made by Dr Hamblin
Smith, and we can now add to them those of another investigator, Dr Norwood
East, late Senior Medical Officer of H.M. Prison, Brixton, and now Medical
Inspector of Prisons in England and Wales.*

Dr East took as his material a series of 150 cases admitted to Brixton Prison
on trial or on remand charged with the offence of exhibitionism or indecent exposure, and these he classified into two main groups : (i.) the psychopathic, and
(ii.) the depraved. In the former group, consisting of 101 individuals, he found
24 who were definitely mentally defective and 9 who, though not certifiable, were
sub-normal, this making a total of 22% of the whole number investigated.t
The offence, as committed by this group, may have various causes. It may
be due, Dr East writes, " to a lack of appreciation of social convention, to be
contributory to masturbation, to obtain sex gratification or stimulate phantasy,
to attract, excite, or invite some female or child, and occasionally it appears
to be due to an infantile pleasure in showing off." In another case it appeared
to be a " retaliatory insult to some girls who, the defective said, were
accustomed to laugh at him in the street, probably on account of his foolish
appearance. The exposure in this case seemed fairly comparable to the less
offensive putting out of the tongue at times indulged in by children."

Whatever the exciting cause, however, Dr East considers from his personal
experience that " any sexual offence committed by a defective will be repeated
unless institutional care is adopted." It would be well if this significant pro* " Observations on Exhibitionism," reprinted by The Lancet, August 23rd, 1924.
t It is interesting to compare these figures with those of Dr Hamblin Smith who, out of 50
cases of indecent exposure, found 18 mentally defective or sub-normal, a percentage closely
agreeing with Dr East's,
nouncement could be borne in mind by all magistrates when faced with th?
necessity of deciding how to dispose of cases of this sort brought before them.
Mental Defect in a Rural Area. A Survey.

In a recent number of " The Lancet "* there is published a paper containing the results of a systematic attempt by the Local Education Authority of
Wiltshire to carry out its duty of " ascertaining " the number of mentally
defective children in the area.

The statistics that resulted are based on the examination of 4,979 children,
the majority of whom were tested personally by the Assistant County Medical
Officer, Dr E. K. Bowes, by whom the experiment is recorded. There were
discovered to be 169 cases of mental defect (feeble-minded, 140, or 88% ;
Imbecile, 27, or 16% ; Moral Imbecile 1), making a proportion of 3% of the total
school population of the area (Imbecile, 5% j feeble-minded, 2.5 /0). This proportion is higher than that found by other investigators taking the same standards
of classification but working in urban areas (Dr Cyril Burt s corresponding
figures for London, e.g., for feeble-minded children, being only 1.5%), but for
various reasons Dr Bowes considers his estimate probably errs on the side of
being too low, and that 4% is likely to approximate to the actual number.

The results of his investigation the writer interprets as pointing to the fact
that the number of mentally defective children in Wiltshire is so high because it
is a rural area, and that in a rural area the incidence of mental defect is higher
because of the lower level of intelligence at which it is possible to maintain partial
or complete self-support. He would, however, no doubt admit that until other
Rural Education Authorities have conducted an ascertainment equally thorough,
generalisation from the experience of one county alone can be only very tentatively made.t
t th 4u,?ust> 1924- , .. , ?nval Commission on the Care and Control of the
Feeble-SUe ^
" MenW Deflciency." 4th Edition,
P* 179 et seq.
