Lunacy in England
==================

Art. V.?
The twenty-fourth report of the Commissioners in Lunacy
has just been issued.

The following table shows the classification of the patients
011 the 1st of January:?

Where maintain ed
on January 1,1880
Private
Pauper
F.
Tota
T. M.
T.
In county and borough asylums 211
In registered hospitals . . 1,409
In licensed houses:
Metropolitan . , . 1,026
Provincial .... 745
In naval and military hospitals
and Royal India Asylum . 309
In Criminal Lunatic Asylum
(Broadmoor) . . . .180
In workhouses:
Ordinary workhouses .
Metropolitan district asylums
Private single patients .
Outdoor paupers
Total .

273
1,293
484
2,702
1,854
1,554
17,903
81
180
247
21,701
48
428
286
282
468
5,126
2,080
2,293
6,865
2,393
3,687
4,066 3,554
28,098
35,473
39,604
129
608
533
253
11.991
4,478
5,980
18,114
1,490
1,206
992
63,571
309
368
5,126
2,080
186
2,293
21,974
1,341
1,256
1,095
19
115
6,865
2,393
282
3,687
32,164
40,088
2,831
2,462
2,087
483
11,991
4,473
468
5,980
39,027
71,191

From the above we see that there is a decrease of 121 males
and 37 females of the private class, and an increase of 602
males and 862 females of the pauper.

The private patients have increased in County and Borough
Asylums by 8, but have decreased in all other establishments.
The pauper patients have increased in County and Borough
Asylums by 1,209, in Registered Hospitals by 12, in Licensed
Houses by 31, in Workhouses by 294, in the Metropolitan
Asylums of Leavesden, Caterliam, and Darenth by 165. The
" out-door paupersresiding with relatives or others, have
decreased by 250.

The usual important statistical tables are given, showing
the progress and condition of lunacy in its various grades,
throughout the year.

With regard to the causes of insanity, intemperance again
heads the list. This curse of our age ought to be legislated
for. The Habitual Drunkards' Act is worse than useless. What
we want is a compulsory Act, not a voluntary one.

At the present time there are sixty County and Borough
Asylums in England and Wales.

On the 1st of January, 1879, there were 38,870 (17,678
males, and 21,192 females), the total admissions during the
year being 11,758, of which number, 5,693 were males and
6,065 females.

Those discharged during the year number 6,249, whilst the
deaths were 4,291. The average daily number resident in the
County and Borough Asylums throughout the year 1879 was
39,642.

During the year two of these institutions have been visited
by outbreaks of typhoid fever, in consequence of the bad
drainage. This occurred at the County Asylums of Chester
and Somerset; in the former the chaplain, his wife, and four
of the patients succumbed to the malady, whilst in the other, a
large number were attacked, but only two died.

The following suicides happened during the year: ?
" No suicide or other fatal casualty has been reported to us
as occurring in any Borough Asylum during 1879, and we are
glad to state that those which have happened in the County
Asylums have been, during the same period, comparatively
few. We hope that this greater immunity from such accidents
may properly be attributed, in some degree at least, to the pre-
valence of better arrangements for the supervision of insane
patients and the exercise of greater vigilance on the part of
those intrusted with their care.

"We proceed to note (shortly) the circumstances of the cases
of this description which have occurred in the year in the County
Asylums, or to patients absent on trial but still on the books.
" A female patient, of the Three Counties Asylum, hanged
herself, while absent on trial, on the 28th of June. This would
probably have been avoided had the patient been returned to
the Asylum in accordance with the suggestion of the Asylum
authorities, conveyed to the clerk to the guardians of the union
to which the patient belonged, by a letter of the 23rd of June.
It seems, however, that the parents of the patient were very
unwilling that she should be detained in an asylum, and this
possibly prevented the immediate action that was necessary in
the case.

" A married woman, S. J., was admitted into the Berks
County Asylum on the 29th of October, 1877, on a certificate
which stated that she was desponding, and had a delusion that
she and her family must come to utter ruin and destitution.
The " statement" sent to our office by the medical superin-
tendent mentioned, too, that she had " suicidal feelings and
delusions." In the evening of Sunday, the l'2th of January,
1879, she evaded the attendant, gained access to the dormitory
in which she slept, and there hanged herself to one of the gas
pendants by means of a round towel, which it was supposed she
must have taken from the basket for dirty linen. It is stated
that S. J. had escaped the nurse's notice while the patients were
being taken down to the hall for tea, and that she had been able
to get into the dormitory, owing to the door of the latter being
inadvertently left unlocked, and that the patient had not been
" looked upon as a suicidal case," her husband having said on
her admission that she had never threatened or attempted
suicide. With reference to this point we failed to understand
how such a view could be entertained in the face of the certifi-
cate, and of the medical superintendent's own " statement."
We were afterwards informed that the lock had been made
more secure, but that there were difficulties in the way of
altering the gas pendants.

"At the Parkside (Macclesfield) Asylum, a female patient,
H. C., committed suicide on the 21st of April, only five days
after admission, by throwing herself from a second-floor window.
" She was of known suicidal propensity, and was so de-
scribed in the ' reception sheet' given to the charge attendant
of the ward in which she was placed. Apparently improving,
the patient was, on the day of the suicide, directed by the head
attendant to be employed in the laundry. This order was for-
gotten by the charge nurse, who, instead, sent H. C. to assist an
under nurse in making beds in a second-floor dormitory. Before
this work was completed, the under nurse took H. C. into her
bed-room, which adjoined the dormitory, and the windows of
which were widely opened. Her object was to give the patient
some confectionery as a reward. This done, both left the bed-
room together and returned to the dormitory, but the nurse
omitted to lock her bed-room door after her. She committed
a second fault in leaving H. C. in the dormitory, with only one
other patient, while she went to inspect a different dormitory.
H. C. took advantage of the nurse's absence to return to the
bed-room, and finding on the table some poisonous liniment,
she drank it and then threw herself from the window. Death
ensued in a few hours from the injuries caused by the fall.
" The carelessness and infraction of rules manifested in this
case were the subject of comment by us, but we left the ques
tion of punishment to the Committee, who, in consideration of
previous good character, forbore to dismiss the nurse who was
chiefly in fault.

" M. R., a woman suffering from melancholia, and stated to
be suicidal, was admitted into the Cornwall Asylum on the 5th
September, 1878. After a slight improvement she relapsed,
and on 27th September tried to throw herself over the banis-
ters. She again improved, though with some relapses, but
continued apparently well from December to the 1st of March,
1879, when, after examination by the medical superintendent,
she was allowed to go on trial for five weeks to the care of her
husband and children at Camborne, and with a weekly allow-
ance of 5s. On the 5th of March, when returning to her
home with her son, she left him and went into some neighbour-
ing arsenic works, and drank from a pool containing arsenic in
solution, from the effects of which she died the same evening.
" This case affords an instance of the difficulty, so con-
stantly experienced, of determining how soon to rely on the
apparent convalescence of a patient with suicidal tendency.
" An epileptic idiot cripple, S. T., died in the same Asylum
on the 12th July, 1879, and the verdict of the coroner's jury
who inquired into the case was, that ' the said S. T. died from
epilepsy, and that his death was accelerated by exhaustion the
result of a scald.'

" It appeared in evidence that an attendant, with the aid
of a patient, had, on the morning of the 2nd July, taken
S. T. to the bath-room to give him a bath ; that the attendant
had turned on the hot and cold water together, and while the
bath was tilling had left the bath-room to attend to another
patient outside ; that during his absence the patient left in
charge of S. T. had placed the latter in the bath; that the
attendant hearing a sound as if some one had been put in the
water, rushed back, saw S. T. in the bath, and moaning, and on
taking him out found him scalded.

" After reading and considering the bathing rules in force in
the Asylum we did not think that so much blame attached to the
attendant for this accident as would have been commonly attri-
butable ; for the rules did not contain instructions on three
important heads, namely that the cold water should always be
turned on first; that during the employment of the bath the room
should never be left without an attendant: and that the keys
should not be allowed to remain on the water-taps, and when
out of use should be kept locked up.

" A female patient who, after some six months' residence in
the Cumberland and Westmoreland Asylum, had sufficiently re-
covered to be sent out on a month's trial, destroyed herself at
her home. There appears to have been no reason in her case
to suspect a suicidal disposition, and no ground for supposing
that her discharge on trial was premature.

" On the 9th of April a patient in the Derby Asylum, J. D.,
committed suicide by cutting his throat with a piece of glass,
obtained by breaking the glass of a framed Scripture text. He
was known to be suicidally disposed, and when admitted, on the
7th of January, 1879, was placed under special care, and orders
were, we are informed, given by the medical superintendent to
the chief attendant, and by the latter to the ward attendant,
that J. D. was to be constantly watched. He, however, about
8.45 on the morning of the 9th of April, while engaged in dust-
ing the furniture in the gallery, escaped the observation of the
attendant in charge, who was occupied at the end of the gallery
in shaving another patient, and entering a small dormitory, the
door of which into the gallery had been left open, soon after
was found kneeling by a bed with a severe wound in the neck,
self-inflicted by the piece of glass obtained as before mentioned.
He died in about half-an-hour after being so found. The
reason given why the door of the dormitory was left open, was
that the room was being aired, ventilation by the windows alone
not being satisfactory. Although the circumstances of this
case evidently pointed to a relaxation by the attendant in
charge of that unceasing watchfulness which is requisite in the
case of patients of the suicidal class, we did not consider the
neglect so culpable as to call for further action on our part.
" On the 23rd of October, E. K., a private patient of the
Dorset Asylum, while residing with his brother, to whose care,
on trial, he had been allowed to go on the 10th of the same
month, committed suicide by cutting his throat with a razor.
This patient, who was distinctly suicidal when admitted, had
been several months in the Asylum.

" On the 17th of November, 1879, a man, J. S., was admitted
as a patient into the Essex County Asylum. He was then
" highly suicidal," as described in the " statement," and was
suffering from the effects of self-inflicted wounds. He was at
first placed in the padded-room, and restrained by the strait
waistcoat. This treatment continued until the 30tli of Novem-
ber, after which he was allowed to sit in the ward in the day
time, unrestrained, and after the 8th of December he was placed
at night in the special dormitory for suicidal patients. Special
instructions had been given that J. S. was never to be left
alone. On the 18th December he was in the special charge of
an attendant named liobert Alfred Jaques, who had no other
duty than that of attending to this patient. On this day, how-
ever, he allowed J. S. to be in the closet alone, while, as he
stated, he (Jaques) went to calm another patient who had
become excited; and on returning to the closet after an
absence, according to his own account, of not more than four
minutes, he found J. S. lying with his throat cut, and bleeding
extensively. Dr Amsden, the assistant medical officer, was in
the ward, and immediately attended to J. S., who, however,
died in a minute or two. The wound was inflicted with a razor
belonging to Jaques, but it was not ascertained how J. S. ob-
tained possession of it. We considered it abundantly clear that
there had been culpable negligence on the part of Jaques, and
expressed our confidence that his conduct would be severely
dealt with by the Committee of Visitors. Subsequently we
learnt that he had been discharged from the Asylum service,
but not prosecuted.

" In the Hants Asylum a male patient, H. K., was disco-
vered, 11 days after his admission, to have two broken ribs.
The investigation of the Visitors and the medical superinten-
dent failed to fix with any certainty the responsibility for this
injury ; and their inquiries were impeded by the fact that on
admission no sufficient medical examination of the patient's
person had been made. In reference to this omission we re-
commended the substitution of a more stringent general rule as
to medical examination on admission than that which was then
in force ; and our recommendation was adopted by the Visitors,
who also, on our suggestion, strengthened the staff of male
attendants.
" A bad case of death by scalding occurred in the Barming
Heath Asylum in the month of June. On the morning of the
6th, Emma Hughes, the charge nurse of Ward 17, having occa-
sion to bathe a patient, E. Gr., employed another patient to give
the bath, neither she (the nurse) nor any other attendant being
present. The patient prepared the bath, but with water which
was too hot, and by force placed E. Gr. in it, the consequence
being that E. Gr. was so severely scalded that she died of the
effects on the 15tli of the same month. Hughes's conduct was
in clear contravention of the bathing rules of the Asylum, of
which she had full knowledge, and which expressly prohibited
the giving a bath except by an attendant, and also the employ-
ment of a patient to turn on either hot or cold water. We at
once expressed our readiness to take proceedings against her for
wilful neglect. The Visitors, however, had her summoned
before the magistrates, when she pleaded guilty and was fined
?3, which was paid, and she was discharged from the Asylum.
Her punishment was, in our Opinion, inadequate for the grave
neglect and breach of rules of which she had been guilty.
" A death occurred in the Lancaster Moor Asylum on the
1st January, which forcibly illustrated the importance of that
which we so constantly urge, namely, a thorough medical exa-
mination of patients on admission.

"A woman, H. A., was admitted on the previous 21st of
December, from the Burnley Union Workhouse, in feeble con-
dition, and apparently, as stated by the assistant medical officer,
' half-starved.' This gentleman received the patient, and made
a slight examination, during which he observed a black eye
and a skin eruption, but he did not specially examine the
chest. The patient was put to bed, and on the 23rd symptoms
of capillary bronchitis being observed, she was removed to the
hospital. On January 1 she was much worse, and appeared to
suffer much pain when coughing, and also from movement of
the body. This attracted attention to the state of her ribs,
when it was found that several were broken on each side. She
died in the night of the 1st, and a post-mortem examination
disclosed that two ribs on the right side and three on the left
were broken.

"A coroner's inquest was held in this case, and several
witnesses examined. The evidence of the medical superin-
tendent and his assistant medical officer went to show that the
fractures were of some standing, of at least a week's, and pos-
sibly a fortnight's, duration. The evidence of the asylum
attendants negatived the hypothesis that the injuries had been
occasioned in the asylum. That of the matron and of the
pauper nurse who had charge of the patient in the Burnley
workhouse (there being no paid attendant for the lunatic ward),
proved that she had been during the three days she had been
detained there, excited and violent, and had been continuously
restrained by the strait waistcoat and otherwise; and the
statement of the relieving officer who took the patient to the
asylum was to the effect that she had gone quietly, and had not
been violent on the journey.

"The jury found that the death of the deceased had been
accelerated by the broken ribs and pleurisy, and that 'the
evidence did not show by whom or how the fracture of the ribs
was caused.' The jury directed attention to the insufficiency of
the medical examination on admission, and commented on the
want of proper provision for the care of lunatics in the Burnley
workhouse.

" We entirely agreed with these remarks, and we further
felt bound, in forwarding to the medical superintendent our
observations upon the case, to express our opinion that the
deceased had not received in the asylum that amount of medical
care and attention to which she was entitled.

" The remarks of the jury on the workhouse management
were very just. It appeared from the evidence of the master
that there were at the time of the inquest 19 male and 17
female imbecile patients, but no regular paid attendants, these
inmates being attended to by paupers only, who were entrusted
with the instruments of mechanical restraint and uncontrolled
power of employing them. We have reason to fear that this
system still continues in force. It rests with the guardians to
alter it.

" In the Prestwich Asylum a patient, J. C., came by his death
at the hands of a fellow patient, J. McG-., on the 24th July.
J. McG. was demented, but quiet, and apparently inoffensive.
On the day mentioned he was at work with J. C. and other
patients in the stackyard of the farm, and engaged in removing
pieces of timber. He suddenly, and apparently without pre-
meditation, struck J. C. with a heavy bar of iron, killing him
on the spot. He was subsequently put on his trial for murder,
but was, on arraignment, found to be insane, and was removed
to Broadmoor Criminal Lunatic Asylum.

" A male patient died in the Eainhill Asylum in February,
and the post-mortem examination disclosed the presence in
the stomach and intestines of partly digested yew leaves. A
branch of yew had also been found in the patient's pocket.
The certified causes of death were disease of the heart and
congestion of the liver and kidneys, but Dr Kogers was of
opinion that the irritant effect of the yew leaves had accelerated,
or was partly the cause of the death. The leaves had been
obtained from Irish yew-trees growing in the airing-court, and
although not aware that any similar accident had occurred, Dr.
Eogers thought it prudent to have these trees removed.
" L. S., a German, speaking but little English, was admitted
as a patient into the Banstead Asylum in May. He was de-
scribed as not suicidal in the ' statement' accompanying the
order, but the medical certificate mentioned refusal of food,
and indicated a form of insanity which might easily develop
a tendency to self-destruction. In the morning of the 24th
of July, at about a quarter to six o'clock, he was found dead
in his bed in a single room, having strangled himself with a
piece of linen bandage, which he had probably obtained from
the infirmary, where he was employed in the day.
" 
At the inquest, it was stated by Dr Claye Shaw that no
symptoms of suicidal insanity had been observed in the
patient by him, and that none had been reported to him by
the attendants, and, consequently, L. S. had not been treated
and watched as a suicidal patient. No blame was attached
by the coroner's jury to anyone concerned. We think, how-
ever, that there was enough in the medical certificate to
have suggested some greater amount of precaution in the care
of the patient.

" Two suicides occurred in the Colney Hatch Asylum during
the past year, both of female patients.

" The first was that of M. P., who, in the night of 13-14th
January, set her night-dress and bed clothes on fire, and
on the 16th died from the effects of the burns thereby
caused. This woman, who had previously been for some con-
siderable time under certificates, was on the 14th of September,
1878 admitted to the Asylum, and was then considered to
be suffering from recurrent mania, but was not described or
thought to be suicidal. On the 16th of December, however,
she refused her food, and on the 18th tried to set her clothes
on fire, saying, ' she thought that higher powers had ordered
her to do so.' She was in consequence removed to the in-
firmary ward, in order to be under the supervision of a nurse
day and night. In this ward, on the night in question,
there were 39 patients in charge of the ordinary day nurse,
who was taking the night nurse's duties, the latter being
on leave. There was also a special nurse in the ward in
attendance on a woman in labour, who was lying in a small
room opening out of the principal room, and was delivered
during the night. The regular nurse was summoned to
assist when this happened, and, while the special nurse at-
tended to the child, she was engaged with the mother, and
thus, as she stated on the inquest, was for half-an-hour taken
from her regular duty of supervision. In the interval M. P.
got up, lit a piece of paper at the gas burner over the
door, which she reached by means of a chair, and getting
again into bed, set fire to the clothes. The regular nurse,
hearing a cry of 4 fire,' went at once into the room where
the deceased was and extinguished the flames. No special
notice of the deceased patient's tendency to meddle with
fire, or instructions as to watchfulness, appear to have been
given to the nurses of the infirmary ward, though the nurse
in charge on the night of the 13-14th stated that she was
aware from ' general talk' that the patient had previously set
fire to her clothes.

" On a review of all the circumstances of this case, we could
not avoid coming to the conclusion that the death was due
to the imperfect arrangements made for the night supervision
of the patients in the infirmary ward, and this conclusion
we communicated to the Committee of Visitors.

" The other case of suicide in the Colney Hatch Asylum
was that of Ann R., who was described on her admission
in February 1878 as 'the subject of melancholia' and as
suicidal, and who was found by a patient about 5.30 a.m.
of the 10th of May, 1879, suspended by means of a jack towel
to the top lintel of the W.C. in E dormitory, and quite
dead. In the opinion of the medical superintendent, who
was immediately summoned, the deceased had been dead
an hour when he arrived. She had not, we are informed, been
considered suicidal, and no special instructions as to her treat-
ment had been given to her nurses. She slept in a small four-
bedded dormitory opening out of a larger one, containing 64
beds, in which a night nurse sat. This nurse, however, had
the supervision of 178 patients sleeping in five rooms on three
floors, to all of which it was her duty to pay periodical visits,
the head night nurse having also occasional rounds. The
patients were of a chronic class, and considered to be quiet and
harmless. It is probable that Ann E. had taken advantage of
an absence of the night nurse from E dormitory to go to the
closet. How she obtained the towel with which she hung
herself did not appear.

" We were glad to learn that after this accident the Com-
mittee appointed a special night nurse for E dormitory alone.
Both in this and the preceding case of suicide at this Asylum,
we think an error of judgment was committed by the medical
officers in not treating the patients as suicidal. In the one, the
nature of the malady and the statements in the certificates
certainly pointed to a suicidal tendency; and in the other,
the previous attempt at injuring herself by fire should have
suggested greater precautions than were adopted in consequence
of that attempt.

"A patient who was admitted into the asylum at Thorpe in the
forenoon of the 4th of April was found dead in his bed early the
following morning. He had been admitted in a very feeble con-
dition from the Aylsham Union Workhouse, and the circum-
stances of his removal gave rise to a correspondence, which we
will refer to later on.

" The suicide by hanging, of a patient, John B., took place in
the West Hiding Asylum, at Wakefield, on the 27th of August.
The patient had been in the asylum more than a year, and had
so much improved in mental condition that the propriety of his
going home had been mentioned to him by the medical
superintendent. This idea, however, appeared to be distasteful
to the patient. At the time of the occurrence he was not con-
sidered to be any longer actively suicidal. Previously he had
been kept under close observation, and it was thought possible
that the suggestion of sending him home may have overcome
his self-control. On a review of all the circumstances of this
case, which were fully detailed to us by Dr Major, we did not
consider that blame attached to any one in the matter.
" An inquiry was held in July last, by two of our number, into
the circumstances attending the death of Benjamin H., a pauper
patient in the South Yorkshire Asylum at Wadsley.

" The coroner's jury had returned the following verdict at
the inquest: ' The deceased died from inflammation of the
lungs, accelerated or caused by a fractured sternum and three
broken ribs, but as to where or when the injuries were inflicted,
there is not sufficient evidence before the jurors.'
" This death, in apparently suspicious circumstances, created
a considerable amoujit of excitement in Sheffield and the neigh-
bourhood.
" The Committee of Visitors failed to elicit anything more
definite than the coroner's jury had done.
" Our inquiry was made at the asylum, and lasted four and a
half days, 35 persons being examined on oath, and 10, chiefly
patients, making statements not sworn to.

"The patient was a canal-boat hauler, 33 years old, stout
and strong, but not tall. When admitted he was so restless
that the medical superintendent who examined him was unable
to satisfy himself as to the presence or absence of broken ribs.
It seemed, however, on the whole, pretty clear that on admis-
sion the bones of the chest were uninjured. The patient died
on the 28th of June, seventeen days after admission, when the
injuries reported in the verdict just quoted were found out.
" Searching inquiries were made into the care and treatment
of the patient throughout the whole period of his residence in
the asylum. The general evidence showed that these had been
quite proper. A discharged patient, indeed, swore to one vio-
lent assault on the deceased by an attendant, but this was
.directly contradicted, and shown to be an exaggerated account
of a fall, originating from a push given by the attendant, while
injudiciously endeavouring to deal with the patient single-
handed. From this fall no bad effects resulted.

" It appeared, however, that on the 22nd of June the patient
had been placed, on account of his continued restlessness, in a
single room. Here he suddenly climbed up on to the upper edge
of the lower sash of the sliding window shutter, and thence fell
?of sprang down a height of six feet, coming down heavily and
doubled up, his knees bent, and ' driven up into his stomach,' as
one witness described the occurrence.

" The fall was duly reported, but it was not thought serious,
especially as the deceased rose up immediately, neither exhibiting
pain at the moment or subsequently, nor showing external signs
of injury.

" Still it seemed possible, and, indeed, according to surgical
experience, very possible, that the injuries to the breast-bone
and ribs might have happened on this occasion, and so our
colleagues reported.

" The attention of the Committee of Visitors was called to
the construction of the window shutters of the single rooms,
which required, in our opinion, some alteration to render im-
possible the recurrence of such an accident."

On the 1st of January ] 880, there were 2,831 patients in the
sixteen Registered Hospitals. The total admissions during the
year 1879 being 900. The condition of these institutions, with
one exception, have been spoken favourably of by the Commis-
sioners in Lunacy. The exception is the Liverpool Lunatic
Hospital, and this chiefly in consequence of the financial
arrangements.

The Licensed Houses in England and Wales, or what are
generally known as Private Asylums, on the 1st of January last,
were 99 in number, of which 37 were Metropolitan, and 62
Provincial ones.

By the statistical table it may be seen that the number
resident at the commencement of the year was 4,549, divided
into 1,771 males, and 1,637 females of the private class, and
427 males and 714 females belonging to the paupers.

Three cases of suicide alone took place at these private
licensed houses, one at Haydock Lodge, the others at Stretton
House and Grove House, All Stretton.

With regard to the single patients, the Commissioners give
some valuable remarks and regulations, which we give in
extenso. The register shows the following number:?
Number, 1st January 1879
Registered during the year
Discharged and removed .
? of whom recovered
Died ....
Eemaining 1st January 1880
Males
192
71
56
13
21
186
Females
280
86
65
11
19
282
Total
472
157
121
24
40
468

Besides this number, there are 208 persons of unsound
mind, found so by inquisition, and who are understood to be
residing with their committees.

One suicide of a single patient is reported, by means of
opium, whilst on leave of absence.

Acting under the powers conferred upon the Commissioners
in Lunacy, of the 8th & 9th Vict. c. 100, s. 90, a new form for
the Medical Visitation Book or Medical Journal, in which the
progress of the case of a single patient is to be entered.
We here give the " Provisions of the Law as to single
patients," as given in the Appendix M. of this Eeport. We
consider the details so valuable as to be given in their
entirety:?

" Provisions of tiie Law as to Single Patients.
" The charge or detention of a lunatic (which expression
includes an idiot and a person of unsound mind) as a single
patient in a Private House, not licensed for the reception of
lunatics, is permitted by law on the following conditions:?
Order and
certificates.

8 & 9 Yict.
c. 100 s. 90.
16 & 17 Yict.
c. 96. ss. 4-8.
Notice of
admission
and copies,
&c. to Com-
missioners.
Ibid. 25 & 26
Vict. c. Ill,
6. '28.
Admission
on transfer.
16 & 17 Yict.
c. 96, s. 20.

" 1. The procuring of an order for reception signed by
some person, requesting the superintendent or proprietor of
the house, or the person who is to take the charge, to receive
the patient; and of two certificates, each signed by a
registered medical practitioner, stating that he has sepa-
rately examined the patient, and on such examination
found him to be of unsound mind.

" N.B.?Where a patient already under certificates is
removed with consent of the Commissioners in Lunacy,
fresh certificates are not required by the person taking
charge.

" 2. The transmission to the Commissioners in Lunacy at
their Office, 19 Whitehall Place, London, S.W., of notice
of the reception of the patient, together with copies of the
order and certificates, or in case of a patient transferred
from other care, copies of the transfer order and the Com-
missioners' consent thereto.

" 3. The visitation of the patient at short stated intervals
by a registered medical practitioner (appointed by the
friends of the patient), who did not sign either of the cer-
tificates of insanity or the order for reception, and who
derives no profit from the care or charge of the patient, and
who is not a partner, father, son, or brother of any person
deriving profit from such care or charge. He is called
' the medical attendant.'

" N.B.?This condition is not necessarily affected by
the circumstance that the person taking the charge is
himself a medical man.

" 4. The visitation of a patient at any reasonable time
or times by one or more of the Commissioners in Lunacy.

" EXCEPTIONS.

" These Conditions do not apply to cases where a Committee
of the Person has been appointed by the Lord Chancellor, nor
where payment is not made on account of nor profit derived
from the charge of the lunatic.

"of the order and certificates, etc.
" The forms are prescribed by Act of Parliament, and must
be strictly adhered to.

" Instructions for filling up the forms in conformity with the
law, and for transmitting the necessary copies, the notice of
admission, and statement of condition, have been prepared by
order of the Commissioners in Lunacy. On receipt of an appli-
cation containing the names and addresses of the intended
single patient, of the person who is to take charge, and of the
person who places the patient in charge, the Commissioners will
give a set of blank forms with instructions.

"of medical visitation.

" 1. After two days and before the expiration of seven clear
days from the day of reception, the medical attendant is to
forward to the office of the Commissioners, on a prescribed
form, a report or statement of the mental and bodily condition
of the patient.

" 2. The person taking charge is bound to cause the patient
to be visited at least once in every two weeks by the medical
attendant.
" 3. The medical attendant must at each visit enter in a book
to be kept at the house, according to the subjoined form, the
date of each of his visits, and a statement of the several par-
ticulars required as to the condition and circumstances of the
patient and of the house.

" 4. These visits may, by special permission of the Commis-
sioners,* be made less frequently than once in every two weeks;
but in such case, where the patient is under the care or charge
of a medical man, such medical man must himself make an
* This permission is not (as a rule) accorded until the patient has been visited
once by a Commissioner.

Visits of
Commis-
sioners. 8&9
Yict. c. 100,
s. 92, 16 & 17
Yict. c. 96,
s. 27.
16 & 17 Yict.
c. 96, s. 4,
Schcd. A.
Statement of
condition.
25 & 26 Vict,
c. Ill, s. 41.
Fortnightly
visits.
8 & 9 Vict,
c. 100, s. 90.
Entries,
medical
visitation
book.
8 & 9 Vict,
c. 100, s. 90.
Less frequent
visits.
16 & 17 Vict,
c. 96, s, 14,
242 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
Annual
reports.
16 & 17 Vict,
c. 96, s. 16.
Restraint
and
seclusion.
Changes of
residence.
16 & 17 Yict.
c. 96, s. 22.
Transfers.
16 & 17 Vict,
c. 96, s. 20.
Removals
for health,
or on trial,
Ibid. s. 22.

entry once at the least in every two weeks in a book to be called
the ' medical journal.'

" 5. Every medical man who visits a single patient, or under
whose care a single patient may be, must, on the 10th of
January, or within seven days thereof, in every year, report in
writing to the Commissioners the state of health, mentally and
bodily, of the patient, and such other circumstances as he may
deem necessary to be communicated. Each annual report
should give all these particulars fully, even although no change
may have occurred since the previous report.

" MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.

" The regulations of the Commissioners, made under the
powers of Act 25 and 26 Vict. c. Ill, s. 42, require that treat-
ment of the patient by restraint or by seclusion should be
recorded in the medical journal or visitation book.

" By restraint is meant mechanical restraint, as, for instance,
the use of a ' strait-jacket,' or the tying down of the patient to
a chair, or securing him in his bed or by gloves.
" Seclusion is defined by the Board as ' compulsory isolation
in the day-time,' as by locking up the patient in a room alone.
" In order that a proper record of such treatment (if resorted
to), may be kept, the person in charge of the patient, if not
himself a medical man keeping the journal, must keep a note of
the days on which either restraint or seclusion is resorted to,
and of the length of time on each occasion, and must produce
such note to the medical attendant on his next visit.
" When the person in charge of a single patient proposes to
change his residence, and to remove the patient with him, seven
clear days' notice of the proposed change, with the exact
address and designation of the new residence, must be sent to
the Commissioners and to the person who signed the order for
reception of patient.

" If it is proposed to remove the patient to the care or charge
of another person, the consent to an order of transfer should
previously be obtained from the Commissioners, otherwise a
fresh order and certificates will be necessary. ?
"If it should be desired to give the patient liberty of absence
anywhere, for a definite time, for improvement of his health,
or for a trial of his powers of self-control, the consent of the
Commissioners must first be obtained; the written consent of
* N.B.?These books, or book, and the original order and certificates and the
transfer order, if any, must be so kept that they may be accessible to any Com-
missioner in Lunacy visiting the patient at any time.
the person who signed the order must accompany the applica-
tion, as well as a statement by the medical attendant showing
the fitness of the patient for such absence or trial.
" If a definite place is named in the written consent of the
Commissioners, the removal of the patient to any other place,
without first obtaining a fresh consent, will operate as a dis-
charge, and will entail the necessity of fresli order and
certificates. This will also be the case if the patient is not
brought back before the expiration of the leave of absence, or of
any extension thereof.

" The death of the person to whom the order is addressed
likewise operates as a discharge, and renders fresh certificates
necessary. Should the person in charge, therefore, become
dangerously ill, the friends of the patient should at once be
communicated with, in order that arrangements for a transfer
may be made.

"Everyletter written by a single patient, and addressed to
the Commissioners in Lunacy, must, by law, be forwarded un-
opened, unless special directions to the contrary have been given
by the Commissioners.
" Every letter written by a single patient, and addressed to
any person other than the Commissioners, must be forwarded to
the person to whom it is addressed, unless the person in charge
of the single patient prohibit the forwarding of such letter, by
endorsement to that effect under his hand on the letter, in which
case he must lay all letters so endorsed before the Commissioner
who next visits the patient.
" Immediate notice must be forwarded to the office of the
Commissioners in case of the discharge, removal, escape, and
recapture of a patient.
" DEATH.
" Notice of d,eath in the subjoined form must be sent to the
Commissioners within 48 hours of the death.
" The medical man who attended the patient during the
illness, which terminated in death, is to prepare and sign a
statement setting forth the time and cause of the death, and
the duration of the disease of which the patient died. Such
statement should be entered in the medical journal or visitation
book, and a copy of such statement, certified by the person in
charge of the patient, must be transmitted by him to the
coroner for the county or borough within two days after the
death.
Letters.
25 & 26 Vict,
c. Ill, s. 10,
Letters.
25 & 26 Vict,
c. Ill, s. 40.
Notices.
8 & D Vict,
c. 100, ss. 53
54, 55, & 90
continued
and
extended,
16 & 17 Vict,
c. 96, ss. 21,
22.
Statement
for the
coroner.
25 & 26 Vict,
c.lll, s. 44.
244 LUNACY IN ENGLAND.
8 & 9 Yict.
c. 100, s. 54;
25 & 26 Vict,
c. Ill, s. 4-1.
'f PENALTIES.

" The following acts or defaults are declared by the Lunacy
Acts to be misdemeanours punishable by fine, imprisonment, or
both:?

" 1. The reception into an unlicensed house, or the taking
the care or charge of any person therein as a lunatic,
without having the order and certificates prescribed by
law. (Except in the case of a person deriving no profit
from the charge, or a Committee appointed by the Lord
Chancellor.)

" 2. The neglect to transmit copies of the order and
certificates (when obtained), and the statement of condition
to the Commissioners in Lunacy.

" 3. Failure in causing the patient to be visited fort-
nightly by a medical man, unless such fortnightly visits
have been permitted by the Commissioners to be paid less
frequently.

" 4. The making of an untrue entry in the medical visi-
tation book, or medical journal, by the medical man
keeping the same.
" 5. Neglect to send notice of discharge or death to the
Commissioners, or statement of cause of death, &c., to the
coroner.

" The neglect to deal with a patient's letters as above directed
is punishable by a penalty of 201.; the neglect to send notice
to the Commissioners of escape and retaking by a penalty of
10?.; and the failure to comply with regulations as to entries
in medical visitation book by a penalty of 51.
" To keep two or more lunatics in a house a license is re-
quired.

" By order of the Board,
" (Signed) C. S. Perceval,
" Secretary.
" 1 si January 1880."

FORM of MEDICAL VISITATION" BOOK (or MEDICAL JOURNAL) for SINGLE PATIENTS,
Authorised by the Commissioners in Lunacy, 1st December 1879.
Date
Mental Condition. What evidence of
Insanity ?
Any and what change since last Visit ?
The first entry after admission to be a
sketch of previous history of case, and full par-
ticulars of mental and bodily condition, and not
to be enteral here, but on blank pages to be left
for the purpose at the beginning of book.
Bodily
health and
condition
Restraint or Seclusion
since last Visit.
When and how long ?
By what means ? and
wherefore ?
Visits of
Friends.
Date of Visit.
Name of
Friend
State of House and
Furniture, Bed
and Bedding.
Supply and Condition
of Wearing Apparel
Dietary
proper ?
If not,
state the
reason
Employment,
Exercise,
and
Amusement

FORM OF NOTICE OF DISCHARGE.
I hereby give you Notice, That , a private patient, received into this house on the day of 188
?was discharged therefrom (a) by the authority of on the day of 188 .
(Signed)
Dated this day of 188 .   Proprietor (or Superintendent) of House.
To the Commissioners in Lunacy.
(a) Recovered, or relieved, or not improved.
FORM OF NOTICE OF DEATH.
I hereby give you Notice, That a private patient, received into this house on the day
of 188 , died therein on the day of 188 .
(Signed)_
Dated this day of 188 i   Proprietor (or Superintendent) of House.
And I further certify, That was present at the death of the said , and that the apparent
cause of death of the said [ascertained by jpost-mortem examination (if so)], was
(Signed) __
To the Commissioners in Lunacy. Medical Attendant of the said
On the 1st of January, 1880, there were 16,464 (7,206
males and 9,258 females) detained in workhouses. With regard
to the management of these places, the Commissioners state:?
"?It will be observed that at the present time there are a
large number of each sex in workhouses who are classed as of
unsound mind, and who are consequently visited by us. There
has been, on the whole, considerable improvement in the
accommodation and treatment of the classed imbeciles, during
the past ten years, and we can, with pleasure, report that in a
large number of instances, the recommendations made by us
have been favourably received by the guardians and supported
by i the Local Government Board.

"It should be borne in mind, that chronic harmless lunatics
or imbeciles are the (inly cases that ought to be detained in a
workhouse, and our efforts are always strongly directed against
the reception and detention of acute cases. We have often
found it necessary to order the removal of decidedly insane
patients, who ought, in the first instance, to have had the
benefit of Asylum treatment; and in some of the larger work-
houses we frequently meet with inmates suffering from long-
standing melancholia, where the history of the case gives the
impression that early treatment might have resulted in cure.
The Act of Parliament has clearly defined the duties of both
medical officers and parish officials, and it is to be regretted
that false ideas of economy, or other reasons, should be allowed
to have weight, and a course be pursued which cannot fail of
being prejudicial to the patient, and, ultimately, of increasing
the number of the incurable insane dependent on the rates.

" On tthe other hand, in many instances, an inclination
exists to send off to an Asylum old chronic cases, because they
are a little troublesome and difficult to manage. This is espe-
cially so in those workhouses where there are no regular paid
attendants, as there ought always to be when the imbeciles are
separated from the other inmates. We thus find in our County
Asylums many old chronic patients who, under proper super-
vision, might be well cared for in workhouses.

"We must not be understood to be advocating the removal
of all working patients, of a chronic type, from County and
Borough Asylums, as this might lead to serious inconvenience,
INeither do we lose sight of the fact, that the experience of
Medical Superintendents of Asylums shows, that where patients
Mve been discharged to workhouses, where the conditions of ?
proper supervision, cheerful rooms, suitable clothing, a liberal
dietary, and the means of bodily exercise do not exist,;they
have degenerated rapidly, and have been returned to; the
Asylum as unmanageable.

" Still, under suitable arrangements, a large number of the
chronic imbecile class might be well cared for in the work-
houses, and room would thus be found in the County Asylums
for the treatment of recent cases, thus, to some extent, meeting
the urgent want of asylum accommodation, which is at present
so generally felt.

" Without entering, on the present occasion, into criticisms
of the management of particular workhouses, we may report
generally, that although the standard is certainly higher than
it was some years ago, yet that in many of these establishments,
the treatment and accommodation provided for the imbecile
paupers are open to grave objection.

" For instance, we find that there is a want of night super-
vision of epileptic cases in many workhouses, even when the
number of such cases is large. Thus, in one of the Lancashire
Workhouses, we found 58 male and 86 female epileptics, but no
attendant sitting up at night to guard against accident of any
kind.
" The bathing arrangements, again, in many Workhouses,
are not satisfactory, but in this matter there appears to be a
gradual improvement.

" The diet provided for the imbecile class varies consider-
ably. We endeavour to procure for them as a minimum, three
solid meat dinners weekly. In this we have not been uniformly
successful, and some boards of guardians consider that meat
twice a week is sufficient. We shall not, however, relax our-
efforts in this direction, and in that of improvement in other
respects."

Four cases of prosecution for infringement of the Lunacy
Laws have taken place for taking illegal charge of persons of,
unsound mind, were brought to the notice of the Commissioners
during the past year. In three of these cases the circumstances
justified the Board in abstaining from prosecuting for the >
misdemeanour, on condition of an apology being published in
the newspapers. In the fourth case, however, proceedings
were taken :? 

" Having received information that a person named Samuel
Hancock, living at Alsager., near Crewe, had charge of a lunatic;
patient, Mr. L. E., in respect of whose reception by Hancock no
notice had been sent to our office, we obtained an order from ,
the late Lord Chancellor under the provisions of Sects. 112 and
113 of the Act 8 & 9 Vict. c. 100, armed with which, two of
our number, accompanied by Dr J. T. Arlidge, of Newcastle- ;
under-Lyme, visited the house which had been indicated to us. ,
This was found to be occupied by Samuel Hancock, and in his
charge was L. E., who evidently was of unsound mind, and
whom, Hancock admitted, he received for profit without order
and certificate. L. E. had previously been a patient in a
Provincial Licensed House, from which he had been discharged,
but ' relieved' only, in 1872. 

"We directed a prosecution to be commenced. Hancock
was committed by the magistrates for trial at the Chester
Summer Assizes, at which he pleaded guilty, and the learned
judge (Mr. Justice Manisty), who presided, considered that,
in the circumstances of the case, it was sufficient to sentence
Hancock to come up for judgment if called upon to do so. No
cruelty to, or very serious neglect of the lunatic by Hancock
was observed, though the sleeping accommodation supplied was
far from satisfactory.

" The patient was, soon after the visit above referred to,
duly certified to be of unsound mind, and his reception by
Hancock made legal."

The Commissioners have during the past year considered
the class of attendants in the various asylums, and prepared
the following circular letter, which was, however, supplemented
by their own personal inquiries as to the wages of the
attendants:?

" Office of Commissioners in Lunacy :
" 19 Whitehall Place, S.W.,
" 6th May 1879.
" Sir,?In a Circular Letter addressed about twenty years
ago (March 31, 1859), by direction of the Commissioners, to
the proprietors of licensed houses in the metropolitan district,
will be found the following remarks, called forth by a considera-
tion of the subject of the duties and qualifications of attendants
upon the insane :?

"' The particular qualifications for attendants, in addition
to moral character, patience, and good temper, and cleanly and
orderly habits, depend upon the classes and stations in life of
the patients under their care.

"' As respects pauper patients, the attendants should be
capable of directing and promoting their occupations and
amusements, of reading to them, and of instructing them in
their various trades and employments.

"? Qualifications of a higher order, and a superior degree of
education, are required in attendants upon private patients, to
whom they are necessarily, to a certain extent, companions.
In this point of view it is very desirable that the attendants
should not have to perform duties of a menial kind, such
as belong more properly to domestic servants. It is scarcely
necessary to observe that they should be respectably dressed,
and that they should be intelligent and courteous in manner.
"' In establishments requiring a considerable number of
attendants, it is important that there should be a head
attendant, to see that the ordinary attendants perform their
duties with regularity, and that they are civil and attentive to
the patients.

"' In order to ensure the services of good and efficient
attendants, and to prevent a frequent change of such persons,
it is indispensable that they should be adequately paid, and
that they should be encouraged in a course of good conduct l?y
a periodical advance in their wages. It is important also that
they should be afforded regular opportunities for temporary
absence and relaxation.

" These remarks, the Commissioners think, may usefully be
repeated at the present time, for, although the care and treat-
ment of the insane have, since the date of the Circular, in
most respects altered greatly for the better, improvement in
the character and position of attendants has not been nearly so
marked.

" Charges of rough and unkind usage continue to be made,
and not always without reason : dismissals for actual misconduct
(especially among male attendants) are still numerous; while
in many quarters the Commissioners hear complaints as to the
difficulty experienced in procuring and retaining the services of
satisfactory persons.

" Twelve months appears now to be an exceptionally long
period of service for attendants in the larger licensed houses.
In some houses the changes are very frequent, and the conse-
quent annoyance to the patients is necessarily great.
" The Commissioners are convinced that much of the evil
above referred to arises from the insufficiency of wages given
to attendants, and that they must renew their efforts to procure
throughout the houses within their immediate jurisdiction a
more liberal scale of pay.

" They therefore address to all the proprietors in the metro-
politan district this letter, embodying their views on the
subject. In doing so they are fully aware that in more than
one case the scale of wages actually in existence is already quite
what it should be.

"The Commissioners think, in the first place, that as a rule,
no person under 20 years of age ought to be employed in the
immediate and direct supervision of insane patients.
" In the next place, they still hold the opinion, expressed
in 1859, that, in order to encourage a superior class of persons
to enter the ranks of attendants, none of the duties of ordinary
menial servants of either sex ought to be cast upon them.
" Entertaining these views, and considering the general rise
in wages, the Commissioners are of opinion that the initial
wages of male attendants should not be less than 30?., of female
attendants not less than 20L, with, in each case, a prospective
annual increase.

" They consider that a male attendant of sufficient ex-
perience to take charge of a ward ought not to receive less than
401, a year.

" Where the majority of patients received are of the private
class, and are persons of good pecuniary means, the scale here
suggested will be, in the Commissioners' opinion, too low.
Higher wages are, to their knowledge, given in several such
establishments.

" Concurrently with good wages, attention to the comforts
of the attendants, especially when off duty, should be systemati-
cally given, were it for no better motive than that of inducing
them to remain in their situations. Some provision for rational
amusement and social enjoyment during leisure hours should be
made, according as circumstances may allow. In several county
asylums this matter is meeting with deserved attention, and
the licensed houses should not be behind them.

" I am to conclude these observations by expressing the
Commissioners' confident hope that you will give the whole
subject your best attention, and, in particular, if it should
happen that your scale of wages has been hitherto on a less
liberal footing, that you will reconsider it as soon as possible,
with a view to improvement.
" I am, &c.,
"Charles Spencer Perceval,
" Secretary.
"To.
House."
With regard to a subject concerning which there has been
much discussion, the Commissioners add:?
" Although this Eeport is limited to the demands of the year
1879, we cannot omit recording that among the measures an-
nounced in Her Majesty's Speech on the opening of Parliament in
February 1880, was a Bill for Coi\solidating and Amending the
Lunacy Laws.

" We are fully sensible that the dissolution of Parliament
and subsequent change of the Ministry, events which have
taken place during the preparation of this Eeport, may lead to
a postponement of legislation on this head."
Such remarks, coming from gentlemen who protect in every
way the interests and welfare of the insane, should be sufficient
to disperse the " hare-brained chatter " of those clamouring for
lunacy reform.
