Report of the London, Ontario, Asylum
=======================================

322 REVIEWS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES.

The London Asylum is a large institution, gauged by
English standards, containing as it does over seven hundred
patients. During the year ending September 30, 1879, 80
men and 88 women were admitted as new patients, making the
aggregate population 875. Of this number, 48 men and 40
women were discharged, 40 deaths took place, and 2 escaped.

Of the admissions, 79 were transfers from gaols, and 89 from
private families under medical certificates; while of the dis-
charged patients 64 are reported cured, 16 improved, and 8 not
improved. The ratio of recoveries, 7*31 per cent, of the entire
population, shows an improvement on that of the year pre-
ceding, viz., 5*75. The probation system, which is a favourite
one in America, provided 60 patients, of whom 31 were finally
cured, 9 improved, 15 returned to the asylum, and 5 remained
on probation at the end of the year. The death-rate exhibits
improvement, having fallen from 5*38 to 4'91. The greatest
care seems to be constantly taken, judging from the in-
spector's report, and that of the medical officer, to secure the
health and comfort of the patients, by adding to and altering
the buildings for their accommodation. These, as described in
the report, seem admirably adapted for the purposes to which
they are put, and we can judge somewhat of their efficiency
from the knowledge afforded that the cost of construction of the
cottages which are employed in part of the institution amounts
to about ?60 per head. In connection with the cottage system of treatment, it is said there have been " no elopements
from any of the cottages, and no accident of any kind as the
result of too much freedom."

The medical officer makes a demand, in his report, for a
pathological laboratory, and this, it can hardly be doubted now,
should be part of the arrangement of every considerable asylum.
The intimate dependence of psychology on pathological anatomy
and histology, makes it a matter of supreme importance to pos-
sess the best information and the most extensive, on the intimate
structure of the diseased organs under the physician's care.

Some valuable and well-considered remarks are made, when
speaking of visitors, in reference to the popular errors regarding
asylums, but Dr Uucke expresses as his opinion, that the anta-
gonism to these institutions is yielding to a better appreciation of
their benefits. Dr Bucke's words are so much to the point with
respect to the public feeling in this country, it will be well to
give them verbatim:?

"If the doors of the asylums are kept closed, people will
always think that there is something to hide; and it is just
this impression which it is so important to remove. There are
many other reasons why the public should be encouraged to
visit lunatic asylums, such as the constant inspection so main-
tained by the public ; the variety which is in this way intro-
duced into the horribly monotonous life of the patients ; the
constant assurance thus given to the public that there is
nothing to conceal in the manner in which the patients are
used. But the reason first mentioned is the most cogent,
though there are many others of great force, all tending in the
same direction. The reasons given against admitting visitors
are : first, that the public curiosity in regard to the care and
treatment of lunatics is a contemptible weakness which ought
not to be gratified; secondly, that the patients do not like to
be visited ; and, thirdly, that it does harm to the patients to
have strangers pass through the halls where they are and look
at them. While I give the gentlemen who urge these objec-
tions credit for perfect candour, and a desire equal to my own to
render good service to the public and to the patients in their
charge, and while I declare that I have weighed this matter
carefully and impartially in my own mind, I must acknow-
ledge that these objections seem to me trivial and without
force. The first of them I think I have already answered. Jn
regard to the second and third, I have only to say that I have
never yet known a single patient object to the admission of
strangers into the halls, and that I have never known a patient
to be injured by these visits."
