Gladys
=======

:Author: Beatrice M. McCully,
University of Pennsylvania.

One October day, a small thin child of five, bedecked in gala
attire?white summer dress, white stockings, etc., was jumping up
and down in the waiting room of the Psychological Clinic. Closer
inspection showed that this fidgety individual was Jewish and blond
(although one doubted very much if nature had given her light hair),
with brown eyes and a pallid skin. A fretful, querulous expression
rested around the mouth, giving the child an odd cynical look which
one would scarcely expect of a five-year-old.

The mental examination showed that she was trainable on the
basis of her performance with the formboard. The Binet results
were: Chronological Age, 5 years 11 months; Mental Age, 3 years
6 months with an Intelligence Quotient of 59.

Impatient to do some task or other, and stubborn or blas6 when
forced to keep at a given test, Gladys was essentially the product of
her environment. Born into a fairly comfortable Jewish merchant's
family, with parents who knew nothing except making money,
Gladys was allowed to have food which obviously did not agree with
her until the result was that she had convulsions from the time that
she was seven months until she was three and one-half years old.
During that time she was apparently excused for everything that
she did on the grounds that she was not well, and the natural consequence was that she now exhibits the behavior of a completely spoiled
child. Even now, after she had been in kindergarten several months,
she seemed to have no idea that she must obey orders whether she
wanted to or not.

Her general health at the time of coming to the Clinic was still
poor. Her teeth were in very bad condition, yet her mother would
not allow her to be taken to the University Dental School, although
the child specialist at the University Hospital recommended immediate dental treatment as an aid toward building up her general
health. Along with this a careful supervision of her diet was recommended. Sweets and eating between meals (as she was accustomed
to doing) were strictly forbidden.

The family history contains nothing significant except for the
fact that the mother was ill during pregnancy. Another child who
is now two years old is, according to the mother's report, perfectly
normal; in fact, she makes the deficiencies that Gladys has more
noticeable.

The fact that Gladys was backward in walking (she began at
two years), learning to dress herself, and taking her own part
when playing with her little friends, as well as the fact that she had
not responded at all to kindergarten work, were the reasons her
mother brought the child for clinical examination. The results
showed decidedly inferior mentality, yet the examiner was unwilling
to give a definite diagnosis until clinical teaching had been tried.
In four hours of teaching, I succeeded in getting but two definite
results from Gladys: her colors learned, and an auditory Memory
Span. Always she seemed to have such a "shifting" operative
memory span level that she gave the impression that she could do
much more than she was doing. At the same time, she showed
such a definite lack of the ability of concentration of attention that
I believe it was this that kept her from learning more. The examiner,
noticing this defect, thought that Gladys might be negativistic.
There was nothing that showed up in my work with her, however,
that would bear out this idea. She was simply stubborn and spoiled
and besides had this definite lack of concentration.

Her stubbornness showed up when I tried to get her Memory
Span. After much coaxing and persuasion, I managed to get an
auditory memory span of four digits. Since Goadys was six during
the time that she was coming to the Clinic, four is a low score, and
would indicate that she has poor association.

Her visual imagery too was subnormal, for, although we spent
a total of forty minutes on Healy A, Gladys never once made a
perfect performance. Her retention was so poor that she actually
would forget the position of even the largest blocks from one lesson
to the next. Occasionally she would work in spurts, and give a
surprisingly good performance. She did this sort of thing when
being tested with the formboard. My work with her would bear
out the opinion of the examiner; that is, that Gladys is trainable,
but in learning to do a given task, the child would need many repetitions. With Healy Puzzle B and the Knox Casuist test, although
she finally solved the problems, she required almost innumerable
repetitions and suggestions. In all these, defective retention, imageability and initiative seemed the main causes for her very poor performances. Nevertheless, given indefinite time and a teacher with
unlimited patience, Gladys would probably learn to do tasks of this
nature.

Since she seemed unresponsive to this sort of material, I tried
work requiring higher powers of organization. With numbers, I
could not persuade her to count higher than 14. (She would never
count blocks in a straight row, no matter how often I repeated my
directions, but always jumped around.) With this work I think she
was just plain stubborn. She was quite used to being either bribed
or rewarded when she did something that another child would be
expected to do without any reward, and since I did neither she
seemed to think that her feelings had been hurt. She always wanted
to play, and when given something else to do for a change, she would
say either "I don't want to" or "I ca-yunt." It was that way with
the alphabet: she never once said the seven letters from A to G
without help.

With learning to write letters on the board, however, it was
different. She really seemed to like this work and tried hard to absorb
it. She quite surprised the clinic teacher by remembering three
letters over a week. When, however, the checking method, was
tried it was discovered that it had all been guess-work. She really
could not pick the letters out or identify them. The ones taught
her were A, C, T, 0. She would remember little directions that
had been given her such as, "Leave a little gate in the C"; or,
"Down and across for the T." She would repeat these to herself,
but it seemed to do no good. When it came to differentiating
between letters, she was hopelessly mixed up. Once in a while she
would make something that might be recognized as an A, but it
was not as good as those made by children in the first grade, and
was generally an accident, anyway.

Indefinite time and patience, would be required to teach Gladys
to read and write. Judging by the only standard that we have,
however, the school standard, Gladys would be most surprising if
she got through first grade even with many repetitions of the material
she was to learn. The average school teacher would and could not
give her the extra time and coaching that she would require. If
she had a mother who could push her and help her, as well as discipline her, when she needs it, the prognosis would be more favorable.
As it stands, therefore, Gladys is deficient socially, she cannot
dress herself, take part in children's games, nor do kindergarten
work; and she is deficient intellectually, she does not seem able to
learn the fundamentals necessary for acquiring an education.
We can not say definitely that the cause of her deficiencies is
poor stock, for her baby sister is normal. Perhaps they may be
attributed to the neglect of her diet when she was a baby. She is
the product of her environment, and is, I believe, no higher than a
Low-grade-imbecile Barr classification.
