Sebastian
===========

(The Effect of Increased Physical Fitness on Mental Test Results)
:Author:  William F. Lutz, A.B.,
University of Pennsylvania.

The work with Sebastian has centered around an attempt to
correlate certain factors of efficiency in adolescence and an analysis
of increased Binet I. Q. with increased physical fitness.
Sebastian comes of American stock of average social status.
His parents are of average mentality. There is no history of specific
disease, but for some ten years the family finances have been at a
very low level with the result that very often food has been insufficient both in quality and quantity. The result, of course, has been
that the children are all handicapped by malnutrition and anemia.
At the time of the first examination, two years ago, Sebastian
was fifteen years old, listless, indifferent, stooping, with pasty complexion and mongoloid eyes, two inches under height and twelve
pounds under weight. He worked after school and on Saturdays,
was very fond of athletics and regularly overtaxed his strength.
At this time the first mental test was given, resulting in a Binet
I. Q. of 93, which placed him on the Binet scale in the lower
quintile of normal intelligence, not far removed from "dullness."
A year later, after a bad winter, financially, and an attack of
influenza, he came down with pleurisy with effusion and made a
slow convalescence. During this time the family finances improved
and Sebastian was provided with plenty of good food and milk and
his over-exercise controlled.

Six months later the second Binet test was made. He had now
come up to normal height and weight for his age and was in better
physical condition than for many years. Glasses had been provided
and the mongoloid appearance of the eyes seem to be improving with
the improvement in nervous and muscular tone. Mild tics which
had been in evidence, from a slight chorea in childhood, showed
marked improvement.

In the first examination made in February, 1920, the I. Q. was
93. In the second examination, December, 1922, the I. Q. was 107,
the auditory memory span showed no change, being 7 on both
trials. In the first Binet test he failed in problems of fact, arithmetic,
fables and enclosed boxes; in the second he passed all of these, showing
an improvement in ability to apply knowledge and in the logical
integrity of mental processes and also an improvement in constructive
visual imagery. In the first examination there was a marked irregularity in the score, five failures below chronological age and no
successes above it. In the second examination there were no failures
below the age and three successes above it. This is in accord with
a report made by Dr Pressey in the Psychological Clinic for
May 15, 1919, that a high irregularity shows the presence of some
more or less irrelevant factor, preventing a standard measurement
of the intelligence. In this case it may have been due to the anemia
and malnutrition which prevented the central nervous system from
functioning at the highest level of which it was capable. When this
loss of tone and mal-adjustment was remedied there was a corresponding rise in the mental level. This, of course, can only be
expected when there is no congenital or traumatic etiology and when
failure to function is due to removable mal-adjustments.

The first examination gave an epideictic rather than an hyparctic
rating, which seems to show that perhaps in many cases of apparent
dullness if we would reserve judgment until a thorough physical and
medical examination had been made and acted upon we would do
more justice to the case in hand. In this case the first examination
would have, apparently, allowed a judgment of low average intelligence. The second, after physical readjustment, would allow a
judgment of high average intelligence.

The Witmer formboard on first examination gave 32-23-15; on
the second the time was 25-18-13. The Witmer cylinders first
time gave 120-45-58; on the second the time was 65-48-40. There
were no errors, although the energy displayed was somewhat below
normal. It seems to me that if a sufficient number of examinations
showed this improvement in intelligence ratings correlating with
improvement in physical condition among school children it would
impress upon parents the value and relation of the sound body to
the sound mind. In the Canadian Journal of Mental Hygiene for
July, 1921, Prof. Sandiford says: "If intelligence implies the power
of adapting oneself to novel situations it certainly demands facile
adjustments in the nervous system." He says, also, that "at
bottom, intelligence is nothing more or less than a function of the
central nervous system. If a person has a nervous system which
integrates easily and tenaciously, he is likely to be bright and intelligent. If, on the other hand, his associative connections are made
with difficulty he is likely to be dull and stupid." This would seem
to be in accord with the results shown in these two examinations.
In connection with the foregoing I have been making a dailyrecord of pulse and systolic blood pressure at the same hour extending
at present over some forty observations on the above case. It has
been primarily as a test of physical fitness based on Crampton's
article in the American Journal of the Medical Sciences, November,
1920, page 721. The indices of efficiency in this case (and in quite a
number of cases found in an investigation that I am making at the
Y. M. C. A.) are quite in accord with Crampton's results. The
question arises whether there is a relation between this and intelligence levels, but the work is not sufficiently advanced to warrant
any conclusions as yet. I am inclined to believe, however, that
systolic blood pressure is in the higher normal quintile for higher
intelligence and that the lower levels of intelligence show a lower
level of blood pressure in the normal range for physiological age.
This is, of course, discarding pathological conditions. Dr McCurdy
of Clarke University in a recent pamphlet, the result of some similar
investigations, says that in a number of instances he noted that a
high heart rate, a large variation and a low blood pressure went
with poor scholarship, but that so wide a difference was found in the
marking standards of teachers that it was difficult to draw conclusions of much value. As I am making both the mental and
physical tests, I should be able to get results in which that factor
of error is of much less weight. Dr Clarke thinks that we need
two sets of indices. First: "Indices of the intellectual health,
organic soundness, and efficiency of the central nervous system.
Second: Indices of organic efficiency (which the Crampton index
seems to give). That, as in the Hughlings Jackson's three level
theory, the low level centers regulate the organic life, the high level
centers are related to the intellectual and emotional life. The
higher centers are built upon the lower ones, therefore the relation
of intelligence and morality to the physical integrity of the lower
centers."

I am hoping that further investigation on these lines will enable
me to find some relation, some indices, for expressing the relation
between mental and physical efficiency in school children.
