The Superior Child
===================

A Series of Case Studies.
:Author:  Alice M. Jones, A.M.,
University of Pennsylvania.

In the last issue of the Psychological Clinic I presented case
studies of four Superior Children chosen from my group primarily on
the criterion of the exceptionally high Intelligence Quotient. The
present group consists of children who are not only of superior
general competency, but who, in addition, have already displayed
some talent in the literary field. Two of these children are preadolescent, and two in the very early stages of adolescent development, so that one can only estimate their future productivity. If
one may judge by the present output, however, all of them have at
least the "germ" of real ability. It so happens that all of these
cases are girls; I have not as yet examined a boy who possessed any
marked literary ability, or even interest in writing. Whether there
is any significance in this fact I am by no means certain; it may have
been simply the result of accident. On the other hand, it may be
true that the instinct for written language develops in boys relatively
later than in girls, an assumption that might be justified by a comparison of the composition work produced by the two sexes at the
High School and College levels. The cases presented range in age
from six to twelve years.

Elsie, when examined at the Clinic, was six years and four
months old. She was brought by her father, a physician, who handled
her with the care evidenced by a hen who has hatched a charming,
but bewilderingly non-conformed, duckling. There is no question
but that Elsie is the undisputed ruler of the household, and that her
personality is rapidly becoming fixed in a very unpleasing mould.
Her voice is dictatorial, her manner overbearing, and on a somewhat
sullen, dark little face already is written the story of selfishness and
overwhelming conceit.

According to the usual procedure in the clinic, Elsie was first
subjected to the performance tests. Her work in this field, although
satisfactory for her age, showed no marked excellence. She did
show good comprehension of the problems involved, but her manner
of solution was very inefficient. The rate of movement displayed
was slow; her coordinations were poor, as her hands are very immature. When she made errors, the manner of correction was frequently almost stupid. Because she realized her own inefficiency in
this field, she criticized and ridiculed the tests, a reaction which occurs
so seldom in the clinic as to be noteworthy as a personality index.
The Healy Pictorial Completion Test A, however, testing as it does
complexity of imagination rather than mechanical efficiency, was
successfully solved in a short time, and elicited considerable interest.
She has a visual memory span of eight digits, and an ability to repeat
twenty-five syllables in a sentence. Although this is rather unusual
in a six year old child, it indicates to my mind some specific language
ability, rather than true integrated memory span. This supposition
I believe to be confirmed by the general clinicial picture and the
history of unusual attainment in the language field.

On the Binet (Terman Revision Shortened Scale) Elsie scored a
basal age of eight years, and a mental age of nine years six months,
which gives her an Intelligence Quotient of 150.0. This, although
not so striking as many discovered in the group with which I am
dealing, is still sufficiently high to place her without question into
the Superior Group. Since success in the Binet tests is so closety
related to language acquirement and environmental influences, it is
natural to suppose that this girl's high I. Q. is also more or less a
function of her specific ability in the language field.

Just how great ability she has in this direction may be inferred
from her early history. She talked at seven months, which is unquestionably rather early, and at twenty months was able to say her
prayers. On her second birthday she was given a book of animals,
which she memorized on that day. At two and a half years she had
memorized all of Mother Goose and other verses. Before five years
she was reading the newspapers, magazines, the Book of Knowledge,
and other books. She has read, at present, about one hundred
classics, including "Tom Sawyer", "Huckleberry Finn", "Pilgrim's
Progress", "Little Men", "Little Women", etc. Her father insists
that her favorite book is the Bible, a statement which was received
at the Clinic with a very large "grain of salt". A rough clinic test
indicated that the child has about fifth grade proficiency in reading.
I am inclined to believe that she does not read well enough to grasp
the content of many books which she is alleged to have devoured,
but without doubt she does possess a marked specific ability in the
field of written language.

It is also in this direction that her creative ability lies. She
began, at the age of five, to compose little stories, which she dictated
to her mother. There is now a rather large blank-book filled with
these stories, the last of which she herself has written in childish
script. I read a few of the stories, and found them, although immature in content and style, exceptionally smooth and well unified, and
not lacking either in incident or interest. A desire to have permanence assigned to her childish imaginings is certainly very unusual
in a girl of her age, and would seem to indicate that the child possesses
to an unusual degree the instinct for creative production. This
tendency, I feel, should be fostered.

It is unfortunate, however, that the father, although a physician,
has not realized the inadvisability of so over-developing the child in
one direction. He has never encouraged her to form other child
interests. It is almost impossible to force her to play with other
children. Her coordinations have never been developed with any
kind of handwork or toys of a mechanical nature, and as she appears
to-day, the clinical picture is a very uneven one. She has been
placed this year in an ordinary first grade, which may in some degree
offset the former situation. To try to overcome these unfortunate
sequellse of the child's temperament and specific ability, it was
recommended that an attempt be made to socialize her through
enforced and constant contact with the play of other children. It
was also recommended that, although she should by no means be
prohibited from reading, some reason be exercised in the choice of
books and the number of hours of reading. It was further suggested
that she learn French at this time, since not only will it be a very
easy acquirement, but will also open up to her an entirely new literature. This regime, plus some judicious discipline, may result in an
amelioration of the personality defect which is sure to be the child's
greatest handicap.

Helen, aged nine years three months, is the other pre-adolescent
member of this group. She is a charmingly wholesome child?one
of the best, from the point of view of all-around development, in the
entire group. She is in the sixth grade of a public school, having
skipped twice, and is doing work of an excellent grade in all subjects.
There is nothing priggish about this child; she is popular both with
adults and other children. No juvenile function in her "set" is
complete without Helen, and her mop of blonde hair is always to be
seen at the center of an animated circle on the playground. A very
sensible home regime has contrived to make her entirely lacking in
the "sense of superiority" which in some cases sadly interferes with
the attractiveness of members of this selected group.

A thorough-going clinical examination revealed no specific
defects whatever. Her work on the performance tests was good;
she passed all tests given in good time. Her memory span is as
follows: auditory eight digits, visual nine digits, reversed six digits,
and syllables twenty-five. Her mental age on the Binet scale is
thirteen years, ten and one-half months, which gives her an I. Q. of
150. In the Binet the examiner noted marked qualitative excellence
of language acquirement. She has a very quick verbal reaction time
and instant comprehension of all questions. Her memory span is,
of course, a factor in the high I. Q., but the child's qualitative reactions are such as to make an I. Q. of 150 a rather true rating of her
relative general proficiency. On the three written tests standardized
on a group of high school girls1 Helen just barely passes the minimum
score of the high school girls in silent reading and arithmetic, and falls
into the second quintile on the Hard Directions Test. In order to
handle these tests at all, however, a child needs far more proficiency
in the three R's than one would expect from a nine year old.
Helen is unusually well-developed from the point of view of
extra-curricular activities. Her music lessons are progressing very
well; she is in a dancing class and a French class. One of her greatest
assets is her ability to speak well on her feet, either extemporaneously
or from an outline. She excels in dramatics and in debate. She is
a great reader, and were it not for judicious home interference would
devour seven or eight books a week. She especially enjoys reading
books with a historical background, and fairy tales, the latter wholesome interest indicating that she is still, after all, a nine year old girl.
Her creative work takes the form of plays and stories. In the
former especially, I am assured by her teachers that she has real
talent. I read one or two of her efforts, and find that she has, indeed,
the rare gift of being able to express a situation through conversation,
and consider all the details which make for an appropriate setting.
Because of this creative ability, Helen's ultimate rank order in
my superior group will be considerably higher than performance tests
and I. Q. alone would warrant. Because of her delightful personality,
her real intelligence, and relatively high intellectual attainment,
combined with a real talent, I predict without hesitation a high level
of achievement for this small miss. In the phraseology of her beloved
fairy tales, "And to the child's christening came many fairy godmothers, each bearing a gift?one health, one beauty, one intellect;
others charm, and personality and talent." Whether among them
was the rarest gift of all, genius, only time will disclose.
1 Woodworth and Wells Hard Directions Test, Monroe Silent Reading Test for sixth, seventh and eighth
grades, and a Shortened Arithmetic Test, see R. E. Learning, Testa and Norms for Vocational Guidanc* at ?
Fifteen-Year-Old Performance Level, Pbtcboloqical Clinic, XIV, 7, Decenlber, 1922, 193-220.
Barbara, aged twelve years and seven months, falls unquestionably into the Superior Group, both on the criteria of the tests, and
of general attainment level. At twelve years she is a high sophomore
in high school, and is doing satisfactory work in all subjects. Her
rapid progress in school is partly the result of the efforts of her mother,
who is a teacher. She gave Barbara an early start in reading and in
phonetics, so that after a week in school the child was skipped to
the third grade. After a year in third she went into the fifth grade,
and spent a year in each of the remaining grades. This brief career
in the lower grades, followed by an entrance into high school at an
early age, did not prove disastrous for Barbara, as she matured very
early, and entered high school the equal of her associates in physiological, although not in chronological age. Her height and weight
and general maturity are at present those of a sixteen year old girl.
Barbara is not at all the "book-worm" type; she is very much
interested in athletics and out-of-door activities of all sorts. She
"goes in for" music, and dramatics, and dancing, and all the usual
activities of the high school girl. She is attractive and wholesome
looking, and remarkably well poised.

She was subjected to the same test which has been used by
Doctor Learning on four hundred high school girls. Her I. Q. is 143,
which is the maximum noted in the group of four hundred girls
examined. Since her score matches the maximum, her rating becomes
one on a group of two out of four hundred, or one in two hundred,
which is well above that required for admission into the superior
group. Her results on the written tests fall in all cases into the
highest quintile. The only place where her results fail to reach the
highest quintile is in the two mechanical tests, where her time scores
fall just below the median. Of these tests, however, her qualitative
rating was very high, as she worked deliberately and planfully, and
seldom made a false move.

I shall permit her claim to admission in this group of children
with some ability for writing to be justified by quoting two samples
of her work. One of these was written as an ordinary English
composition assignment; the other is entirely spontaneous work.
A Wonderful Day.

My ideal of a perfect day is one spent on board ship in the early summer,
when there is a fair breeze, and when the boat glides along in that rolling motion
which I love. I come out on deck and take deep breaths of the exhilarating air.
I go to the rigging, put forth my hand and swing myself up. Higher, higher,
and still higher I mount. The very risk of losing my footing and falling into the
blue depths below gives me a strange thrill. I am at the top of the rigging.
I pull myself up on the cross-trees and am soon seated there holding to the
nearby ropes for safety. A sudden puff of wind flies past. It lifts my hair and
my scalp tingles. I close my eyes and feel the joy of living. My eyes open and
gaze at the sea, far below. A small school of porpoises come by. How they leap
and dive! They seem but streaks of silver against the blue. How alive they
are! I am alive now, as they are, as I have never been before. There is a song
of gladness in my throat. Those on the deck below are all forgotten in this
exquisite moment; I feel apart from the rest of the world.

It is getting darker. I can see silver lights flashing here and there in the
water. The stars come out, one by one. The moon comes up in a glow of
beauty, and mounts into the sky. I heir voices on the deck and let myself
down. When I reach the deck I close my eyes to feel again what I have felt,
but it is gone. With the lights and human voices it has departed over the sea.
The Corn Fields of Perrineville.

When we lived in Perrineville, our house was at the top of a little hill, from
where we could see some of the surrounding country. One day I came out on
the porch and gazed ahead of me. I saw the fertile fields filled with corn. They
stretched as far as the eye could see; it looked as if the end came only with the
end of the world.

Suddenly a tiny breath of wind came up from the calm. It swooped like a
bird upon the fields of corn, and like a bird the fields would seem to rise and
fall, rise and fall, as a swallow does while flying. The strange beauty of this
scene held my eye. The wind made shadows on the fields, and then, having
finished his playing, flew away.

A man and his son with their horses and plow came to a vacant lot near
the corn fields and began to plow. A sultry sun had come out, and the corn
looked parched and dry. It seemed to be calling for rain. The men worked
untiringly in the fields. All at once the rain came, fresh, cool, and delightful.
The farmers hurried to shelter, but the corn drank deeply.

Toward evening I heard a sharp noise. Tinning my face to the fields I saw
the wind playing again with the corn. It sounded shrill and sweet, like a zither.
The glorious colors of the sunset were slowly fading away, and enveloping the
fields in a cloak of gray.

This work of Barbara's is, of course, immature in construction;
the girl needs training, but I feel that there is a hint of rhythm, and
a richness of vocabulary and imagery which are indicative of an
excellent style, once she has mastered the mechanics of her art.
Margaret, aged eleven years eleven months, is without exception
the most attractive girl I have examined in the course of my stu y.
She is the "golden" type, red-gold curls that fairly scintillate, a ne
white skin with a faint golden tinge, wide blue eyes, and a degree o
poise and charm of manner most extraordinary in a child of ier age
She has already matured, and in all physical characteristics sugges ^
a girl of sixteen years. Her entire social orientation is t a o
adult. Yet there is nothing unpleasant or "superior" in the girl's
attitude; her manner is the golden mean between aggressiveness
and girlish shyness.

Although Margaret is not yet in high school, for purposes of
comparison she too was subjected to the tests at the fifteen year old
level. Her work on the mechanical tests was exceptionally fine.
She has beautiful hands and perfect coordination of movement. She
attacks mechanical problems with a combination of intelligence and
efficiency most unusual in a girl of her age. Her time on the Dearborn Formboard C was thirty-four seconds, nine seconds shorter
than the minimum time recorded for a group of four hundred high
school girls. On the Binet Test, her basal age is Average Adult,
and her I. Q. 151, eight points above the maximum for the high
school group. Her vocabulary score is seventy-six, which scores at
the Superior Adult level. On the three written tests, here scores fall
below the maximum, but above the median, on all three.

The tests alone show this girl to possess in a high degree intelligence, intellectual development, and efficiency. With these endowments alone, one might expect her to go far, but she has also the
grace of a most charming personality, and?a specific talent for
writing. The little sample of her work which I quote here does not
compare very favorably with those of Barbara, quoted above, but it
was merely a bit which the girl happened to have with her when she
came to the clinic, and of the defects of which she was fully aware.
I quote it merely to indicate the richness of vocabulary for a girl
not yet twelve years old.

A Rainbow.

After a shower on a warm summer evening, a span of brilliant colors stretched
itself across the azure sky. It lasted a number of moments and then gradually
its brightness faded into softer tones, until it appeared to be a mass of pale
clouds. Suddenly, in a flash, it again resumed its former splendour, spreading
its gorgeous dies across the sky like a fairy bridge crusted with rich jewels, and
colored in the radiant beams of the sun. Then slowly, ah so slowly, it grew
paler, and melted away from sight.

Margaret's teacher, who brought her to the clinic, tells me that
the girl's work in composition is of a uniform standard of excellence.
She has recently justified her claim to some superiority in this field
by winning a prize offered by a newspaper for the best essay. This
was an open competition, and undoubtedly indicates that the girl
has some real ability.

Each child in this group can claim by comparison with other
children a ranking of "superior" on the basis of both tests and general
attainment level. They fail, of course, even to approach "perfection" or the maximum possible attainment in all fields tested, but
they represent the type of superior child who should be our chief
concern, in that they possess that spark of creative imagination which
of itself insures a fairly high achievement level, and without which
a high intellectual level alone appears to be of relatively little permanent social value.
