A Study of 1000 Cases of Children who do not Conform to School Routine
=======================================================================

:Author:  Selinda McCaulley, v'
Department of Special Education, Public Schools, Philadelphia, Pa.
In the public schools today in many of the classrooms sit a
number of children who are never able to take part in regular classroom work. Some of them are content to just sit, disturbing no
one, and disturbed by none; others, attempt to take part in their
lessons, enthusiastically waving their hands in the desire to answer
a question, but if called upon, either answer "I forget", or give a
wrong answer nine times out of ten; while still others, utterly beyond
their depth, as far as ability to do the work is concerned, sit and
contrive ways to make life interesting for the teacher and their classmates. In recent years children of this type have been referred to
the Department of Special Education in order that some suitable
adjustment in their school life can be made.

In studying their cases, an attempt has been made to discover
where differences exist between them and the normal group, and what
is the nature of the differences. Teachers are often perplexed about
these children, and are loath to send them to special classes. They
often say "He's a nice child?he's fairly intelligent. He can run
errands nicely, but he just can't seem to get along?and he tries so
hard! What is the reason?" With the increased demand for the
right of every child to an education, what the reason is for their
ability to progress in the regular classroom and what is to be done
about it, are becoming problems of more and more importance. If
the child can not succeed in taking in the kind of education which
is offered at the present, what kind of education is suitable for him?
In trying to solve this problem it is necessary, not only to study
the differences which exist between the normal and retarded groups,
but also to determine what is the relation of these differences to the
child's success in physical training and manual training activities.
It is popularly supposed that many children of low intellectual
attainments possess an unusual ability to use their hands. Therefore many educators advocate motor education for backward children. Such an idea is contained in the popular slogan of one of our
great institutions for the feeble-minded?"Heart, head, and hand."
The method of teaching in many of our special classes presupposes
that retarded children always possess good manual ability. Since
this is so, it is important to discover the validity of this supposition.

In many special classes, an attempt to develop the mind through
the training of the hands is the fundamental basis of all the work.
For instance, the child is given material which is easily handled, and
requires little fine muscular coordination. Probably the most widely
used material is raffia. The child is trained to take strands of raffia
and wrap them around cardboard frames. In some of the better
regulated classes, these frames vary in size and shape, and require
a gradually increased skill to be covered correctly. Instead of just
plain wrapping, the child is also taught to use a buttonhole stitch,
and then a Solomon's knot stitch in covering them. This wrapping
is then carried over to the field of sewed Indian baskets, and baskets
of different sizes and shapes, requiring more and more skill. Reed
basketry, simple wood construction work, hammock making, chair
caning, brush making, sewing and rag rug weaving are taught also.
Theoretically, as the child advances step by step in manual ability,
so does he progress in mental ability.

In actual practice, however, it does not work out this way.
Some children, it is true, respond well to this method of teaching,
but others never respond. Their hand work is mediocre, or worse,
at the beginning, and it remains mediocre, or worse, at the end.
The question then arises, is mental development obtained through
manual training of any more value than that obtained by other sorts
of training? This is a vital question for many reasons. In the first
place, manual training material is very expensive, and this expense
ought to be justified. In the next place, there are very few skilled
manual training teachers. In the hands of untrained teachers,
manual training becomes a farce. Instead of the teacher selecting
the work and presenting it in a graded series of difficulties, the child
is often allowed to choose what he wants to do, and "go to it", in
his own manner and after his own taste. Some children specialize
in baskets, others in raffia picture frames, and others in hammocks.
Their main idea seems to be production?not quality but quantity.
I recall very clearly a visit to a certain classroom, which is typical
of many others. One boy was on his fifth hammock. It was full
of slip knots and mistakes, but he went merrily on. Another was
just completing a huge reed basket. There were not enough spokes
in the basket to keep it firm, the basket was beautifully lop-sided,
and the border was a wretched failure. The reed had been used
before it was soaked, and in consequence, had broken in many places.
The child, however, who was really capable of much better work,
was delighted with his accomplishment, and the teacher seemed not
unsatisfied. If she had had any skill or training in this line, the
result might have been different, but since she had not, could she
not have obtained better results by teaching actual school subjects
in which she had been trained?

Miss Grey, Director of Special Education in New York State, in
her address during Schoolmen's Week, told of the experience of a
trained supervisor of Special Education in one of the middle western
cities, who enthusiastically decided that all classes under her supervision, should be given no other instruction than manual training.
As time went on, the results were so negative, and the morale of the
children so lowered, that in a revulsion of feeling, she excluded all
manual training and substituted instruction in regular school subjects, modified to suit the needs of the pupils. She is firmly convinced that the mental development obtained by the latter method
is far superior to that obtained by the former method.

In an attempt to answer unbiasedly the question?are retarded
children better able to work with their hands than normal children,
or is this ability exaggerated merely because the results of the concrete
work done by this type child stand out in glowing contrast to the
results of his work in abstract subjects??three performances test?
the Witmer Form Board, the Witmer Cylinder, and the Healy Construction Test A, were given to a group of retarded children. The
children selected were referred by the principals of the public schools,
because, for the most part, they were unable to succeed in regular
school work. A few of the cases were also disciplinary. Only a
small percentage of the the cases are feebleminded in the social sense.
The majority of them are normal, dull children, who possess enough
competency to be able to earn a living after leaving school. A few
of them are of average intelligence, but utterly uninterested in the
present school curriculum. These are the behavior problems. The
results of the tests were compared with those of an unselected group
of children. This comparison of the Table of Times for the different
performance tests bring forth clearly some very interesting points.
Although qualitatively the performances of many of these children
compare favorably with those in the unselected group, quantitatively,
their performances are very inferior.

The following table (see Table I) taken from Sylvester's results
from his study of the performance on the Form Board of 1537 normal
children, shows that the average time of the five-year-old, 37.6 seconds, is not equalled by the average time of the eleven-year-old in
the selected group, while the average time of the six-year-old, 26.5
seconds, is not equalled by the sixteen-year-old in this group. The
zone limits of the five-year-old group are from 22 to 75 seconds.
There is no zone limit past 75 seconds in any group. All of the zone
limits in this group run over 100 seconds.

A comparison of Paschal's Table, taken from the results of his
study of the performance level of 1000 cases, with the Witmer Cylinders, with the table of this retarded group, emphasize the same thing.
Although qualitatively many performances could be compared
favorably, quantitatively, they are very inferior. The mean for the
normal six-year-old is 82.4 seconds. This is not equalled by any of
the children under thirteen years old. The mean for the normal
seven-year-old, 73.9 seconds, is practically paralleled by the sixteenyear-old. The zone limits are also very much higher among the
retarded children.

So, likewise, with the Healy A; from the tables given in Pitner
and Patterson, the median for the normal seven-year-old is 131
seconds. This is not equalled by any median below the age of
thirteen years in the retarded group.

It seems, therefore, that the group retarded in school work is
much slower, also, in reaction time. Just as this group succeeds in
doing two or three problems in arithmetic while the rest of the class
do ten, so do they succeed in their performance tests. To this group
belong the children who receive failing marks because they are unable
to show, in a limited time, how much they actually know. Many of
this group were rated a failure in performance tests because they
did not finish in a given length of time. Many more would have
been rated a failure had the time limits not been very liberal.
A study of their memory spans is also significant. Out of 1000
cases, 406 had an auditory memory span of 4 digits or less. Only
57 had an auditory memory span of over 6 digits. The result of
this is seen in their school work. Their mental processes are much
less complex. They learn more slowly than the average child. New
work must be presented to them in its simplest form, and in smaller
quantities. For this reason, the Department of Special Education
is recommending more and more that these children be placed in
special classes, where they may receive more individual attention;
where the course of study may be modified to suit their need; where
it will be possible for them to be allowed enough time to finish their
work. Here they can learn slowly what their more favored fellows
grasp quickly. With such a provision made for them, they are not
neglected, and on the other hand, they do not retard the progress of
the regular classroom.

In the field of physical education, a comparison of their achievements with that of an unselected group shows their inferiority. Mr.
Judelsohn, Supervisor of Physical Training, found the following
results:*

*"A Study of Normal, Backward and Disciplinary Boys in Regard to Height, Weight and
Jumping Ability."

Observations.
Height.
In every age group but the eleven-year-old, the normal child
is the taller. The difference between the normal and the next group
varies from an average of one inch to 2}/% inches. But altogether
there is not such a great difference in height between any two groups.
As concerns the backward and disciplinary boys, there is very little
difference in height.

Weight.

In regards to weight, the groups vary considerably. But again
the normal child is not far above the other two divisions. In the
thirteen and fourteen-year groups, the normal child is the heaviest;
in the twelve and fifteen-year groups the backward child is the
heaviest; and in the eleven-year group the disciplinary child is the
heaviest. But it takes only a glance at the charts to see how close
the three curves lie to one another, especially so in the thirteen and
fourteen-year groups. The fifteen-year chart is very interesting in
that there is so little difference in the highest and lowest weight for
each division. Just the opposite to this is the eleven-year group,
where the difference in extremes is so great. We may summarize
by stating that with the single exception of the thirteen-year group,
there is little?practically nothing?in favor of the normal child.
Standing Broad Jump.

It is in the jumping ability of the three divisions that one sees
the great difference, and always in favor of the normal child. In
every age chart the normal child's curve is beyond that of both the
backward and the disciplinary child. Especially is this evident in
the case of the eleven-year group, where the average jump of the
normal child is 14^ inches more than the backward child; and in
the fifteen-year group, where the normal average is 15 inches more
than that of the backward child, and 13J4 inches more than that of
the disciplinary child. In every case the best jump was made by a
normal child; and in the eleven, fourteen, and fifteen-year groups
the lowest jump of a normal child is better than the lowest jump of
a backward or disciplinary child. In the other two age groups the
lowest jump of the normal child is the same as that of the disciplinary
but higher than that of the backward child. The averages show that
the normal child, on the average, jumps from 6^- to 13x/? inches
further than the disciplinary child, and from 71/6 to 15 inches further
than the backward boy.

Conclusions.

In the foregoing observations we find that as far as height and
weight are concerned, there is little to choose between normal and
disciplinary, normal and backward, or backward and disciplinary.
Therefore, if these two factors enter into making better jumpers,
there should be little difference in the respective jumping ability.
But, when we investigate the records made in standing broad jump,
we find a great difference between the normal child and the backward
or disciplinary. The normal boy outdistances his less fortunate
friends in every case, and by a considerable number of inches.
Physical conditions underlying the jumping were the same; as far
as size and weight were concerned, as mentioned before, there was
little, if any, advantage in favor of the normal boy. There is but
one factor remaining that could enter, and that is the underlying
cause?the mental development. The normal boy has been better
endowed; he has a better developed power of coordination; he can
put "everything he has" into his jump; and in this respect he stands
above the backward child and the disciplinary child. He who is
mentally backward will be found, upon investigation, to be physically
backward, or retarded, for coordination is the tremendous factor
entering into so many of our physical activities.

In every field of accomplishment in which we study these children, we find they are less proficient than the average child. A study
of their results in the performance tests show that they are no more
gifted in motor ability than they are in intellectual ability. It seems,
therefore, that a course of study which gives predominance to motor
education does not meet their needs.

Only such arithmetic as the child actually needs should be taught.
Roman numbers, the value of francs, pounds, shillings, etc., decimals,
as such, are among a few of the things that can easily be dispensed
with. Then more time will be left to teach how to figure out a grocery
bill, or the amount of money which is due a man who works so many
hours, for so much an hour. This actually comes within their
experience. If the children can be given newspaper proficiency in
reading, this is, also, of value. Current events attract the interest
of many. It is really surprising to discover how much some of them
really do know. Civics and personal hygiene are, also, important
subjects. Manual training, in the sense of pre-vocational training,
should play an important part in the curriculum. Finally, by adjusting the work to keep it within the ability of the children, so that they
feel that they are now succeeding instead of constantly failing, the
children are given a right emotional attitude. There is a great
opportunity for character formation, and even if these children are
never to be counted among the leaders of the world, they can at least
help to form a dependable, self-supporting group of law-abiding
plodders, who are, also, necessary to help the world go round.

Table I.
Age.
Number
of Cases.
Average
Time.
Zone
Limits.
80
170
173
206
214
221
172
141
80
80
37.6
26.5
23.3
20.5
18.7
16.7
14.9
13.8
12.6
11.6
22-75
18-44
15-38
14-32
13-34
12-27
9-24
10-22
9-17
9-17
Witmer Cylinders.
Age.
Time, seconds.
Total.
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 325 350 F
Total.
1
13
28
67
43
72
54
66
77
86
77
39
7
630
Age.
Number
of Cases.
Mean.'
Minimum,
seconds.
Lowest
Quintile.
Lower
Quintile.
Median.
Upper
Quintile.
Highest
Quintile.
Maximum,
seconds.
1
13
28
67
43
72
54
66
77
86
77
39
7
228.3
160
123.2
111.9
120.1
103.5
107.1
78.5
76.7
73.2
60
150
86
72
41
40
41
39
38
39
35
29
47
F
125
80
75
75
58
60
49
55
46
F
180
120
100
95
90
90
62
63
65
F
241
130
128
100
100
100
69
72
75
F
F
185
155
142
115
115
80
85
95
F
F
F
F
252
170
201
145
117
120
240+11
310+17
321+28
300+12
251+17
358+8
360+7
344+9
315+7
223+6
180+5
245
* Exclusive of failures.
16 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Auditory Memory Span?Digits.
Age.
Number of Digits.
Number
of Cases.
7....
8....
9....
10....
11....
12....
13....
14....
15....
16....
17....
2
26
35
124
109
127
112
113
115
101
87
43
Age.
Number
of Cases.
Mean.
Minimum.
Lowest
Quintile.
Lower
Quintile.
Median.
Upper
Quintile.
Highest
Quintile.
Maximum.
2
26
35
124
109
127
112
113
115
101
87
43
6
3.5
4.1
4.3
4.5
3.7
4.7
5.1
5
5.3
5.5
5.5
Healy A.
Age.
Time, seconds.
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 175 200 250 275 300 F
Total.
Total.
28
58
124
112
122
102
113
110
102
83
46
1000
Age.
Number
of Cases.
Mean.'
Minimum,
seconds.
Lowest
Quintile
Lower
Quintile,
Median.
Upper
Quintile.
Highest
Quintile.
Maximum,
seconds.
28
58
124
112
122
102
113
110
102
83
46
103
114.6
112.2
99.8
90.8
93.9
74.3
83.5
95.7
100
42
36
18
20
19
17
10
14
14
16
197
122
94
71
47
55
41
38
30
F
F
300
152
95
113
67
82
F
F
F
285
150
176
92
102
143
F
F
F
F
217
F
142
128
190
107+26
255+50
245+96
265+75
300+72
285+52
275+41
287+44
300+34
256+20
201+46
' Exclusive of failures.
A STUDY OF 1000 CASES. 17
Form Board.
Age.
10....
11....
12....
13....
H....
15....
16....
Total
Time, scconds.
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 325 350 F
Total.
3
29
61
127
118
125
103
122
119
85
79
29
1000
Age.
Number
of Cases.
Mean.'
Minimum,
seconds.
Lowest
Quintile.
Lower
Quintile.
Median.
Upper
Quintile.
Quintile
Maximum,
seconds.
3
29
61
127
118
125
103
122
119
85
79
29
78.2
77.3
57.3
50
40
44.6
33.2
32.4
30.4
31.8
34.4
160
152
85
63
55
49
46
45
42
39
43
135+
240+4
260+5
335+7
252+3
105+4
355+1
160+1
285+1
122+4
188+1
112
* The mean was made, exclusive of failures.
