Mental Changes After Removing Tonsils and Adenoids.
===================================================

:Author:  Gladys M. Lowe,
University of Kentucky.

This paper presents the results of an attempt to measure the
change in general mental alertness which followed the operation for
diseased tonsils and adenoids. The comparisons made in this study
involve the use of a control group with adenoids which did not
undergo the operation. Only one other investigator has taken
advantage of the fact that the best control group would consist of
those suffering from the same defects but not operated upon. Three
methods were used to determine the changes in mental ability; tests
of mental alertness, teachers' estimates of certain traits, and the
actual scholarship records. Cornell estimates that about 8 per cent
of school children suffer from diseased tonsils and adenoids. The
prevalence and the easy correction of these defects make important
the question of the mental changes after their removal.

There have been few studies attacking the problem in a scientific way. The four chief investigations are those made by Rogers
('22), Terman ('19), McPhail ('20), and Cornell ('12). See the
bibliography at the close.

Doctor Rogers' study of 28 children operated upon for defective
tonsils and adenoids reveals no difference in the average I. Q. six
months after the operation when compared with 28 children, of practically the same life age, possessing these defects. She says: "We
find that the test group shows an average gain in I. Q. of 25 points.
The median gain is 2 points, the total range 18 points and P. E. of
the average is ?0.99. The control group shows an average gain
very slightly higher, 3.25 points, the median gain being 3. The
range in this case is 32 points, but P. E. is only ?0.47. The average
of the compared gains of separate pairs is ?1.035. . . . Actually,
we may say that the operative group as a whole showed no gain over
the control group." Retesting after one year 21 children available
from each of the two groups, "the average gain of the test group was
3.09 points after twelve months, compared with 2.25 after six. The
control group, however, made an average gain of 6.24 after twelve
months, the gain after six months being 3.29. These numbers are
insignificant as gains, but they at least show no improvement in the
test group which the control group does not reveal as well." This
investigation was extended by comparing the I. Q.'s of a group of
236 children with diseased tonsils with a group of 294 children without this handicap. This comparison showed that the children of the
normal group had as high I. Q's. as those of the tonsil group.
As shown by this investigation there was a small gain in weight,
and also in the height-weight-age relationship for the operated group
during the year following the operation. Other features of the study
were tests for strength of grip, speed of tapping, and Healy's Picture
Completion test, number II. None of these tests showed a reliable
gain in favor of the operated group, except speed of tapping, which
did show a marked improvement.

Among children retested by Terman (interval between tests
from a few months to seven years), using the Stanford Revision of
the Binet tests, 27 children had diseased tonsils and adenoids removed.
When the average I. Q's. for the first and second tests were compared
there was a gain of two points and a fraction. He regards this gain
too small to be significant.

McPhaiPs study is based upon the school records of thirty-one
school children. The scholarship records obtained ten months previous to the operation were compared with records obtained ten
months subsequent to the operation. These showed that one-third
of the thirty-one cases had improved. For a smaller number;
namely, eighteen, the scholarship record for the second year showed
that twelve had improved. Records for eleven of the original thirtyone cases were obtainable for the third year after the operation.
These showed that the scholarship had improved in each case over
the record obtained before the operation.

The results of this investigation are uncertain for it is not indicated whether or not the cases showing improvement the first year
after the operation are in the main the same cases that showed
improvement in the school year, and again in the third year following
the operation. It is also questionable whether scholarship records
taken in three different grades under different teachers are comparable.
The study of Cornell concerns sixty-three school children. It
includes three features; namely, age and grade at the time of the
operation, mental improvement one year after the operation according to the teacher's opinion, and according to the promotion from
one grade to the next. He found that these children were strikingly
retarded in comparison with the average of the different grades. In
the teacher's opinion forty-four had improved mentally, sixteen
remained unchanged, and three had deteriorated. However, there
were sixty-one who failed to be promoted a grade out of ninety-seven
possible promotions. This means, then, that if the forty-four
improved as estimated by the teachers, the improvement in some
cases did not give them average ability as shown by the number who
failed to be promoted.

The somewhat inadequate methods of some of the other investigations were partially avoided in this study by the use of a control
group possessing the same defects as those removed from the operated
group, and by the use of a standardized scale of tests of mentality.
One hundred names of children, diagnosed by the city school physician as having diseased tonsils and adenoids, were taken consecutively
from the records of the Lexington Public Health Nursing Association
and were tested. Of this group sixty were available for testing after
a lapse of one year. Twenty-five of this group of sixty failed to follow
the recommendation for an operation. This group was used for
comparison with the operated group of thirty-five. For statistical
purposes the groups should have been paired according to life age.
It was possible to pair only thirteen in this study, a group too small
for results to be significant.

The Stanford-Binet test was given subsequent to diagnosis,
always preceding the operation, usually by one or two weeks. All
of the mental tests were given in the school buildings, and all made
and scored by the writer, thus minimizing such factors as excitement
and non-uniformity in method. In supplementing the testing by
teachers' estimates, each teacher was asked to think of the class (in
which the pupil appeared) as divided into five groups of equal number,
ranging from poorest to best,1 for each of the traits to be estimated.
In an effort to select characteristics not measured by a mental alertness test the following traits were chosen: (1) companionship with
fellows, (2) emotional self-control, (3) initiative, (4) self-expression
(speech), (5) interest in school work, (6) attention, and (7) scholarship. As a final means of comparison of the two groups for the two
years, the actual grade of the child and the average grade of the class
in which the child belonged were obtained from the teacher.

When the two groups are compared as to the average increase
in I. Q's. we find no significant difference. The average I. Q. for the
control group in the first test was 83.0. One year later the average
was 85.4, showing an increase of 2.4 with a mean variation of 4.0.
For the operated group the average I. Q. was 89.2, and one year
later the average was 90.7, showing a difference of 1.5 with a mean
variation of 2.2. The distribution of I. Q's. for the two groups were
very similar. For the control group in the first test the range was
i The Evaluation of a Method for Finely Graduated Estimates of Abilities. James Burt Miner, Journal of
Applied Psychology, June, 1917, Vol, 1,133-133.
MENTAL CHANGES AFTER REMOVING TONSILS. 95
Table I.?Distribution of Changes in I. Q.
Changes in I. Q.
Operated.
Control.
17.0-17.9.
16.0-16.9.
15.0-15.9.
14.0-14.9.
13.0-13.9.
12.0-12.9.
11.0-11.9.
10.0-10.9.
9.0- 9.9.
8.0- 8.9.
7.0- 7.9.
6.0- 6.9.
5.0- 5.9.
4.0- 4.9.
3.0- 3.9.
2.0- 2.9.
1.0- 1.9.
+0.0- 0.9.
-0.0- 0.9.
1.0- 1.9.
2.0- 2.9.
3.0- 3.9.
4.0- 4.9.
5.0- 5.9.
6.0- 6.9.
7.0- 7.9.
8.0- 8.9.
9.0- 9.9.
10.0-10.9.
11.0-11.9.
12.0-12.9.
Total N.
Average Increase.
M. V
M. E
Median
q ;;
P. E. of Median..
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
2
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
5
1
3
3
2
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
35
1.6
3.9
0.7
-0.1
3.8
0.6
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
1
0
2
0
2
3
2
0
0
1
4
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
25
2.2
4.7
0.9
0.9
4.5
0.9

from 40 to 114, with a median of 87.5. The range for the operated
group in the first test was from 50 to 113, with a median of 92.9.
In the second test the I. Q's. of the control group ranged from 40 to
129, with a median of 82.6. The I. Q's. of the operated group ranged
from 60 to 125, with a median of 91.1 one year after the operation.
The difference in the average gain for the two groups shows the
gain to be in favor of the control group of 0.6 of a unit of I. Q. However, a gain or loss of even two or three points in the I. Q. is insignificant. We may say then that after an interval of one year the
operated and the control groups showed similar changes in I. Q. The
distribution of changes in I. Q. is shown in Table I. The median
change for the control group was 0.9 of a unit of I. Q. with a Q. of
4.5 and a P. E. of 0.9. For the operated group the median change
was ?0.1, Q. being 3.8, and a P. E. of 0.6. This, of course, shows
the difference in the median change for the two groups to be
negligible.

Comparing the two groups as to their life ages, we find the
average age of the control group, 9 years and 6 months, is one year
and one month less than the average age of the operated group.
The median life age, however, of the control group, 10 years 7 months,
with a Q. of 3 years 7 months, is five months more than the median
age of the operated group, 10 years 2 months, with a Q. of 2 years
6 months. The error of this difference, 5 months, is 9 months, which
makes the difference negligible.

The distribution of changes in mental age for the two groups
is probably a more important comparison as to the effects of the
operation. It is shown in Table II. The difference in the average
months gained shows an advantage of 1.1 months in favor of the
operated group. This average gain of 1.1 months (mean variation
1.8) for the operated group in excess of the average gain for the control group is noteworthy because it favors the operated group. However, when the amount of this excess in the average gain for the
operated group is considered, it can not be said to be clearly indicative of greater improvement in the operated group than in the control
group. It is to be compared with its error, which is 1.8 months.
The median change in mental age for the control group is a
gain of 11 months, with a Q. 15.5 months and a P. E. of the median
of 3.1 months. For the operated group the median change was 14
months, with Q. 11 months and a P. E. of 1.7 months. This shows a
median gain of 3 months (P. E. 3.6) in mental age in favor of the
operated group. The chances are even that there is practically this
gain of 3 months.

Table II.?Distribution of Changes in Mental Age.
Mental Age in Years and Months.
Operated.
Control.
2.7-2.12
2.1-2.6
1.7-1.12
1.1-1.6
0.7-0.12
+0.0-0.6
-0.0-0.6
0.7-0.12
1.1-1.6
Total N
Average Increase, months.
M. V
M. E. of Average
Median
Q
P. E. of Median
1
5
3
9
7
5
4
1
0
35
12.4
6.4
1.1
14
11
1.7
1
3
3
4
5
5
2
1
1
25
11.3
7.5
1.5
11
15.5
3.1

There are three chances out of four that there is some gain in
mental age in the operated group over that of the control group, if
we consider these median gains rather than the average gains.
This slight excess gain in mental age favoring the operated group
is a change not reported by any other investigator. None of the
others have directly compared changes in mental age. It is probably
true that in groups selected at random (such as these were) the mental
age is a better measure of improvement than the I. Q., which is
somewhat reduced by an increase in life age. Unfortunately, in the
only other study in which the mental effects after one year are measured by objective tests the distribution of gains in mental age for
the two groups is not given, so that no comparison of this criterion
of change is possible.

The teachers' estimates of the seven traits named above show
an average rating slightly in favor of the second year for both the
control and operated groups. For two traits the difference of the
average change is in favor of the operated group (interest in school
work 0.1 of a division and scholarship 0.1 of a division). These
differences are too small to be significant. It is probable that the
changes, if any, were not large enough on the average to be
observable.

The average scholarship grade of the control group remained
the same, "C," for the two years, but the average grade of their
Table III.?Distribution of Changes in I. Q.
Rogers and Lowe.
Changes in I. Q.
Operated.
Control.
26.0-27.9.
24.0-25.9.
22.0-23.9.
20.0-21.9.
18.0-19.9.
16.0-17.9.
14.0-15.9.
12.0-13.9.
10.0-11.9.
8.0- 9.9.
6.0- 7.9.
4.0- 5.9.
2.0- 3.9.
+ 0.0- 1.9.
-0.0- 1.9.
2.0- 3.9.
4.0- 5.9.
6.0- 7.9.
8.0- 9.9.
10.0-11.9.
12.0-13.9.
Total N.
Average Increase.
M. V
M. E
0
0
0
0
1
2
1
1
2
3
6
4
8
5
7
7
4
1
3
0
1
56
2.2
3.8
0.5
1
0
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
4
3
4
5
3
2
6
4
1
0
1
46
4.1
4.9
0.7

corresponding classmates rose one scholarship rank, i. e., to "B".
The average grade of the operated group not only remains the same,
"C", but remains the same as the average of the classes represented,
weighted for the number of pupils for such classes.

The average gain in scholarship rank was approximately the
same for the two groups (0.2 advantage for the control group).
When compared with classmates, the operated group compares more
favorably, since they maintained the same average; whereas the
control group fell one rank below the average of their classmates.
The consistency between the estimated and actual scholarship records
is not without significance. It seems to confirm the value of the
method of rating used in this study.

Three cases were found in which there was a marked improvement in conduct at school and in scholarship. This, though not
shown to be the general tendency, suggests possible secondary factors
influencing improvement which should be investigated.
Using data obtained from the two investigations carried out by
Doctor Rogers and myself, Table III shows the distribution of
changes in I. Q. for an operated group of fifty-six children and a
control group of forty-six children. The average increase for the
operated group was 2.2, with a M. V. of 3.8; for the control group.
The average increase was 4.1, with a M. V. of 4.9.
When the data is thus combined it indicates that the control
group has gained on the average more in I. Q. than the operated
group, as shown by the average difference of 1.9 units of I. Q. favoring the control group. This advantage of 1.9 for the control group
shows a gain in the same direction as that found in my study (0.6
average gain in I. Q. for control in excess of operated).
However, as discussed above, the nature of the I. Q. as a measure
of change makes these small figures insignificant as indicative of
improvement in either the control or the operated group.

Summary

1. There was a mean increase of 3 months (average 1.1) in mental
age found to be in favor of the operated group. No other investigator has found any change in mental age as revealed by a mental
test. The advantage was, however, only once its error.
2. The results show no reliable increase in I. Q. one year after
the operation.
3. The non-operated group gained as much or more in scholarship than the operated group.
4. The teachers' estimates of other mental traits revealed no
difference one year after the operation. This may mean that
100 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
these were not adequate measures or that the changes in the traits
were too small to be noticed.
Bibliography.
1. Cornell, W. S.?Effects of the Removal of Adenoids.?School Hygiene
May, 1909.
2. Gill, E. G., M.D., and Graves, K. D., M.D.?Tonsils from a Clinical and
Medical Standpoint. Southern Medical Jour., June, 1921, pp. 39-41.
3. McPiiail, A. H.?Tonsils and Adenoids; A Study Showing How the Removal
of Enlarged or Diseased Tonsils and Adenoids Affects a Child's Work in
School. Pedagogical Seminary, June, 1921, pp. 188-194.
4. Miner, James Burt.?The Evaluation of a Method for Finely Graduated
Estimates of Abilities. Journal of Applied Psychology. June, 1917, Vol.
I, pp. 123-133.
5- Rogers, Margaret Cobb.?Adenoids and Diseased Tonsils?Their Effect
on General Intelligence. Archives of Psychology, No. 50, p. 70.
6. Simpson, J. C., M.D.?Tonsil Operations. Journal of American Medical
Assoc., April 1, 1916, p. 37.
7. Terman, L. M.?The Inteligence of School Children. Houghton, Mifflin
Co., 1919, pp. XXII+317.
