Lunacy in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
============================================

287 Art. XII.?
In our last number we gave a few particulars relative to
Insanity in Massachusetts, gathered chiefly from an imperfect
report of the State Board. Through the courtesy of Dr Allen,
Commissioner in Lunacy to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
we have been favoured with the official report of the Com-
missioners of Lunacy for that State, which appeared at the
beginning of this year.
At the present time there are 3,077 persons of unsound
mind residing in Massachusetts, out of a population of 1,630,598,
whereas in 1870, the population then being 1,457,351, the
number of lunatics registered was 2,662, showing a difference
of 415 in four years; and it appears to us that this increase of
lunacy in the State is not compatible with the increase of the
population. Between the years 1850 and 1870 there was an
increase of 982 in the number of the insane, or 58*4 per cent.
With regard to the increase of insanity, the Commissioners
make the following remarks:?
INCREASE OF INSANITY.
That there would be an increase of insanity, corresponding to that
of population, has been generally admitted; but that it is actually
increasing in a ratio greater than that, has been considered very
doubtful. On this point, however, there has been a difference of
opinion among those who might be considered very good judges. Last
year a distinguished lecturer, in Boston, declared, in a public address,
" that insanity is on the increase among us; " to which a well-known
writer upon this subject replied, saying, " This is mere assumption."
Says one of our leading superintendents, in his Report for 1873, " If
mental disorders are not increased in a ratio greater than the increase
of population, a proposition that has not,been proved, and the truth of
which is exceedingly doubtful," etc. The superintendent of another
hospital, in his report for the same year, after stating that the average
admissions for the last four years into his institution had been over
400 each year, against 243 average admissions annually for the four
previous years, remarks: " As something of the same advance, for years,
has been observed in the other two State hospitals, we can hardly avoid
the conclusion that there is a decided increase of insanity in our midst,
an increase out of proportion to the natural growth of population."
A careful inspection of the constantly increasing number of
admissions, for years, into our lunatic hospitals, would surely convey
the impression that there was a decided increase of insanity in our
288 LUNACY m MASSACHUSETTS.
State; but then, so many of these admissions are for a second or third
time, while others are mere transfers, such an inspection would not
afford very positive evidence in the matter. The fact that, for years,
all our provisions for the insane, notwithstanding great enlargements
from time to time, have been and are still very crowded, would seem
to indicate that there must be a decided increase of insanity. A brief
sketch of these changes or increased accommodations may aid us in
Obtaining a better knowledge of this increase.
In 1818 the McLean Asylum was established, and in 1832 con-
tained G4 inmates, at which time the State Hospital at Worcester was
built, for 120 patients. This was as large a number as it was then
supposed would need such accommodation. In 183G-37 two wings were
added, to accommodate one hundred more ; and in 1842 two more wings
were added, to provide for another hundred. In 1851 the Worcester
Hospital had 450 patients; the McLean, 200 ; the Boston City Lunatic
Hospital, 204; the receptacles at Ipswich and Cambridge had 115
insane; besides these, many were confined in jails and almshouses.
On account of the crowded state of these institutions, the Legislature, in
May 1851, passed an Act to establish another hospital, which was
opened at Taunton in 1854, with over 300 admissions the first year.
Such was the pressure on the institutions that, in 1855, provision was
made for another lunatic hospital. This was opened at Northampton
in 1858; and these two hospitals, built near the same time, with pro-
vision for 600 new patients, seemed to meet the demand for nearly ten
years. In I860 (and for several years) the three State Hospitals were
so crowded that an asylum, connected with the State Almshouse at
Tewksbury, was opened for the chronic insane. This, ultimately,
made provision for 300. For some years the Taunton Hospital has
been so crowded that two large wings have just been added, making
provision in all for 500 or GOO patients. Worcester, on account of its
crowded state, and the pressure of the city upon its premises, is
erecting a new hospital to accommodate 500 or 600. Besides these
changes, the State is erecting at Danvers a large new hospital, making
provision for 500 or more patients. And when all these accommodations
are complete, providing for some 800 or 1,000 new patients, they will
at once be all occupied, and more room will soon be demanded. From
the extended provision made from time to time for the insane, it would
certainly seem as though there had been a very decided increase in
numbers, above the ratio that might have been expected.
It is not the exact increase in numbers which we here aim to
discover, but the relative increase of insanity compared ivith that of
population. A definite enquiry made at the proper sources in all the
cities and towns in the Commonwealth, as was done by the Lunacy
Commission of 1854, might give us a very correct knowledge of the
present number and distribution of the insane, though it would throw
but little light on its increase or its causes, as connected with the
changes of population. The census affords the only feasible medium of
enquiry in this direction. The censuses are taken at different periods,
under similar directions, conditions, and methods, and must yield
results each time of comparatively equal value, the defects of each
period being much the same in amount and kind. The value of their
LUXACY IN MASSACHUSETTS. 289
results consists not so mucli in absolute statements, as in enabling us
to make comparisons as to the relation which the insane sustain at
different periods to the changes in population.
We cite the United States and State Census taken at five different
periods?viz., 1850, 1855, 1860, 1865, and 1870. Included in this
period there are two important phases?the late war, and foreign
immigration?which call for special notice, not merely in their effect
upon population, but in their relations to the insane. For the sake of
convenience we present these tables together; and though taken by
different agents, there are no marked discrepancies, but their results as
a whole help to explain and confirm each other.
The Commissioners state that tlie increase of insanity may
arise from two sources:?
First.?Looking at the foreign element, more especially the
Irish, it may arise from the change in organisation and cha-
racter, consequent upon migrating from the equable climate,
outdoor exercise, pure air, and simple habits of life enjoyed in
their native land. Here the not unfrequent disappointments,
the different style of living, the increased habits of intemperance,
working more indoors, living in tenements badly ventilated,
etc., etc.?all these causes are peculiarly calculated to impair
health, disturb the nervous system, and in many cases produce
decided insanity. Moreover, this element in our population is
largely increasing.
Second.?A change from a vigorous, well-balanced organisa-
tion to an undue predominance of the nervous temperament is
gradually taking place in our New England people. The brain
is being developed altogether too much at the expense of the
body. The educational pressure on the young, to the neglect of
physical exercise, the increasing artificial and unnatural habits
of living, the great excitement and competition in business,?
these and other causes are multiplying nervous diseases,
especially of the brain, and disturbances of the mind, many of
which must result in mental derangement. Then it must be
borne in mind, that the evils resulting from the above-mentioned
causes may be propagated by the laws of inheritance, in an
aggravated and intensified form.
The fact, that for twenty years there has been a decided
increase of insanity in our State, disproportionate to the increase
of population, is clearly demonstrated, we believe, by the tables
and comparisons here presented; but neither time nor space
will allow, at the present time, an enquiry in what particular
classes this increased insanity has appeared, or what were the
precise causes that produced it. Judging by the history of
facts, and the various influences now in operation, we have
reason to apprehend a still greater increase of insanity, unless
290 LUNACY IN MASSACHUSETTS.
active measures are taken to arrest its progress by enlightening
the public as to its causes.
Some valuable remarks are made as to the difference
between acute and chronic insanity. The causes are often
complex and latent, and we are unable to determine when
and how the disease originated, and consequently it is some-
times a difficult thing to state whether we have an acute or
chronic malady under our observation. The question naturally
arises, at what period a disease may be considered to have
passed from the acute to the chronic stage, and in no disease is
this point more complicated than in insanity. When the
disease has definitely settled into a chronic condition, it is
almost hopeless to attempt a cure.
Dr Alien says:?" If the proper treatment can be applied
in its first attack or stage, it is estimated by some that, taking-
all cases as they arise, from 70 to 80 per cent, can be
cured, and others estimate the rate still higher; but if not
treated at all, or attempted unsuccessfully, till the disease
passes into a chronic state, it is found, as a general rule, that
not more than 10 per cent, ever recover," thus showing the great
importance of treating the malady in the incubatory stage.
This, we are sorry to say, in our own country is not always re-
cognised ; the friends refusing to admit the real condition of
the patient until the symptoms have become rapidly developed,
and consequently, during the incubatory stage, no treatment has
been adopted as a means of checking the rapid advances of the
malady, and frequently the disease has assumed a chronic form
before admission into an asylum. The chief recoveries occur
in persons in whom the premonitory symptoms have been
recognised, and active treatment immediately resorted to.
One of the chief provisions required by the Lunacy Act in
Massachusetts is that the Commissioners' Report should give
the various methods for treatment adopted in the State. This
clause is an important one, and we regret there is no such
provision in our own Act.
We consider the remarks on treatment extremely valuable,
and we here append them:?
TREATMENT OF THE INSANE.
The Act establishing this Commission enjoins upon it an enquiry
into the treatment of the insane. This may be interpreted in different
ways; it may refer to medical, sanitary, or personal treatment. In this
enquiry it may not, perhaps, be out of place to notice briefly each
of these topics.
The administering of medicine constitutes a very important agency
in the cure of the insane. By some the value o? this agency would be
LUNACY IN MASSACHUSETTS. 291
estimated much higher than by others. In the establishment of
hospitals the use of medicine has always assumed paramount im-
portance. Formerly, medicine was deemed much more efficacious, and
its use more essential, than of late years. It was regarded, in fact, as
the chief agency in curing the insane; whereas of late, the moral, the
sanitary and other outward agencies have assumed relatively greater
importance. It is found that all those influences that appeal to the
laws of the mind have a powerful tendency to the restoration of health.
It is well known that there has been great improvement in the general
practice of medicine as to the use of drugs, both in quality and
quantity. It is to be presumed that all the most improved methods of
compounding and administering medicine to the sick are to be found in
our lunatic hospitals. But in examining the reports of these institutions,,
and by enquiry of their superintendents, we find a great difference
among them in the quantity of medicine used. In the item of ex-
penditure for medicine in the various reports, it will be seen that for a
series of years twice or three times as much medicine is purchased for
the same number of patients by some institutions as by others. In one
or two of the institutions this expenditure, as reported, is five or six
times as large as in the others. It may be said, we are aware, that the
item of expense is not a fair or correct criterion as to the wise ad-
ministration of medicine, as the patients in the hospitals differ so
widely. It is well known that, among the best physicians in private
practice, a great difference exists in the quantity of medicine used.
The same difference may exist in hospital practice. Here the medical
attendants are sole judges, without interference on the part of patients or
their friends. "Whether there is over medication, or a neglect in the
efficient use of medicine in particular cases, are questions beyond the
scope of our present enquiry. If medical skill and experience?if a
wise discriminating use of drugs?if close attention to and watchfulness,
of their effects?are required anywhere, it is surely in the medical
treatment of insane persons. The highest skill, the best experience,
and the greatest wisdom to be found in the profession should by all
means here be brought into requisition.
Connected with this topic the inquiry arises, Can a superintendent,
with one or two assistants, treat properly four or five hundred sick
people ? In private practice, a physician could not begin to do justice
to a quarter part of this number. This constitutes a serious objection
to large hospitals. In all these institutions, it is found that there must
be one superintending mind; there must be in every department
personal responsibility resting upon some one individual. If the
superintendent is to act as steward,-?is to have charge of all the repairs,
improvements, and finances of the institution,?is to have his mind
charged with a multitude of other duties too numerous to mention,
how can he properly examine, prescribe for, and carefully watch, from
day to day, very many patients? It is true he may have good
assistants, and there may be large numbers in our lunatic hospitals who
really need no medical treatment; yet, with the cares, labours, and
responsibilities put upon him, can he do justice to all such patients as
are very sick, or in the first stages of the disease ? If there must be
lack of attention or neglect of duty anywhere, it certainly should not
be in the medical care of the insane.
292 LUNACY IN MASSACHUSETTS.
Another agency in the treatment of the insane, in some respects
more important than the use of drugs, certainly so to large numbers of
them, is that of sanitary influences. Once the value and efficiency of
these agencies were imperfectly understood; yet nowhere are they so
important as in the case of the insane, Avhere great numbers, diseased
both in body and mind, are brought into close CQntact. Good air, pure
water, cleanliness, and proper exercise are here indispensable. Within
a few years great improvements in these respects have been made in all
our hospitals, but there is room for still more. Most serious defects,
under these heads, might be pointed out in each of our institutions, in
some more than others; but we cannot at the present time enter into
detail. One single point should be mentioned. We found the lower
halls at the Worcester Hospital, several in the older portions at Taunton
and South Boston, badly ventilated ; but by the changes going on and
in prospect, these evils, it is expected will be remedied.
There is one other point, however, that calls for special notice?that
is, the law of exercise, applicable to the mind as well as the body. As
a curative agency for the insane, and a conservator of health, its value
and importance cannot be overestimated. Much may be accomplished
in this way within the walls of the institution, but more outside.
Useful employment of various kinds may be found for a portion of the
females within and about the establishment, while others should be
made to seek exercise in verandahs and airing-courts, as well as in
walks and rides. If the practice of gymnastics, with some of the more
simple apparatus and appliances, could be employed by both sexes, it
would conduce greatly to their physical and mental health. In the
case of males, exercise can be provided to some extent within the
institution, but far better and more wholesome without, in doing chores,
in taking care of stock, in making repairs and improvements, in garden
and farm work, &c. Though much has been effected in these directions,
there is abundant room for further improvement. No kind of exercise
is so wholesome as work in the garden or on the farm, and the more
this can be extended the better. The introduction of some
suitable mechanical work on a larger scale would, as it seems to us,
prove an admirable addition to the remedial resources of such institu-
tions. The utility or profit of the work would be a minor consideration,
compared with its sanitary influence.
Inasmuch as insanity is a disease affecting the mind, and inasmuch
as all mental exercises have a powerful influence upon the physical
system, it is found that, in order to treat insanity successfully, we must
summon to our aid all those agencies that tend to produce a normal
healthy action of the mind. Within ten or twenty years there has
been great improvement in this respect.
There is, among the insane, such an absorption or introversion of
thought and feeling on themselves, such an overwhelming tendency for all
their mental faculties to run in particular grooves or channels, accom-
panied generally with great depression of spirits, that in order to break
up this spell or incubus, and effect a change, there arises a necessity for
resorting to those means, which serve to draw the mind away from itself
and bring before it newscenes and objects. This is done in a great variety
of ways, by amusements, such as billiards, games, plays, excursions, rides,
LUNACY IN MASSACHUSETTS. 293
together with lectures, music, pictures, reading, religious exercises, etc.
All these measures, when properly employed, have a powerful tendency to
restore the mind to a normal and healthy action. They operate in harmony
with the laws both of mind and body; and the most skilful and success-
ful managers of the insane resort more and more to these agencies. It
is found that the more constantly the minds of the insane can be occu-
pied with agreeable and pleasant employments and associations, the
greater are their chances of recovery. In no one way, nor in any de-
partment for treating the insane, has so great improvement been made
as in the use of these agencies. And the more correctly and thoroughly
Ave understand the laws of mind as based upon the functions of the
brain, both in a normal and abnormal state, the more successfully will
they be applied to cure the derangements both of body and mind. But
it is almost superfluous to say that, as in the past there has been con-
stant improvement in the use and adjustment of such appliances and
remedies, there is yet room for and hope of still greater.
THE QUESTION OF PERSONAL TREATMENT
possesses points of great interest. It is unnecessary to discuss the impor-
tance of kind gentle treatment to persons in health ; but its influence
upon the insane is so powerful that we cannot find language strong
enough to express its value. The very nature of their disease makes
them morbidly sensitive and generally suspicious. They are governed
very much by first impressions and outside influences. While deprived
of reason, or the use of those higher faculties designed for our guidance,
they yield readily to the impulses of will, feeling, taste, fancy, etc., as
affected by persons or circumstances around them. Now in this mor-
bid, sensitive, uncontrolled state of mind, the manner, talk, gesture, or
smile of those especially in charge of the insane has a powerful in-
fluence. It may do more, in many cases, to break up and cure their
derangement than it is possible lor medicine or any sanitary agency to
do. Hence the importance that all having charge of the insane,
whether physicians, attendants, or nurses, should at all times take special
pains to treat them with great kindness and tenderness. No assistant or
attendant should ever be employed, without he possesses qualifications
particularly adapted to this business. To discharge successfully the
duties here incumbent requires a peculiar combination of qualities.
Among these may be mentioned an inexhaustible share of patience and
goodnature, a cultivated, well-balanced mind, firm and decided, without
harshness or severity, always cheerful and persevering. Considering
the importance of this subject in hospital treatment, we believe persons
should be trained expressly for this business, and should receive such
compensation as will render the situations more permanent than they
usually are. In this way far more good might be accomplished, and
less complaint would be heard from patients or their friends. Lunatic
hospitals have probably suffered in reputation more from this source
than from any other.
Perhaps under the head of " Treatment of the Insane," the question
of " Diet," specified in the law creating this Commission, should receive
294 LUNACY IN MASSACHUSETTS.
some notice. Much might be said on this subject; but to do it justice,
one should visit the hospitals at meal-hours, and carefully examine into
the kinds, qualities, quantity of food, manner of cooking, etc., and en -
quire whether each inmate obtained sufficient food, or what was best
adapted to his wants. All this would require far more time and labour
than our prescribed limits allow. Each of the hospitals has a regular
*l Diet Table," which is followed, we are informed, with much uniformity.
Those tables have been prepared with great care, and improved, from
time to time, as experience and observation dictated. Each of these
tables specifies meat always in some form at dinner, and about half the
time at breakfast. A great variety of food is presented in these tables, not
intended, of course, for every meal or day, but extending through the
week. The general character of the diet would seem to be plain, nutri-
tious, wholesome,and substantial, interspersed with pastry, dessert, condi-
ments, fruit, milk, etc. The sick have a prescribed diet adapted to their
wants. Judging by these tables, it would seem as though the inmates of
these hospitals could have no just ground of complaint for the want of
variety in their food; and it is generally understood that the cooking
in all our large institutions is superintended by experienced persons.
Whatever other complaints have been made against our lunatic
hospitals, scarce any have come to our knowledge on the ground of
insufficient or unwholesome food. It has been maintained that the
insane, on account of the excited and disturbed state of the brain and
nervous system, require more nutritious food than other people ; and
from extended observation and enquiry, we are satisfied that the
dependent class, particularly of the insane in our public institutions,
fare better than they would do outside.
RESTRAINT OF THE INSANE, FREEDOM ALLOWED, ETC.
On no one point are people so sensitive as on that of personal
liberty. The idea of being confined by bolts and bars shocks one's
sensibilities. The thought that liberty is to be taken from us?that
the freedom, the control of our own persons must be surrendered to
others?produces anything but agreeable or pleasant impressions.
This is perfectly natural; it accords with our best instincts of self-
respect and self-government. And in the case of the insane the effect
of such a change may aggravate or increase the very derangement out
of which grew this necessity, and also serve as a most grievous
hindrance to the restoration of health and sanity. On account of this
great change in surrendering up one's personal rights to which the
insane must submit, special pains should be taken, that this confine-
ment and restraint should at first, and all through the treatment, be as
light and inoffensive as possible ; and all the freedom compatible with
safety to the patient and others should, at all times and on all occasions,
be allowed. In respect to this matter of the personal liberty of the
insane, great changes for the better have been made within a short
period, both in Europe and our own country. The insane in our
lunatic hospitals are obtaining every year more and more freedom by
use of halls, yards, courts, and by outdoor exercises. But whenever
there is danger or positive evidence that a patient will injure himself,
LUNACY IN MASSACHUSETTS. 295
or others, lie must be confined in a room by himself, or in some way
his limbs or person be restrained so as to prevent such injury. Both
in the manner and frequency of employing this confinement or restraint,
great care and discrimination should be exercised. Neither should
such confinement or restraint be continued longer than is absolutely
necessary. No pain or suffering should by this means be inflicted upon
the body. Special care, too, should be taken that no injury occurs by
this confinement to the health, and that it should interfere as little as
possible with any of those agencies intended for the permanent recovery
of the insane. In all our large lunatic hospitals cases are constantly
occurring where seclusion or restraint is absolutely necessary,?some-
times temporarily, and at others more permanently. In our visits to
these institutions we have made careful enquiry on this point, and have
been surprised that these cases of confinement or restraint were so few,
and that it was applied with so little apparent injury to body or mind.
By actual count, the number thus confined or restrained on our visits
ranged between five and ten.
To all the insane who can go outside of the walls of the institu-
tion, freedom should be allowed as far as possible. Let them go, for
work or pleasure, in small or large companies; let them ride or walk ;
they should by all means be encouraged and urged to go. In these
outside exercises let them be put upon their honour?upon their good
behaviour. Should one occasionally escape, it does but little injury;
whereas great numbers are essentially benefited, and, perhaps, cured
for life. There are, however, two modes of using force or restraint
which demand special notice. First.?In case an insane person is dis-
obedient or disorderly, and requires correcting by the laying on of
hands, this correction should always be performed without harshness or
violence, or showing ill-temper. Many complaints have been made
by patients against attendants in lunatic hospitals for rough and
abusive treatment of their persons, and Ave apprehend that, in some
instances, just grounds have existed for such complaints. Second.?The
other mode of using force is in confining the insane, as a mode of
correction or punishment for some misconduct, or for refusing to work,
etc., in cells or rooms, sometimes dark, cold, and unwholesome, and
keeping them in the meantime upon scanty fare. We question whether
this mode of correcting the insane can be justified by any principles of
justice, or by any advantages that may accrue from such a course.
In fact, it is a violation of the laws of the State. Several cases,
where parties refusing to work were confined, for a shorter or
longer time, in cells, lately occurred in one institution: but as,
upon expostulation, the procedure was immediately stopped, with
the assurance that it should not be repeated, any further comment is
deemed unnecessary.
Our special attention is drawn to the evil resulting
from allowing patients to be too frequently visited by their
friends and relations. The physician has no motive in pro-
hibiting their visits. He is perfectly aware of the great
mischief so often following an injudicious visit made to a
person suffering from acute insanity. If, however, the friends
296 LUNACY IN MASSACHUSETTS.
are obstinate, and still insist on seeing the inmate, all responsi-
bility will rest with them for any aggravation of the disease.
We are told that several hundred cases of insanity in
workhouses and private families, are really only fit for asylums.
There are at the present time five Private Asylums in the
State. The oldest of these was established thirty years ago;
but with the yearly increase of insanity, more accommodation
will soon have to be provided, the remainder of the lunatics
being at present confined in hospitals. "We regret very much to
find that, according to the present Lunacy Law, no provision is
made for an official visitation of Private Asylums.
Dr Allen makes various suggestions for the management
and improvement of hospitals, and we congratulate him upon
his earnest labours in the field of Psychology. Notwithstanding
his having been deprived of the valuable services of his coad-
jutor, W. Phillips, Esq., he has given us a most valuable
Eeport.
