Morbid Appetites of the Insane
===============================

235 Art. VII.?
:Author:  W. A. P. BROWNE, ESQ,
Psychological Consnltant, Crichton Institution, Dumfries; recently Medical
Commissiotier in Lunacy, Scotland.

" She can cranch
A sack of small coal, eat your lime and hair,
Soap, ashes, loam, and has a dainty spice
Of the green sickness."?Ben Jonson.

On visiting the wards of an asylum there may be encountered
individuals of both sexes and of every station, of pleasing aspect,
respectful or refined address, and of coherent, even intelligent
conversation. If the pursuits and amusements of such a com-
munity be witnessed, they may present the same animation
and decorum, the same enjoyment and self-control, which cha-
racterise similar meetings in rational and respectable society.
These scenes are mere simulacra, semblances of sanity. They
are presented to the critical eye as an advertisement of success,
as the triumphs of common sense and common humanity in
rehabilitating the native ugliness of disgusting desires or
savage passions, in rebuilding the ruined temple of the soul,
or as appropriate appeals to the sympathies and convictions of
the observer. But they form merely the outer wall of a whited
sepulchre. There is, within and below, the loathsomeness of
decay, rottenness, and degeneracy. There will be found in
other strata of " the relics of another and an outer world " of
past health and happiness, degradations, perversions, and brutish
tendencies so gross and grovelling as to extort the enquiry,
can all this be consistent with the past dignity and nobility,
the future glory and immortality of that being who is a little
lower than the angels ? The attractive colours of the picture
are not, however, a fable or a falsity; they constitute the
genuine and legitimate fruits of improved treatment, founded
upon science and a partial knowledge of the requirements and
regulation of the human mind; while the feebleness, the
fatuity, and the foulness which lurk behind are as genuine
fruits of this partial knowledge, and of the ignorance and
incompetency which are confessed, but not yet overcome, and
which the splendid enlightenment already spreading around us
serves to reveal, but not to remove. Dark and gloomy although
such destinies of our fellow-men may be, they are not in-
scrutable. Many solutions have at least been offered of this
fallen estate. It has been attributed to the direct vengeance
of Deity, as a punishment for sins personal or ancestral; it has
been identified with Satanic possession; it lias been traced
back to our brute nature, and paraded as a proof of our descent
and evolution from some less-gifted animal. We conceive that
another explanation less remote and recondite, and more in
harmony with the history of each individual, is accessible, and
that a brief narrative of some even of the most hideous forms
in which alienation may present itself may develop this, and
may at the same time serve to warn the sanguine that com-
paratively little has been accomplished in the amelioration of
mental disease; that they should not be misled by the frac-
tional good which has been done, nor withdrawn from the
contemplation of the enormous amount that remains undone,
as a stimulus and reward to coming Psychologists.

PHTTOPHAGES.

Structural arrangements and the astute vigilance of trained
attendants have suppressed much of the violence, the vagaries,
and absurdities of the chronic insane, but they have failed, and
must, perhaps, always fail, in frustrating the grotesque devices
by which perverted appetites and aptitudes are manifested or
gratified since the abandonment of a mask or a chain.
Many patients display a taste and a talent for deception
and evasion, and derive pleasure from eluding or defeating the
provisions instituted for the purpose of making them human
and happy. Many years ago we had as a patient an officer in
the navy who was partially demented and incoherent, but who
retained the language and many of the habits of his former
condition. The contraction of his fingers indicated that he had
suffered from hemiplegia, but his firm and rounded form, his
blooming and smiling features, showed that he was robust and
well-nourished. He often wrote with chalk or some substitute
on the pavement, and while tracing his gigantic letters he
assumed the quadrupedal position which might have betrayed to
certain theorists a relic of his origin from animals of a lower
grade. He had another peculiarity which seemed to corroborate
this fanciful idea. His lips were repeatedly noticed to be green,
and particles of grass suggested the suspicion that he chewed
and perhaps swallowed the herbage in the airing ground. He
was watched and detected in devouring considerable quantities
of the grass and in making what might have served as a meal
for one of the herbivora. This man had abundance of plain
food, lacked not tobacco, and indulged in this practice in order
to administer, it was at the time conjectured, to a depraved
taste, or to allay the cravings of morbid hunger. We have
since met with many instances of similar depravation, where
the leaves of trees, lierbs and vegetables of all kinds, seeds, roots,
unripe fruits were taken at random and in large quantities.

Even in their Report, 1875, the Board of Lunacy, Scotland,
has issued a circular warning of the evil and fatal effects
arising from a6cess to yew leaves and berries. It does not
seem necessary to seek an explanation for such indulgence
in the origin of species or in the reappearance of an instinct,
extinct in the individual, but existing in his progenitors
and in their unevolved unhumanised ascendants. We are
acquainted with the history of J. Gordon, the mother of a
microcephalic idiot boy, who throughout life displayed an in-
surmountable repugnance to animal food. A modification of
this perversion is met with in hypochondriacs, who, it is
?well known, cherish their maladies, have a predilection for
infirmity and invalidism, recoil from robust health, are en-
grossed with medication, and who, though rejecting natural
and attractive aliments, acquire a positive pleasure in subsisting
upon drugs. Abstinence is certainly a frequent symptom; but
bulimia, or inordinate appetite, is likewise met with in melan-
cholies, extending to inedible, disgusting, and noxious matters,
and may depend upon an advanced stage of that irritation which
leads primarily to the rejection of food in other individuals.
This uneasiness or craving, which sometimes amounts to torture
in the region of the stomach, may be traced to exalted or morbid
sensibility of the nerve, and which may suggest the desire for
food without any consideration of its esculent or digestible
qualities. Gratification appeases the inordinate appetite tem-
porarily, and extinguishes the local pain; but the recurrence of
the inclination to eat takes place much earlier than can arise
from the wants of the system, or from a healthy state of the
stomach. In such cases, where patients do not sleep, food is
sometimes supplied during the night, which appears to remove
the cause of their restlessness, and is followed by sound refresh-
ing sleep.

The earliest and most celebrated illustration of morbid
vegetable-eating is that to be found in the Book of Daniel. As
this narrative has been discussed by the present writer in a
theological work under the shadow and sanction of the venerable
name of Dr Pusey, it may be here introduced as connected with
this enquiry. It is stated that Nebuchadnezzar " was driven from
men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew
of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles' feathers and his
nails like birds' claws." It is now conceded that the madness thus
delineated was allied to a rare sort of disease called Lycanthropy,
or one form of it of which our earliest notice is in a Greek medi-
cal writer of the 4th century after our Lord, in which the sufferer
retains his consciousness in other respects, but imagines himself
to be changed into some animal, and acts, up to a certain point,
in conformity with that persuasion. Those who imagined
themselves changed into wolves howled like wolves, and, there
is reason to believe, accused themselves falsely of bloodshed.
Others imitated the cries of dogs; it is said that others thought
themselves nightingales, lions, cats, or cocks, and these crowed
like a cock. "We attended a lady who conceived herself trans-
muted into a cow, but did not frequent the " pastures sweet."
In many classes of the insane the eating garbage, excrement,
even grass, is a symptom both of general debasement and of
a perverted craving for unsuitable and innutritious diet. If
Nebuchadnezzar's punishment, then, be regarded as alienation,
involving the greatest conceivable amount of degradation, the
" eating grass as oxen," the expulsion from the society of his
fellow-men, and the exposure to the elements may be viewed
as most graphic features of his disease, and of the cruel treat-
ment to which, in those and in much more recent days, such
an affection subjected the sufferer.

There is a traditionary belief that a melancholic, suspecting
his meals to be poisoned or adulterated, was sustained for a long
period upon the contents of cocoa-nuts. We have had several
patients who took no support but that of bread; one of whom
exercised this self-denial in order that his fellow-sufferers might
benefit by his abstinence, and greatly impaired his strength by
such abstinence, as well as by secluding himself in a closet
traversed by hot-water pipes, so that a larger amount of warmth,
according to his estimate, might reach and cheer his companions.
This was a delusion, or an erroneous judgment; but if we
recollect that millions of our fellow-creatures in India are, at
this moment, granivorous, guided partly by superstition and
partly by the products of the country and climate; that large,
but perhaps not so large, numbers in other parts of the world
are frugivorous; that we ourselves, in a certain stage of our
life-progress, have depended almost entirely upon cerials; that
Creed, for ages, limited ascetics to farinaceous food; that a
misinterpretation of physiology has converted thousands into
enthusiastic but rigid vegetarians; we cannot justifiably re-
gard phytophagism as more than a deviation from modern
customs, as a morbid tendency, as the exaltation of a desire for
a particular kind of food, which has been over-laid or obscured
by usage, luxury, or special circumstances, but which reappears
when these superinduced or superincumbent veils or disguises
have been torn off by disease, and the rudimentary strata of our
instincts and propensities laid bare. The G-ymnosophists were
both nudifiers and vegetarians.

LITHOPHAGES.

While paying a professional visit in years when bleeding
was still employed as a remedy, an hysterical woman rifled my
pocket, extracted from it a small morocco case for two lancets,
and, notwithstanding the exertions of those around, swallowed
it. About the same time, when manacles had come under the care
of science, and the iron which was supposed to enter into the soul,
had given place to the reign of leather, stuffed gloves, and but-
toned dresses, a lady, whose gown was secured at the back by
small padlocks, succeeded in tearing off one of these and pass-
ing it down her throat. In what manner these objects entered
the stomach or what became of them was never ascertained ;
but certain it is that no injury or disturbance followed their
entrance into the system. The tolerance of the organs of diges-
tion has been demonstrated in various other ways and in a
more striking manner. The handles of spoons have been cut
out from the walls of the abdomen, which had been furtively
thrust down the oesophagus by lunatics, and cases have occurred
where, after death, spoons, knives, buckles, buttons, coins, and a
miscellaneous collection of small articles have been disclosed by
dissection.

In the Register of Deaths, March 1852, a startling instance
of this kind is recorded. In a private asylum in London there
were found in the stomach of a lunatic thirty-one handles of table-
spoons, about a dozen of nails, two or three stones, and a button.
It is at first difficult to conceive under what feelings or for
what purpose such acts had been resorted to. As none of the
metal-eaters appear to have meditated suicide, we are compelled
to embrace the supposition that such dangerous experiments
were dictated either by delusions of invulnerability or immor-
tality, by boastful pretentions of occult or supernatural powers,
or should be numbered among the rash, motiveless, frenzied
acts characteristic of sudden impulses during maniacal par-
oxysms. I have had more than once to contend against the
wounds inflicted by portions of window glass thrust into the
mouth or oesophagus with the view to destroy life, and upon
one occasion was called upon to deal with an excited mastur-
bator, who, either under the pangs of remorse, or instigated by
those obscure suggestions which emanate from excited csenes-
thesis, seized, crunched, and effectually triturated the glass
which had fallen from a pair of spectacles, and contrived to
swallow a considerable portion of the sharp particles. He sur-
vived this accident and ultimately died of phthisis.

Familiar with pronators, grovellers, burrowers, and hiders,
who dallied with dirt and gravel or excavated the ground near
to tliem, I long suspected that many inedible substances were
subjected to mastication; but not until I had an opportunity
of being present at the examination of the bodies of individuals
who had died in a workhouse during an epidemic of cholera
did I form any conception of the extent to which earth-eating
was carried by the insane. Of many opened, five bodies con-
tained earth in the intestines. It had not, apparently, undergone
any change, but was at some points caked into masses; at
others it remained disintegrated or pulpacious. In all these
persons the colon was the chief receptacle of this foreign
matter, which was present in such enormous quantities, although
the precise amount was, unfortunately, neither measured nor
weighed, that the enlarged and distended gut had been forced
by its contents across and almost down into the pelvis, occupying
the position, in fact, formerly supposed to be characteristic of
melancholia. Of the history of these cases nothing was known,
except that they had long lived in seclusion and died during
cholera ; but it was surmised that the low diet and depressing
surroundings of their situation might have had some influence
over the foul and perhaps fatal practice thus disclosed; in fact,
that recourse had been had to mother earth because food was
insufficient. Either to allay an irresistible impulse, or as a
mode of malingering or of suicide, dirt and plaster eating was
constantly resorted to by enslaved negroes, and induced the
disease or the death which they coveted. There are peoples
who supplement their ordinary nourishment by taking insecti-
ferous earth. There are savage tribes who gorge themselves
with mould, or balls of mould, in order to distend the stomach,
and thus to mitigate the cravings of hunger. There are, again,
those who devour an unctuous clay, and expect to derive support
from the animal or vegetable oil with which it is saturated,
thus proving the omnivorousness of our species, so that what
was done by lunatics from necessity is repeated by their
brethren in freedom, from choice. It is known that rocks have
yielded oils which have been utilised for food and medicine.
Eomance tells us that pearls have been dissolved in order that
royal lips might quaff a draught unparalleled in value, how-
ever unpalatable it might be; and I have seen chlorotic and
dyspeptic girls, both sane and insane, devour chalk, cinders,*
and other disgusting solids, but have met with few examples of
stone-swallowing so extraordinary as the following:?J. C., a
thin, pale melancholic, was long under my care. She was stealthy
in her gait, secretive and cunning in some of her habits,
moderate in appetite, and was placed under special observation,
as it was feared that she added to the ordinary bill of fare some
less digestible matters. Such apprehensions were, however,
long disarmed by the absence of all other symptoms of in-
disposition than anaemia and attenuation of frame. At length
a dose of castor-oil was required, and its operation confirmed
the accuracy of the original suspicion. The stools contained,
besides healthy coacted faeces, a large number of pebbles, evi-
dently obtained while taking exercise in the grounds; but
whether all had been swallowed at once, or at several times,
there were no grounds for conjecture. During the next twenty-
four hours there were collected 158 stones, now upon my
writing-desk. The total number weighed nine and three-
quarter ounces, the largest reaching to six drachms. They were
of all forms, and sometimes presented rough surfaces and sharp
edges. Increased care and watchfulness interfered with any
further indulgence in this extraordinary modification of crapu-
lence ; but the unfortunate patient was removed to another
establishment, where, after some years, she became bedridden,
and ultimately died of what was supposed to be chronic
gastritis. On inspection the stomach was found filled by a
rolled dark mass, which is now before me, and which consisted
of hair, some portion of which might have been stolen from
her mattress, but the largest portion was evidently plucked
from her own head. This propensity is sometimes associated
with fsecophagism.

SARCOPIIAGES.

I would not treat as flesh-eaters such as enjoy cooked joints
every day. A large portion of the inhabitants of the world
delight in and depend upon animal food; but it is remarkable
that, as we approach the primitive or unreclaimed condition, the
enjoyment of such a viand seems to be enhanced by the fresh-
ness of the muscle, by its half-cooked or raw condition. The
North American Indian and his children sit around the fire,
immediately after the chase, and luxuriate in a repast upon
the yet palpitating carcass and suck thfe marrow from bones
which have been heated as much by vital warmth as on the
blazing hearth. It has been asserted that the correct mode of
securing an unrivalled beefsteak is to cut a slice from the
haunch of a living bullock and to heat it slightly in the sun.
It would be absurd to suppose that any such refinements of the
gastronomic art actuated the wife who, longing to taste her
husband's shoulder, killed him in order to possess herself of
the coveted morsel; but it has been well established that
under circumstances of hunger, cold, exhaustion and expo-
sure, as well as in pregnancy, the most selfish and sanguinary
propensities are called into activity, overcoming every motive
save those of self-preservation and the satisfaction of the
dominant appetite. Thus we are told that during the latter
stages of the journey of Sir John Eichardson and his party the
mind became impaired, egoism predominated, and when game
could not be procured, men murdered their masters and comrades
in order to appease their sufferings, and were then killed
in turn to arrest a series of similar tragedies. He says:
" I observed that, in proportion as our strength decayed our
minds exhibited symptoms of weakness, evinced by a kind
of unreasonable pettishness with each other." It is possible
that famine or imperfect nourishment may have called forth
the longing for flesh in certain cannibal lunatics, the selection
of their own muscles or those of companions being determined
by the restraints under which they lived, but this cannot be
received as the explanation of other cases on record. A
chronic maniac, under my own charge, bit off the nose of a
sleeping friend, but was prevented from swallowing it; another
attempted to devour a part of her own arm; a third picked and
plucked off the greater part of the lobes of both ears, appa-
rently enjoying his repast of the shreds and blood, invariably
uttering during the process, " the royal blood of peacocks."
These patients were well fed and cared for and under constant
superintendence. A desire for living flesh is mentioned by
Dr Laycock, on the authority of Dr Elliotson, " so that some
have eaten live kittens and rats and instances have recently
come under my own notice where live mice, frogs, beetles,
and worms were devoured; but the pressure of want may
have tempted an idiot lad, whose case has been stated to
me, to eat part of the shoulder of' the corpse of his
mother, with which he had been locked into a room. In
individuals, the disorder of whose mind receives a colouring
from criminal impulses, where homicide precedes or proceeds
from anthropophagism, the promptings of hunger seem to be
connected with the blood-thirst; but ample details upon this
revolting division of the subject may be found in an " Essai sur
l'anthropophagie, par M. le Dr Legrande du Saulle," " Annales
Medico-Psychologiques," Third Series, t. viii. p. 472, and in
an article on " Necrophilism," " Journal of Mental Science,"
January 1875.

Our concern is with innocent, because insane, carnivorous
human beings. We have had patients who subsisted, and for
long periods, exclusively upon animal-meat, some of whom
delighted in raw or semi-prepared meals; others loathed, or
affected to loathe, all farinaceous or vegetable matter, while
others delighted in the quantity rather than the quality of
what was offered. The latter, like Mary Queen of England,
whose voracity required an addition of ?26 per annum to the
Court expenses for meat breakfasts and suppers, were gluttons,
but under such restraint as interfered with any estimate of
their powers of consumption; yet, when opportiuiity offered,
they were detected in appropriating the portions of three or
four of their fellows, so that the range and extent of their
limitless and insatiable hunger was but imperfectly ascertained.
It was at one time benevolently believed that rice-eaters were
in disposition mild, timid, treacherous, and the events of the
Indian mutiny in part substantiated this opinion. It was like-
wise believed that flesh-eaters were daring, barbarous, san-
guinary, and savage, and, so far as very narrow experience of
the habits of this class among lunatics may justify any con-
clusion, such propensities were developed in connection with
the strictly animal diet. Such persons were generally, although
not always, maniacs, and may have acted under the influence
of their real or imaginary powers, and of morbid passions
rather than of morbid appetites. In Dahomy it is recounted
that the wives of the Thunder-Grod cut slices from the bodies
of those killed by lightning and chew them. The cave-
men, of whom our naturalists speak, must have been hearth-
less as well as houseless, and must have used their game
of Elk, Bear, &c., raw or merely heated, and I have re-
peatedly seen inmates of asylums who were utterly regardless
of the culinary art, and others who wo aid have dispensed
with all cooking. I have just heard of a man who, during
his absence from an asylum from which he had escaped, lived
upon the raw flesh of fowls and rabbits. In my own practice
I examined an imbecile who chewed and swallowed dead or
half-dead leeches, although he was understood to have been
tempted to partake of this shocking repast by a bribe.
Now, when compared with our own modes of sustenance, and
with the habits of decent society, such tastes and indulgences
will appear monstrous and unnatural;. yet it is highly pro-
bable that the choice of animal food is merely the cropping
out of a primary instinct, and that the preference of raw flesh
may date from the ages when in our woods the noble savage
ran, but no earlier; and, if we consider the slow growth of
artificial tastes and tendencies, the accumulated impressions
which have for these ages trained and transformed human
inclinations, no wonder need be felt that the origin of such
mental manifestations should be prehistoric, or that they should
reappear during cataclysms, whether general or individual, or
when man is stripped of all that constitutes him the man of
civilisation.

"When we'read of Lalande carrying in his pocket a box filled
with common spiders and caterpillars, one of which he from time
to time ate, as other men take comfits or tobacco, we are not
entitled to recoil from a statement of the disgusting substances,
the putrilage, the filthy abominations which may be swallowed
during alienation, as this sketch would be imperfect without
such disclosures, although we raise the veil with repugnance.
This reluctance should likewise be lessened when we recall the
fact that the Samoiedes and Kamtchadales elect putrid fish
as an article of diet, or when we find that among the Chinese
Tibetians the initiation of pleasure in " still meat "?that is,
maggoty meat with a decaying game flavour?is favoured as a
means of creating ferocious valour, and that for this purpose
they cut meat into thin slices, dry it in the sun, grind it to
powder, and then mix it with fresh blood, put it in a cloth, and
give it to infants to suck.

There are before me copious notes by a trustworthy phy-
sician of the case of a gentleman of large fortune, who lived
in a palace, and who, as may be inferred from what follows,
was literally lord of all he surveyed. This educated person was
deranged, and although he spoke rationally and presided at his
own table ; yet he lived in a small apartment which no one
had been allowed to enter for months. Our medical reporter,
penetrating within its hideous recesses, found the floor covered
with the remains of the meals served to its master for the last
six months, as he would not allow them to be removed. These
consisted of game, fish, lobsters, of every kind, of aliment or
luxury which the resources of an ample estate and establishment
could supply. These were passing through every stage of
putrefaction, and exhaled a smell of the most disgusting and
overpowering kind, but which was declared grateful to the
senses of the occupant. This was not all; portions of excre-
ment appeared among the dishes; a soaked and soiled bed,
which never was changed, lay in a corner, and urine was
preserved as a beverage; nothing, in short, was ever removed
from this den with the knowledge or consent of the lunatic.
The latter horrible practice was traced to a delusion that the beer,
which was taken in large quantities, passed through the body un-
changed. In addition to this, five large rooms in this splendid
mansion were found to contain, under lock and key, enormous
quantities of animal matter, of hares, pheasants, or their skeletons
or mummies, one dried roebuck hanging from the post of a mag-
nificent curtained bed; none of these objects having been known
to exist, or having, at least, been disturbed by the household.
This gentleman is said to have recovered. It is but compas-
sionate to suppose that, in addition to many delusions known to
have existed, there were present perversions or hallucinations
of the senses of taste and smell. I have, however, repeatedly-
met with inmates of asylums who drank their own urine where
no such explanation or excuse could be advanced, where the
other habits were those of refined gentlefolks or respectable
peasants, and where food was taken with relish and propriety.
Still more frequent are instances of individuals, not otherwise
debased, washing or rubbing the body with this secretion,
evidently under the absurd notion that it may act as a restora-
tive unguent on ablution. Within a few days we have visited a
gentleman of good position and manners, far-travelled and well-
informed, but long an inmate of an asylum. He is generally
bedridden, and his skin, linen, &c., are redolent of urinous
exhalations; and while he does not eat ordure, he cannot be
persuaded to part with it, touches it, fondles it, &c. His
most prominent moral feature is a sort of sentimental re-
ligiosity, and during a former stage of his malady he horded
with scrupulous care and anxiety every hair which fell from his
long locks, every paring of his nails, conceiving them to be
sacred and precious, as parts of his living body, under a morbid
misapplication of the doctrine or the emotion as to the relics of
the great and the good. Unfortunately, such aberrations and
degeneracy descend still lower; we have known lunatics who
daubed their persons with ordure, who ate it, who resorted to
every contrivance and misrepresentation in order to gratify this
obscene lust, and who never seemed to comprehend the degra-
dation to themselves and the outrage to others involved in such
acts. Esquirol had a patient who, in besmearing the walls, con-
ceived he was using colour pigments. Superstition presents,
under the sanction of the Grand Lama, parallels to these horrors.
A partially restored maniac, so plausible in conversation as
to have imposed upon his relatives the belief that reason was
completely re-established, exemplified the association of revolting
peculiarities with intelligence, and of. the ineradicability of
habits contracted and confirmed under powerful emotion, by
presenting a faithful and trusted attendant, on their separation,
with a rouleau, which the grateful servant supposed to consist of
sovereigns, but which, on being opened, was found to contain
a mass of hardened faeces. The bitterness of the disappoint-
ment was deepened by the contumelious words with which the
insulting gift was accompanied : " I am sorry that I cannot re-
ward you better."

There are rational men who are either insensible to noxious
and noisome smells or who enjoy them; who frequent Abattoirs
?and Knackeries, and who move unconcernedly in an atmosphere
impregnated with the effluvia of corrupting animal matter.
A similar indifference to such impressions has been observed
among- the insane, and even a more pronounced morbidity occa-
sionally presents itself. A patient of our own lived in a water-
closet in the airing-yard when not forced by the attendants to
leave his retreat. Intreaties, compulsion, penalties, all failed
to overcome this proclivity, until the anaemic and haggard aspect,
and the anasarca of the man necessitated more heroic measures,
and the building was removed. The patient was a melancholic,
and had attempted suicide, and may have been induced, by a
desire for concealment, solitude, or darkness, to adopt the
singular course described; but he eventually recovered, and his
obstinacy and obnoxious habits were not then, of course, adverted
to or explained.

Among the industrial sections of the cloistered insane many
?excesses are committed in purloining uncooked meats, in steal-
ing or sharing the unsavoury and inedible messes committed to
them for the use of pigs, poultry, &c., reminding us of the
parable of the Prodigal Son in Scripture.

We extract the following apposite illustration from the
Annual Report of the Inverness County Asylum for 1874, by
Dr Aitken: " An imbecile employed in the garden and at the
piggeries died somewhat suddenly, and the true cause of his
death was only revealed by the post-mortem examination, when
it was found that no less than eight pints were contained in his
stomach consisting of porridge, raw cabbage, peelings of potatoes,
pieces of carrot, turnips, peas, and barley, &c. The organ, it
may be added, was measured before being opened, and its equa-
torial circumference was found to be 34 inches, its circumference
in the plane of the greater and lesser curvatures 32 inches, and
its circumference in the plane perpendicular to the other two
planes 21 inches."

Such consumption of crudities and half-decayed aliments is
more general where patients remain in their own families or
under guardians, or where they rare less watched and warded.
Indisposition often follows such indulgence, and surfeits, and we
have often been disposed to attribute the paroxysms of excite-
ment, delirium, tremour, noticed in such dements and chronic
lunatics, otherwise inexplicable, to poisoning from the putrescent
or fermented substances to which they had access. Such mani-
festations are sometimes the concomitants of fits of excitement
only.

Besides the objects enumerated in the preceding pages, my
attention has been recently directed to lunatics who have ate
or swallowed tar, thread, silk, swill, soap, cotton handkerchiefs,
clothes, buttons, crushed tobacco pipes, paper, the foot of a
tea-caddy, ueedles and pins by hundreds, slate pencils, poultices,
raw eggs, carbolic acid, and lucifer matches (see 17th Report,
Board of Lunacy, Scotland).

To trace such moral obliquities to a common origin would
be fruitless, except under the generalisations that, wherever
mental disease exists, all faculties, feelings, and propensities
participate and are, less or more, impaired or vitiated; that, in
proportion to the extent and intensity of the prominent disease,
are the special vitiations; and, that the most minute deviation
from mental or moral health, even an innocent hallucination or
a morbid instinct, may be fairly regarded as a part rather than
a sign or prognostic of an affection involving the whole psychical
constitution.

In order to show that we have not been dealing with micro-
scopic objects, with selected or solitary cases, with what did,
but does not, exist, we are enabled through the kind co-operation
of medical superintendents, having at present under their charge
the gross number of 2,355 patients in the lower walks of life,
to subjoin the following as the proportions of the different
classes treated of in the foregoing pages: of fsecophages, 73;
sarcophages, 12; lithophages, 11; phycophages, 29. Of 155
patients of the affluent classes, 4 were fsecophages, 5 litho-
phages, and 8 pliytophages.
