Lectures upon the Structure and Diseases of the Nervous System
==================================================================

This interesting little brochure is composed of a course of lectures
on the Structure and Diseases of the Nervous System, delivered by
M. Luys, the well-known physician of La balpetriere. M. Luys,
though not attached to the Ecole de Medecine of Paris eithei as a
professor or an extra-mural lecturer, is rapidly acquiring a great repu-
tation as a teacher, and has already obtained a wide celebrity from liia
* Logons sur la Structure et les Maladies du Systeme JServeux. Par J. Luys,
Medecin de la Salpetriere, Laurent do l'lnstitut (Academic des Sciences), de
l'Academie de Medecine, et de la Faculte do Medecine. Recueillies par J. I)avo,
Interne du Service. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox. King William Street, Strand.
admirable researches on the cerebrospinal nervous system and his
photographic iconography of the nerve centres. His aim in teaching
is to initiate his pupils little by little into the great questions of cere-
bral activity, in its ensemble, and thus by degrees give them precise
formula? of the different operations both of psychological and intel-
lectual life, the phenomena of which have been but too little studied
by our professional brethren. The mysteries of psychology form the
most seductive and attractive studies of human science, whilst they
are also the most obscure, undecided, and most open to discussion.

All his efforts tend to show that the varieties of mental maladies derive
their origin in a material lesion of the nerve centres, and that there is
a natural and constant connection between the regular acts of an active
healthy brain, and the different functional deviations in insanity.
M. Luys first treats of his mode of preparing morbid specimens for
examination, and the various sections most useful for a careful study
of the brain. After an exhaustive description of the structure of the
cortical grey matter, he shows the direction of the fibres of the white
matter, and divides them into two classes: (a) Those having a
radiating and converging direction, he terms the converging system;
(b) And those uniting the two halves of the cerebrum and forming
the corpus callosum, the commissurant or anastomotic system. From
his physical examination of the pathological conditions of the cortical
structure, we are told that partial atrophy of certain convolutions is
the pathological condition in paralytic dementia.

M. Luys now considers the pathological anatomy of the convolu-
tions. He lays great stress upon what he deems to be the principal
character of the structure, viz. : (1) the stratification of the cells into
distinct zones; (2) the lateral anastomoses between the cells of each
zone, and anastomoses between the successive zones; (3) the distribu-
tion of small cells in the superficial, and of the large cells in the
deeper zones. From these and other anatomical facts as to the disposition
of the cells and fibres, he makes the following physiological deductions.
Each zone plays a particular role and possesses functions peculiar to it;
and, though the present state of science does not enable us to limit in
an exact manner the special attributes of any particular order of cells,
still, by comparing them with the elements of the spinal cord, we can
already make certain legitimate inductions relative to their diverse
activities. The large cells correspond to the large cells found in the
anterior cornua of the spinal cord, whilst the small superficial cells
bear a certain analogy to the small cells of the grey matter. The
superficial zones, then, may be considered as disseminating the impres-
sion of general sensibility (as the sensorium commune) and the deeper
zones as the origin of motor impulses. These deductions are of course
but mere hypotheses more or less rational, still they are well supported
by the experiments of Flourens, Louget, Schiff, and Ferrier.

The various pathological conditions of the cortical matter are next
carefully described, and the lesions of the vessels and cells treated at
considerable length.

The white matter is carefully described, especially as to the di-
rection and functions of the commissurant and convergent systems of
fibres. The corpus callosum he treats as a physiological as well as an
anatomical commissure, and its absence he identifies with congenital
idiocy.

The description o? the thalami optici (couche optique) forms
the most original, if not the most instructive part of the book. The
corpus album subrotundum of Arnold and the other two ganglions he
names the anterior, middle (moyen) and posterior centres, and to these
he adds a fourth which he himself has discovered?the median centre.
He gives them each a second name, descriptive of their iunctions.
The anterior centre, from its connection with the tcenia semi-circularis
and the olfactive impressions, is called the olfactive centre. The
centre moyen receives the nerve fibres of the second pair, hence the
name of optic centre. The centre median, from its close relation to
the sensitive fibres of the convergent system, is termed the centre of
general sensibility. The posterior centre plays an important role in
the pei'ception of sounds, hence the name ot acoustic centre.
In support of the physiological deductions made in these chapters,
he cites several pathological facts, grouj^ed under three exhaustive
heads: (1) anatomo-pathological proofs; (2) proofs of experimental
physiology; (3) clinical proofs. The latter proves, in the most
irrefutable manner, that the optic thalami receive, preserve, and trans-
form the sensorial impressions previous to their definitive irradiation
to the cortical periphery. The Iunctions of the optic thalami, in their
relation to intellectual alimentation, are not inaptly compared to those
of the mouth in receiving and preparing the alimentary bolus before it
passes into the stomach.

The description of the brain is now concluded with a careful
account of the corpus striatum. He regards the corpus striatum as
the centre of the reception, regulation, and elaboration of voluntary
motor impressions emanating from the deep layers of the cortical matter.
The pathological facts confirmatory of this theory are divided into two
classes : (1) Those in which a destruction of the corpus striatum has
resulted in motor paralysis, with preservation of intelligence, more or
less complete, according to the extent of the lesion; (2) those in which
its functions have not been destroyed, but merely obstructed by a
compression or partial degenerescence of the elements, entailing certain
disorders in the motor sphere.

M. Luys concludes by attempting to elucidate the most complex
of all motor phenomena?the action of emitting articulate sounds.
The act of speech differs from the other modes of expression, firstly, in
not being the movement but merely the result of the movement Avliich
makes us aware that the order of the will has been executed; and
secondly, because in the phono-motor apparatus, though composed of two
symmetrical halves like the rest of the body, they are not distinct so far
as their functions are concerned. The bilateral integrity of the appa-
ratus is a sine qua non of the perfect exercise of verbal functions.
This part of the work seems unfinished, and is rather obscure, though
we might expect this when we consider the difficulties to be encoun-
tered.

We have a specimen of M. Luys' ability as a photographer in
the five illustrations, dissections of the optic thalami. With the
introduction of photo-mechanical printing a new era in book illustra-
tion has begun, and Ave hope soon to see our medical text-books
illustrated without the intervention of the draughtsman or "wood
engraver.

In conclusion, though we do not agree with all M. Luys' deduc-
tions, we can certainly recommend everyone interested in the elucidation
of the mysteries of psychology to read the book carefully, and if possible,
by original research, to contribute his mite to the grand end and object
which the talented author has in view. We shall look forward with
pleasure to the next work from the fertile pen of M. Luys.
