Reminiscences of Lunacy Practice
=================================

200 Art. V.?
:Author: James George  Davey, M.D., Bristol.

I puepose in the following remarks to record the experience
through twenty full years?or from January 1, 1853, to Decem-
ber 31, 1872?as realised at Northwoods. Although such
" experience" included periods of time both anterior and sub-
sequent to, or outside, the two dates here given, I prefer that
this report should embrace only the time (twenty years)
intermediate to the aforesaid dates.

The arrangement indicated may be said to give a certain
order, or completeness, or fixity to the report, not otherwise
attainable. I may, however, premise that I became the licensee
of the North woods Asylum in June 1852. At this time there
were 25 patients in the house?viz., 11 males and 14 females.
Of these one only (a lady) appeared curable. On January 1,
1853, there were but 24 patients?viz., 11 males and 13 females.
During the latter half of 1852 one gentleman was admitted,
whilst another was removed, being "relieved." The lady
referred to above was discharged " recovered so it happened
that the number of patients was on the first day of 1853, 24
only, each of these being incurable. The gentleman admitted,
it should be stated, had been insane for a period of not less than
thirty years.

The annexed table conveys, at one view, a summary of the
admissions, discharges, and deaths :?
Admissions, Discharges, and Deaths at North woods during Twenty Years.
Patients in the house on Jan. 1, 1853 ....
Admitted during twenty years, from Jan. 1, 1853, to
Dec. 31, 1872
Total cases under treatment during twenty years .
Discharged and removed:
Recovered
Relieved .
Not improved .
Died
Total discharged and died in twenty years
Male Female Total

11
59
70
Male
23
18
7
16
64
13
71
84
Female
39
18
6
11
74
24
130
154
Total
62
36
13
27
138

Average numbers resident during twenty years . . 24.
You "will see that of 130 admissions there have been discharged
" cured " 62. Tiou will see also that*36 other patients have left
the Asylum "relieved." Thus 98 of the 130 admitted are
disposed of, and in a manner no way unsatisfactory. To put
the case in other words, and in round numbers, two patients
in every three of the treated, viz. 154, left the Asylum either
restored to health or " relieved ;" the proportion of the former
to the latter exceeding five to three.

Under the heading "not improved" but 13 appear; but
for this you will be fully prepared when I put you in possession
of the character and very unpromising nature of some at least
of the 130 patients admitted. Thus 2 of these were more
than seventy years of age; 9 were suffering from confirmed
general paralysis; 5 were epileptics; 6 were reported as having
been insane over five years; one was an idiot, and another
was in an advanced state of phthisis pulmonalis; making
a total of 24 incurables?individuals quite beyond the reach
of anything else than a mere palliative treatment.
In reference to the foregoing experience, it may be added
that the highest number of admissions in one year was 14
in 1859 ; but 6 of these were transfers from the Fishponds
Asylum. With this one exception the highest number of
patients admitted in a single year was 9, and the lowest number
was 3 ; the average admissions per annum was 6. As to the
deaths, these reached through the twenty full years but 27,
the particulars of which are recorded in the annexed table;
four deaths you perceive took place in 1870, whilst in 1857,
and again in 1861, not one occurred. On two different occa-
sions, and for a short time, there were 30 patients under the
roof?viz., 15 males and 15 females.

A reference to the last Report of the Commissioners in
Lunacy will inform you that the " proportion per cent, of the
aggregate number of recoveries to the aggregate number
of admissions" into all kinds of asylums during the past
fifteen years is a fraction under 34 per cent. The honour
of realising the highest average of recoveries during the
period named rests, it is shown, with the " Registered Hos-
pitals "?in these the recoveries were as high as 38*91 per
cent.?and the misfortune of realising the lowest average of
recoveries in the same fifteen years is due to the "Private
Homes," their average being so low as 9*15 per cent. It is, as
you will suppose, a source of no ordinary pleasure to myself to
be in a position to demonstrate, as the result of twenty years'
experience at North woods, an aggregate proportion of recoveries
to that of admissions amounting to but a fraction under 50
per cent.

Causes of Death in Twenty-seven Patients, between Jan. 1, 1853, and
Dec. 31, 1872, on, during Twenty Yeaes.
Cerebrospinal diseases
Thoracic diseases
Abdominal diseases
General diseases .
Local diseases
Special causes of death
Apoplexy?Sanguineous .
>, Serous
Epilepsy ....
Exhaustion after mania .
>? ,, melancholia
?> ? dementia
General or progressive paralysis
Total
Valvular heart disease and anasarca .
Acute pneumonic phthisis .
Pleuropneumonia
Phthisis pulmonalis .
Angina pectoris
Total .
Briglit's disease
Diarrhoea ....
Total
Senile decay
Syncopal asphyxia
Total
Carbuncle
Suicide by hanging .
Total
1
16
27

Furthermore, a reference to the last Report of the Com-
missioners in Lunacy will inform you, that a comparison of the
daily average number of patients through the same fifteen years
with the number of deaths yields a percentage of 7-54 and
that this, the lowest average at any kind of asylum, is due to
the ? Registered Hospitals." If, however, the number of deaths
is compared, not with the daily average number of patients
but with the total number under treatment through the whole
time named, then again is the palm seen to be due to the " Regis-
tered Hospitals," their number of deaths to each 100 of the
total number under treatment being so low as 5*51. I have,
then, an additional gratification in having realised at North-
woods, during twenty years, a percentage of deaths?based on
either one of the calculations adopted in the said Report of the
Commissioners of Lunacy?yet below their lowest on record.
It is well worthy of remark that insanity is not, per se, a
very fatal disease, although the subjects of it die at a more
rapid rate than the sane. The causes of death among the
insane are, as the table just referred to shows so plainly, as
frequently as not outside the organ primarily affected. The
fact is doubtless to be viewed, if not as a consequence of, then
in connection with, the wear-and-tear of the forces of life,
involved so materially in the insufficient and disturbed sleep?
i.e., the emotional and mental disturbance so characteristic of
cerebro-mental disease. The whole organism is, as the rule,
prostrated; it is in no position to recover its lost tone and
energies?their recuperation becomes almost an impossibility.
The due nutrition of the body is so materially interfered with,
that each one of the many organs?the heart, the lungs, the
liver, kidneys, and what not?is brought to the very verge of
disease, and its susceptibilities to abnormal action so intensified,
that to escape the consequences of exposure to even the most
ordinary or diluted morbific agency can hardly be expected in
very many of the insane. Hence, then, the frequent occurrence
in them of heart-disease and dropsies, of phthisis and other
chest affections, and of carbuncle?including, too, mollities
ossum and allied states of the skeleton.* As an additional and
* It was in the year 1842, when Medical Superintendent of the Female
Department at the Hamvell Asylum, and when much engaged and interested
in post-mortem investigations there, that I detected the existence of mollities ossum
(" ostco-Tiialacia") in those dying insane. This very important fact is recorded and
commented on at pp. 258 to 265 of my book, The Ganglionic Nervous System : its
Structure, Functions, and Diseases (1858). I have therein referred to six cases
wherein mollities ossum and insanity were found coexisting. The former, it is
affirmed, " may be confined to one or two bones, or even to portions of the same
bone." Of these six cases, four "were afflicted with ' general paralysis.'" In
the Medical Times?No. 170. vol. vii. p. 195 (1842)?will be seen the record by
myself of a highly instructive post-mortem examination of a female patient who
died under my care at the Hanwell Asylum, and in which patient I found so many
as six spontaneous fractures of the long bones, as well as a very considerable
portion of the skeleton occupied or converted into a dark, semi-calcareous, grumous
matter. It is within some half-dozen years that the complication of the two
diseases above-named (mollities ossum and cerebro-mental disease) became to any
extent recognised in the profession ; and when such was the case, the fact was not
only ignored by the press, medical and non-medical, but treated as simply a very poor
subterfuge, or as an apology, and a very lame one too, for the broken and crushed
ribs of insane patients, inmates of our lunatic asylums. In this matter the Pall-
Mali Gazette, the Lancet, and the Journal of the British Medical Association have
much to answer for to the medical superintendents of asylums, of whatever kind,
private or public.

It may be added here that the existence of soft and fragile, i.e. " rickety,"
bones in those dying insane has been found of late years by many medical men.

Thus Dr Thomas Dickson, Dr F. W. Moore, and Dr J. C. Browne are the authors
practical demonstration of the foregoing remarks, let me refer
to this other table :?

Structures and Organs affected, their Proportion, and Relation to
Particular Forms of Mental Disease.
19
11
7
15
19
7
3
2
17
100
Form of Disorder
Mania .
Mania with epilepsy .
Mania with general
paralysis
Melancholia
Dementia . ?
Ditto with epilepsy .
Ditto with general
paralysis
Ditto with epilepsy and
general paralysis .
Not stated
All forms .
? 2
3
24 15
52
24 I 18
26 44
~ ?
?TS
!&
? 9
20
16

It is extracted from a small book, The Nature and Proximate
Cause of Insanity, which I published nearly a quarter of a
century since, with the view to prove that, whatever may be the
amount of morbid change in the brain and its coverings, how-
ever broken up and softened the cineritious neurine, to what-
ever extent adherent it may be to the pia mater, and altered
in colour, &c., and that, however much or little the arachnoid
may be thickened and opaque, and whatever may be the
amount of fluid contained in its sac, or elsewhere about the
cerebral membranes, the first cause or starting-point of madness
must be sought elsewhere than in any one or more of such con-
ditions?that, in fact, the truth of the matter lay much
deeper down than is too generally suspected, and, what is more
asserted.

That a morbid sensibility of the ultimate cell-structure of
the grey matter of the convolutions lies at the root of insanity,
through each one and all of its many varieties or phases of
being, is at this time an accepted fact in pathology; and that
of cases which prove the correctness of my own conclusions, arrived at in 1842;
to the effect that there is a decided connection between brain disorder and bono
degeneration ; and, furthermore, that such is, in its entirety, the sure and certain
outcome of disease originating in the nervous system, i.e. in the ganglionic nervous
system; on which system tho cerebro-spinal organism is, as its functions are,
wholly subordinate and dependent.

this same "morbid sensibility" it is which, when continued,
so damages the normal contractility of the capillaries, " that
their relaxation or distension is inevitable ":?a state of things
this which is alone necessary to the creation and development
of the several alterations of structure noted in the foregoing
table. Truly, the disorganisations named above, and seen in the
brain and its coverings, are the direct effects of inflammation,
acute or chronic, sthenic or asthenic; but whatever the amount
of inflammatory action there may be, it must be held as due
originally to a deficient and impaired innervation; for how
certainly is this indicated, or portrayed, in the too painful
restlessness and agitation, the excitement without power, the
incoherent and ceaseless speech, the rapid yet objectless mus-
cular movements (the motions without force), the acute and
oft-succeeding facial expressions, as well as by the rapid thread-
like pulse, the cold or hectic skin, and failing vital powers,
which mark so very generally the recently insane patient,
whether male or female ? *

It may be, and very probably is, a source of some surprise to
a few that, in the preceding Table of Admissions and Discharges,
there is scarcely a mention made of the words mania, melancholia,
monomania, dementia, &c., as so many kinds of insanity. The
fact is, too much importance has up to this time been attached
to these mere words; they fail to convey else than partially
what they are designed to do. I have, for a long course of
years, felt how inappropriate and unreliable such words are, as
applied to individual cases of cerebro-mental disorder. Inasmuch
as such words express only the most evident or the temporary
signs or symptoms of any given case, and are, therefore, out of
harmony or in little accord with a scientific pathology, the
propriety of their use becomes very materially modified.
Whilst admitting this, I would caution the student of medicine
in accepting too eagerly the teachings of the late Dr Skae.

* The views here expressed in regard to the nature and proximate cause of
insanity were originally broached in a paper entitled The Pathology of Insanity,
published in 1843 in the Zoist, edited by the late Dr Elliotson. In my Contri-
butions to Mental Pathology (1850) the same are repeated with much detail. Pre-
cisely identical views in regard to the disease (insanity), its origin, progress, and
termination (when not relieved or cured), in the several alterations of structure or
disorganisation named in the text, were given to the public by Dr Henry Munro,
in a book entitled Remarks on Insanity, its Nature and Treatment, published in
1851. Moreover, Dr John Hitchman has, on more occasions than one, thought
himself the first to put such views before his medical brethren. I doubt not Dr.
Hitchman's originality, nor do I hesitate to admit that when he gave to the world,
in his "Lectures on Insanity," published in vol. ii. of the Lancet (1847), his con-
victions concerning the nature and proximate cause of insanity, he had no kind
of idea that he was but repeating my own. (See No. 26 of Journal of Psychological
Medicine for April 1854.)

His sketch of the many forms of insanity does not, as I believe,
cover the whole case. The really sound basis is wanting;
because, simply, Dr Skae accepted not the discoveries of Grail
and Spurzheim. The teachings of these famous physiologists
are ignored in Dr Skae's very highly commendable and pains-
taking endeavours to advance mental science and simplify its
nomenclature. My own opinion on this point I may be per-
mitted to convey in a quotation from a pamphlet of my own,
entitled Medico-Legal Reflections, written now a generation
since:?" The term insanity conveys the idea of unsound mind,
and in order to express its varieties, the words mania, melan-
cholia, monomania, dementia are in common use. Such im-
part no more than a general notion of the character of the
affliction, or of its various symptoms or phases?symptoms or
phases, bear in mind, which may or may not change or vary
day by day, and this in even the same patient. Then, again,
disease of the brain may be confined to a part, or it may affect
the whole of the organ, the disease or impairment of function
being at the same time the consequence of either excessive or
diminished action?i.e., sthenic or asthenic; and in any case it
may be organic or functional?furthermore, of either an idio-
pathic or a symptomatic nature. The various signs or indi-
cations of such several phases of mental disorder are recognised
by the general term insanity.

" But if the morbid signs or conditions of the many organs
of the body, including of course the brain, are severally indi-
cated by well-marked or specific functional disturbance, it
must follow that if the brain possesses?which it most certainly
does?parts or organs, the offices of which in the animal
economy subserve the purposes of Caution, Veneration, Self-
esteem, Firmness, Acquisitiveness, Destructiveness, Combative-
ness, Ideality, Gaiety, Hope, and so on through the whole of
the primitive or undecomposable affections, sentiments, and
intellectual powers?call them by whatsoever name we will?
then we see, plainly enough, that a derangement of the mind
(insanity), considered in the abstract, might be, as it is, caused
by disease affecting one or two or more of such organs (functions)
exclusively. Herein, then, we get at the only clue whereby to
unravel whatever of mystery may attach to insanity, in the
abstract, as well as to its many varieties and complications."
As complementary to the foregoing tables, and the remarks
made in reference to them, I will divide the remainder of this
paper into certain practical heads, and these shall follow each
other in the following order, viz.:?

1st. The admission of patients.
2nd. Treatment of insanity?hygienic and medical.
3rd. Seclusion and restraint.
4th. Suicidal patients?their management, &c. Cases.
5th. Eefusal of food. Instrumental feeding?its use and
abuse demonstrated.
6th. Discharge of patients?the responsibilities connected
therewith.
7th. Conclusion.

In regard to the first matter named?the admission of
patients. The removal of one mentally afflicted from his or
her home and its surroundings to an asylum is no trifling
affair; it requires to be effected with much circumspection,
and only after the best consideration of all the circumstances
of the case. To begin well is almost to command success.
Now the common practice is not only to anticipate much
trouble and many difficulties in connection with such removal,
but to invent no end of equivocations, and even falsehoods,
with the view to deceive the patient. Such a course of action
can lead to no good?quite the contrary. In our intercourse
with the insane we must ever be candid and truthful, for they
are by no means ignorant of the kind or nature of the terrible
disorder which is prostrating them, nor are they unaware of
the aim and character of the attentions paid to them. Such
being the case, and the said removal decided on, the patient
should, as the very general rule, be told as much, fairly and
plainly. This done, the matter becomes in no small degree
simplified, or so I have found it. The patient acquiesces, or,
at any rate, he manifests no prolonged or stubborn disapproval
or resistance to his leaving home, and with a little careful
management he is led to adopt your views so far as to allow
himself to be dealt with as is seen best.

Now the object of such removal being to surround the
patient with the most efficient curative means?to give him
the benefits to be expected from new and altered conditions of
being?it follows that asylum-life (so to put it) should combine
the very best sympathies of our common nature with the most
approved attention to sanitary matters, as well as to those
strictly medical. The first great object is to assure the patient
that his residence in the asylum is attended with no real loss
to him?that he is still with friends who can and do sympathise
with affliction?that no means will be neglected to promote
his wellbeing and personal comfort?that the best and most
approved remedies, both palliative and otherwise, will be
sought for and adopted day by day, to meet the difficulties and
dangers of his case, and to insure, as far as may be, the relief
and cure of a too painful malady. The confidence of the
patient gained, this sure foundation laid, the good result, the
superstructure, may be hopefully anticipated. There must be
no going back, no retrogression. Such the starting-point?
the vantage-ground so gained must never be lost. And this
can hardly be if asylum-life is what I have just said it should
be?that is to say, if it embraces the laws of health in their
entirety, and these are so contrived or disposed of as to create
and sustain, so far as possible, among its inmates the mens sanci
in corpora sano. Such laws (of health"), it need hardly be said,
must be paramount in every asylum, and must fasten them-
selves on the attentions of all concerned in its management.
Without order, cleanliness, warmth, pure air, good and abundant
food, a due amount of exercise, occupation, and amusement
daily, not forgetting that kind and efficient yet discriminating
attention and surveillance a real sympathy with suffering will
ever beget and sustain, what of either relief or cure of mental
disorder can be looked for or expected ?

Now the views given above as to the seat and nature of the
proximate cause of cerebro-mental disease will have prepared
the reader to anticipate in no slight degree my notions regard-
ing its strictly medical treatment. If we would relieve the
morbicl sensibility of the grey neurine, if we would allay the
consequent restlessness and sleeplessness in him insane, if we
would counteract the damaged nutritive processes occurring to
the brain, and repair the sympathetic derangements of the
several vital organs, we must, to begin, seek the pretty sure aid
of the chloral hydrate or other sedatives, as the biineconate of
morphia and clilorodyne. In cases of violent mania, when the
patient resists, and will not take medicine, the subcutaneous
injection of the salts of morphia may be employed with sure and
excellent effects. The hot bath, with the free use of cold water
to the head, or (what is better) the careful application of the
sether-spray to the scalp, will frequently be found an excellent
hypnotic, and as such afford much relief to the patient. Those
who have witnessed the experiments by Dr Richardson, of
London, with his tether-spray on animals and birds will be
well prepared to endorse this opinion. Nothing can more
effectually diminish the calibre of the bloodvessels, and so
lessen the volume of blood circulating through, or rather in
contact with, the brain, and withal restore the bond fide,
organic, and normal condition of the cerebral circulation,
anterior to and during sleep, than this sether-spray.
Useful, even indispensable, as sedatives of one kind or the
other are in madness, and however much they can, and do,
soothe and calm the patient, allaying his emotional extrava-
gance or excess of feeling; yet must it be borne in mind that
we have to combat a formidable evil in the wear-and-tear of
the forces of life, in the undue pressure imposed on the
nutritive processes common alike to the brain and the many-
vital organs, and whereby, as has been remarked, they are
brought to the very verge of diseased action. To counteract
this " formidable evil" we must have recourse to a liberal
dietary, including, as the general rule, wine and good beer,
and, it may be, brandy or some other spirit. Now and then,
though rarely, one sees a case of sthenic mania, the conse-
quence?more generally than otherwise?of local injury; but
even such cases will hardly bear a lowering or antiphlogistic
treatment. If you abstract blood by cupping, or by the aid of
leeches, you must allow, at the same time, plenty of good fluid,
meat, rice, milk, and eggs?also, perhaps, bitter beer, or some
light claret wine.

During my residence in Ceylon, from 1844 to 1849 inclusive,
the principal charge of the Government General Hospital
devolved occasionally on myself. At such times I have had
to treat cases of injury to the head inducing insanity. Such
injuries are unusually frequent at Colombo, where the cocoa-
nut plantations abound; and so it was the opportunity was
afforded me of realising the really sound and practical value of
the late Mr. Guthrie's teaching in regard to Injuries to the
Brain Causing Madness. In the book referred to the
surgeon is cautioned " against the indiscriminate use of the
lancet in such cases, employed with the view of reducing
inflammation of the brain, or of its investing membranes."
It is added, "that the persistence of mental derangement,
regarded as an effect of local injury, may or may not call
for the abstraction of blood, and other evacuants; that it
is very commonly found necessary to administer sedatives,
as Dover^s Powder, to allay the irritability present in the
parts within the cranium; and (such is the liability of the
patient to sink from direct physical exhaustion?the conse-
quence of the mischief done to the brain) that the strength
must be supported throughout, by the administration of good
beef-tea, and the like."

But to venture on the treatment of even a case of acute
idiopathic insanity, omitting "a liberal dietary," and for-
bidding the use of stimulants, would be to diminish very
materially the chances of cure in any given case, and to
multiply the number of those incurably insane.

To withhold such a dietary from those chronically affected?
the inmates, for example, of the large county and borough
asylums?would be to increase the percentage of deaths among
them to a frightful degree. This much is demonstrated in
the histories of such institutions, and especially in the history
of the large asylum at Hanwell. When, some five and thirty
years since, I became officially connected with Hanwell?when,
too, I carried into practice the foregoing views as to the dietary
?the Honse Committee were with some difficulty led to approve
"the extra diet list" suggested. What struck me at Ceylon,
on my arrival there in 1844, was the insufficient and poor
quality of the food allowed both to the European and Cingalese
insane, and the high death-rate. From information given me,
I discovered that the island contained nearly 500 lunatics;
that these were scattered much about?some in the gaols, and
more in the leper hospitals; and that the mortality among
them was so high as 33 per cent. But the partial collection
of the insane, European and native, into a new asylum?the
completion and organisation of which was my especial mission?
followed as this was by an altered and a liberal dietary, by
the better feeding of my patients, brought the death-rate
down to, first, 23*3 per cent, per annum, then to 15, and at
length, and after four or five years, down to 7*50 per
cent, per annum. However, so little understood were the
above facts, in so far as the experience at the new asy-
lum at Colombo was concerned, that it was suggested to
me, officially, that " the excitement" of lunacy could be re-
lieved only by a " spare diet." I need hardly add that the
proportion of recoveries was materially added to, whilst the
number of deaths, as above shown, was much reduced. The
mean average of the first (the recoveries) went up from, say,
6 per cent, per annum to nearly 40 per cent, per annum,
whilst the death-rate fell, as is seen, from 33 per cent, per
annum to 7*50 per cent.

It may be added here, that a comparison of the six years
preceding my arrival in the colony with that of the same period
succeeding it?or during my sojourn in the colony?shows a
falling-off during the latter six years in the number of deaths
to the extent of 20 per cent, per annum; and the like com-
parison, in so far as the ratio of cures is concerned, yields an
increase in favour of the latter six years of nearly 40 per cent.
But this result of treatment was not reached without much
struggling with old prejudices and ignorances. The Com-
missariat Department, acting under the friendly advice of
medical authorities of long experience with disease within the
tropics, insisted on it that " so much nutriment could hardly
be beneficial to lunatic patients, who are generally in a state of
great excitement and fury" as that I required for them.

It is quite impossible to dwell on experience such as the
above without a keen appreciation of the teachings and good
results of medical science, as adapted to the mind's disorders
or abnormalities.

The good effects of a liberal dietary may be enhanced by
the use of medicines of a tonic and stimulant character?for
example, the citrate of ammonia and iron, the citrate of
quinine and iron, the syrup of quinine with iron and strychnia,
and the compounds of cod-liver oil with quinine or iron or
strychnia. The solution of phosphorus manufactured by
King, of Crawford-street, Montague-square, London, is a
valuable medicine in cases of debility involving the great
nervous centres. One or other of these medicines, if given
discriminatingly, does good, and promotes the return of health.
?the mens sccna in corpore sano.

Of the patients admitted at Northwoods, the majority pre-
sented signs of more or less disturbance of the organs concerned
in digestion. The prima} viae, of which we hear nowadays
much too little, though so commonly at fault, are ignored or
put on one side, for the sake, as it appears to me, of certain
imaginary germs, and the means whereby such may be poi-
soned or slain withal. However, we may be quite sure of this :
so long as such primes vice are depraved, or incompetent to the
right discharge of their important offices in the animal economy
?so long may we bother our patients with sedatives of
whatever kind, and with tonics, vegetable or mineral?so long-
may we direct what they may eat, drink, and avoid?so long
suggest what we may in the matter of hygiene, &c. &c.?
so long, I say (the, prima} vice being in an abnormal state),
will all prove in vain, and of no real good.

I am never satisfied as to the real state of a patient until
I have examined, with care, the alvine and renal excretions.
If such are found to be normal, both as regards quantity and
quality, well and good. But this is, I believe, rarely the case ;
for the bowels are perhaps constipated, or the stools are wanting
in bile, though diarrhoea is present. The urine is seldom seen
in a natural state in the early stages of insanity. It is
generally thick and turbid, of a high specific character, and
abounding in the salts of urea. In patients of a melancholic
tendency the urine will, very likely, be found to contain also
oxalic acid, or oxalate of lime crystals. Now, such a state of
things tells us, plainly enough, that " the sewage of the body "
(so named by the late Grolding Bird) has been and is insufficiently
discharged; and that, therefore, the entire organism is being
damaged (poisoned) by the contact of nitrogenised substances,
the product of that metamorphosis of tissue ever going on in
each of us. If such sewage, or retained nitrogenous substances,
are?as is asserted and believed?not less poisonous than the
deadly secretion of the puff-adder is to a person into whose blood
its fatal bite has conveyed it, then indeed must it be our very
first endeavour to rid the system of our patients of all such.
This we can do by purgatives, fairly and fully adapted, in the
matter both of frequency and potency, to individual circum-
stances or cases.

The seclusion and restraint of the insane are matters which
have begotten of late much warm discussion. Doubtless there
was a time when both of these very important means of relief
and erne of the disordered mind were much and dread-
fully abused. But of this I am confident, that the right use
of both seclusion and mechanical restraint has been, and is now,
somewhat neglected?and this with the sad and humiliating
effect of aggravating disease, and of adding not a little to
the difficulties and dangers of asylum management. The total
disuse of seclusion, and not less the entire abandonment of
restraint, though advocated by one or more medical men
engaged in asylum practice, is, as it appears to me, not only
absurd, but sometimes mischievous; and it may be more even
than this. Many a superintendent has, it is to be feared, been
ere now deterred from the employment of seclusion and restraint,
when one or the other was urgently needed. Seclusion?in itself
an invaluable sedative, and, not unfrequently, the very best sub-
stitute for chloral hydrate and suchlike?is, no doubt, from time
to time too long delayed, or altogether omitted, and the doubtful
surveillance of attendants sought in its stead. There are, of
course, cases to which seclusion is especially adapted?cases the
symptoms of which are aggravated by any other or the more
ordinary resources of our art?i.e., by the presence of attendants,
by outdoor exercise, or diversion in any way. Remedies, of
whatever kind, must be selected, regard being had to the
requirements, or peculiarities, or susceptibilities of any one
patient. A gentleman now at Northwoods secludes himself
voluntarily, if not in the padded room, then in his bedroom.
He feels wretched and excited at such times, and when alone
he is relieved. As an exception to this rule of his, he will
sometimes prefer to walk, which he does in good earnest, with
long and rapid strides, up and down the garden, or airing-
court, so called. A medical friend suffering from an acute form
of mania came under my care not a long time since. The
excitement reached now and then a painful climax; his rage and
disorder knew then no bounds. At such times I gave him a full
dose of the syrup of chloral, and had him secluded in a padded
room. The external senses being there without any kind of
stimulus to action else than the four padded and sombre -coloured
walls, and the subdued light admitted through the darkened
glass composing the skylight of the apartment, he became
quieted. Brought as he was into a state of merely subjective
life, what so likely as to induce the required cerebral inaction
or repose?what so likely, also, to aid the good effects of the
chloral? The paroxysm was invariably relieved by such a
proceeding. After two or three hours he became so far com-
posed as to be easily managed and kept right?in other words,
to be brought within the wholesome and benign influence of
those about him.

In so far as mechanical restraint is concerned, I may be
permitted to record the annexed case. Nine years ago I had
under my care at North woods a lady, the subject of dementia
of long standing. Her bodily health was so much reduced
that she was unable even to sit, unsupported, in a chair. So
feeble had she become, that she could walk only when rest-
ing, or supporting herself, on the arm of an attendant. In
such a state of mental and bodily prostration you will not be
surprised to learn that, in spite of the best attention we could
give her, she ran the risk of an occasional fall. She did, in
fact, every now and then tumble forward as she sat in her chair
?a padded armchair?and falling on the floor, suffered much
from mental agitation and alarm, and, in addition thereto, from
sundry hurts and bruises. Attendants took their turn to wait
on this poor lady, to gently support or restrain her, and in the
hope, and with a view, to the prevention of accidents such as
those named. However, their patience, it was found, became
too severely taxed, they tired of their occupation; they came
to regard the patient as something akin to a nuisance, or a hard
task. Such feelings, and such an estimate of the case, begat
on their parts less and less of gentleness and sympathy. Ere
very long it was made evident to me that the said support or re-
straining care of attendants, carried out, as it was, for the most
part, with much kind and consistent regard for and on behalf of
this deeply afflicted lady, resolved itself into a question of choice
between two evils. Acting, then, on the principle, that of evils
the greater should ever give place to the less, or that one the
more easily borne, I directed a common shawl to be so wrapped
about the patient and the chair that she could no longer fall
from it to the floor, &c. &c. You will not fail to bear in mind
that this restraint, or rather support, was not continuous by
any means ; it was used only for short and convenient periods
through the day, and as a relief or change, not only to the
patient, but also to the attendants. You may be surprised
to learn that this very case was made the excuse, by a late
Chairman of the Gloucester Quarter Sessions, to call on me to
answer a charge of "being guilty of a mean and inhuman
economy," adopted " at the cost of a patient's welldoing."
This late Chairman told the Court that the above form of
restraint was but " the symbol of rigorous and parsimonious
treatment of lunatics, now happily abolished, and which must
ever be discountenanced by those in high authority." The
issue of the matter was, I was compelled to abandon the use of
the shawl, and put yet again the poor lady alluded to into the
exclusive and doubtful or hazardous care of the attendants.
So were my hands tied, and the comparative well-doing of my
patient prevented. Of two evils, the one or the other of which
was indispensable, I was put under the necessity of accepting
the greater of them. Hard lines such as this for patients,
and not less hard, perhaps, for the doctors, in whose hands rests
both the patient's well-doing and their own reputation.
You will perhaps agree with me when I add, in the words
of Cowper?

All constraint,
Except what wisdom lays 011 evil men,
Is evil, hurts the faculties, impedes
The progress in the road of Science.

and, it may be said also, delays the advent of truth.
But exclusive systems of whatever kind, call them by what-
ever names we may?by Teetotalism or Alcoholism, Puseyism
or Sectarianism, Hydropathy-ism, Mesmerism, including what
may be called Restraint-ism?will have their own little day,
yet is each one of them doomed to be beaten back to its fair
proportions and legitimate belongings. We are assured of this,
as a mere fact, by the growth even now of better and sounder
views of the " non-restraint system," so designated. In the
Journal of the British Medical Association for November 23,
1873, there is seen these words?they appear as editorial
remarks:?

NON-RESTRAINT IN LUNACY.

"In the opinion of the Edinburgh Medical Journal, although England
may justly claim the merit of having done much to introduce a more
humane treatment of the insane, there is no chance of our insular
notion about totally dispensing with restraint being adopted, either on
the continent of Europe or in America, while, of late years, in Great
Britain there has been a steady and powerful reaction against the
extreme views of the 1 non-restraint' men. Superintendents, like Dr.
Lauder Lindsay of the Perth, Dr Yellowlees of the Glamorgan, and
Dr Murray Lindsay of the Derby Asylums, have gained the distinction
of boldly stating views which were getting every year more general
and more decided, that the utter abrogation of mechanical restraint in
all cases of mania was a notion only fit for doctrinaires who do not
understand the real exigencies of asylum superintendence. In a notice
in the Allgemeine Zeitschrift fur Psychiatrie (1871, p. 604) of Dr.
Ivellogg's Report on English Asylums, the writer remarks :?' As for
no restraint, he holds the strict carrying out of it as a sentimental
humbug (a true word)?(fiir einen Sentimentalitatshumbug. Ein wahres
Wort). From private accounts and the most important journals of
England, there is preparing a powerful opposition against the extrava-
gances of no restraint.' In like manner, the superintendent of an
asylum of eight hundred lunatics, in France, gives his views on the
subject in the Annales Medico-Psychologiques (1871, pp. 375, 376) :
' Whatever the English doctors may say, these means (camisole,
manchettes) are better than confinement in a cell and the manual force
of keepers. Almost constant imprisonment in dark and padded cells
cannot but become hurtful to the patients in all points of view. As
for the oversight and repression of keepers, this measure often gives
rise to frequent struggles and scenes of disorder and tumult in the
ward, for the other patients become excited in their turn. It may be
retorted, in defence of the system generally employed in France, that
the no-restraint of the English (surveillance and repression by the
keepers, and constant isolation in cells) is only physical restraint in
disguise.'"

Some of these words may have been better chosen, or of a
milder character, and not so highly coloured. They contain,
nevertheless, a large proportion of truth.
In these Reminiscences of Lunacy Practice the subject of
Suicidal Insanity could hardly escape attention.
During my experience at North woods I have had admitted
several patients?ladies and gentlemen?in whom the tendency
to suicide has been more or less marked. I regret to add that
two of such (ladies '* did succeed in killing themselves. Two
gentlemen were admitted with cut throats, and a third suc-
ceeded in inflicting a throat-wound on himself when in the
asylum. Of these three gentlemen, one of the first alluded to
died, not of the wound, for this had quite healed, but from
cerebral exhaustion, after protracted mania; the other got well.
The third is still at Nortliwoods, in a state approaching
dementia. In reference to the two ladies, they were in a sense,
and as cases exceptional to the rule, sacrificed to the " non-
restraint " system. In the absence of mechanical restraint, the
proper care of them was attempted through the aid of trained
attendants. Two such were engaged for either lady expressly;
they occupied the same bedroom with either lady. Especial
supervision was enforced. Orders of the most unequivocal and
decided character were given, and repeated again and again, to
the effect that these patients should on no account be left alone
and unprotected, &c. &c. But all to no purpose. They both
succeeded in their original design; they both seized or made
the opportunity to elude the watching of those having the
direct or immediate care of them. They hanged themselves?
the one to a portion of the bedstead, the other to a small curtain-
rod. The knees almost of both of these ladies were seen in near
contact with the floor when found suspended and dead. Is it
right to trust altogether to attendants in cases such as these ?
Can it be expected that they (attendants) will not get tired of
their work ??that the monotonous character of the occupation
will not in the long run prostrate them, replace them as we
may and do ? Attendants are but mortal?every fair allowance
must be made for them. Granting?which is not always the
fact?that they do really credit the continued existence in the
patient of the prompting to suicidal acts, the fear is, they will
succumb, or be thrown off their guard, even the best of them;
and their care and watchfulness decline.

It is worthy of remark that, with all my asylum experience
(from 1840 to this time) I have had to do with but three
deaths from suicide, and only two of these occurred at North-
woods. The fact is due, in great part, to the protection afforded
by patients to each other, the consequence of the aggregation
of the insane. My charge at Hanwell consisted of some 550
insane women?at Colney Hatch of about 900. These severally
kept, in a measure, their fellow-sufferers from the committal of
the suicidal act, apart from, and in addition to, the general sur-
veillance inseparable from^ the^ mere numbers of attendants
under the same roof. Nor is this the only advantage connected
with the aggregation of the insane. "Within the last two years
I have found it necessary to desire the removal of two gentle-
men from Northwoods, whose violence was occasionally so
intense, and whose strength withal so great, that when under
the influence of acute mental emotion (mania) great risks were
incurred lest my small staff (three) of attendants should prove
the weaker party. They were removed to one of the large
asylums, where, of course, the number of attendants was such
as to prevent the possibility of any risks of a like kind. In
fact, their new surroundings were, in a degree, salutary,
moving them to the exercise of some restraint over their mad
impulses. The gentlemen alluded to were in the full possession
of their mere knowing faculties ; they knew well right from
wrong, and the consequences?good and bad?which follow, or
are likely to follow, on either their controllable or uncontrol-
lable impulses.

But the measure of control or its converse in the insane
patient lies not so much in the knowing faculties as in the
moral sense ; this it is which supplies the bond fide power to
do or not to do. Such power may be and is strengthened by
an appeal, at one time to the higher and ennobling faculties,
and at another time to the lower, the selfish passions of our
nature. Correction of both the sane and the insane there must
ever be, but this correction, to be used with the best effect,
requires to be served with various and dissimilar adjuncts. It
has been said that?

Love,
The deep recesses of the maddened brain
Can reach, when violence fails, and gentleness,
Demoniac fury quickly can assuage,
When nought beside has power.

I fear the poet may have been a shade more practical.
Love and gentleness go a very long way, and can do great
things, But the admixture of some fear of consequences
heightens the good effects of "correction," not infrequently,
on even the insane mind; and this fact is demonstrable in the
mental histories of the two patients transferred from North-
woods to the larger asylum. Evidence to the same effect is
seen in the case of an elderly lady now under my care. Her
habits are not always what is looked for in a person reputed
cleanly, but she is encouraged, and with very fair success, to
obey the calls of nature, and so to promote her personal
comfort, by an appeal to her " alimentiveness," or the offer of an
extra piece of fruit-tart, or a sweet biscuit; for both which
dainties she has, seemingly, the relish of a practised gourmand.
She fears to lose the indulgence of an appetite, and hence, not
unfrequently, a due control over a bad and filthy tendency is
reached.

The asylum superintendent has one very marked diffi-
culty to contend with, one which is very common to his
experience. The refusal of food by the insane is an ever-
recurring affair. This is sometimes but one of the many signs
or symptoms of suicidal insanity. When it is so, the patient is
generally of a melancholic turn. Now and then the refusal of
food is the outcome of delusions: for instance, the patient is
apprehensive, or possibly believes, that poison has been added
to the food offered to him, and hence it is he refuses to take it.
A deranged religious feeling, or a perverted action of the organ
of " veneration " (to write phrenologically), does sometimes lie at
the root of this particular symptom of morbid mind. I am
now attending a patient in whom such a state of things did,
until recently, exist. For forty days about I kept him alive
by instrumental feeding. During the same period, and for a
similar first-cause or origin, I was required to use the catheter,
and, what is more, to rely, to a great extent, on the use of
copious enemata for the due relief of the bowels. It may be
added that during the same forty days it was necessary to keep
the strictest watch on Mr. Gr., lest he should commit suicide.

After several narrow escapes?and one of these from the con-
sequences of a severe and self-inflicted wound on the forearm,
done when an attendant was within a few feet of him?I was
driven to the occasional use of the old-fashioned strait-
waistcoat. This case was one in which the refusal of food may-
be regarded?apart from its complications?as due to delusions
of a religious character. Mr. Gr. was fed with the aid of a funnel-
shaped machine, the nipple of the instrument, on the end of the
elastic tubing attached to the apex of it being inserted into one or
other nostril. This simple affair is well adapted for some patients,
but not for all. It is very simple, easy of application, and succeeds
well when the patient offers but little resistance. The whole
contents of the funnel may be made to pass by its own weight
into the tubing, and through the stopcock attached to the
nipple, as that occupies the inlet to one or other of the
nostrils, and onwards through the inferior nares and the
pharynx, thence to the oesophagus and stomach with but little
trouble. There is just this one point to be attended to?the
operator must keep the finger and thumb on the stopcock, and
so prevent the too rapid passage of the beef-tea or milk, &c.
through it and the nostril, so that the excitomotory act which
occurs to the pharynx may not be interrupted or drawn on too
eagerly.

When a positive resistance is offered, and the patient has a
fair share of strength to back up such resistance, the use of the
stomach-pump is advisable. Last year I admitted two patients,
a gentleman and a lady, each of whom I had occasion to feed
with the stomach-pump pretty nearly every day, and this for
weeks. The gentleman died?he was over seventy years of
age ; the lady was eventually discharged " recovered."
In the more common cases of refusal of food no such
instrumental means as those referred to here are necessary.
Such refusal being the result merely of some temporary or
fleeting caprice, due not unfrequently to the hysterical tem-
perament, calls more generally than otherwise for no very marked
attention.

It is important, however, to bear in mind that the refusal
of food by the insane may exist independently, more or less, of
the mind's disorder, and may arise from a state of dyspepsia.
When this is the case, if we clear out the bowels, and so render
the secretions normal, such refusal will trouble us no longer.
It does not follow, then, that because a lunatic refuses to eat lie
should always be fed. This fact I would further illustrate by
the annexed case, that of an elderly gentleman, the subject of
long-standing melancholia. Although slowly dying, and in the
most natural manner possible, it was hoped to save him by
forcible feeding?i.e., by the artificial introduction of food into
his stomach. But this organ not being in a state to receive
aliment, and the system itself fast losing its natural and vital
endowments, of what utility could food be to this dying man ?
The following sentence, quoted in Pereira's work on " Diet,"
from the late Dr John Conolly, is so much to the point that
I venture to introduce it here :?

" The cases of refusal of food by insane patients are chiefly of two
kinds:?' one, in which food is refused in consequence of some
delusion, or some vow, or from mere obstinacy?the patient being in
tolerable bodily health, or certainly not incapable of digesting food;
another, in which it is utterly repugnant to a stomach in a high state
of disorder.' In the first description of cases, if all other means
(such as varying the food, persuasion, &c.), 'tried with the utmost
patience, fail, it is justifiable, and even necessary, to introduce food
into the stomach by artificial means.' This is usually effected
by the stomach-pump. ' In the second, the condition of the patient
is entirely different. The tongue is red, or thickly coated; the
bowels are disordered; there is present a low kind of fever; the
brain is highly excited, and the patient almost too feeble to stand
or walk, except by sudden and frantic efforts. His face is pale, the
eyes are sunk and wild in their expression, and the whole frame is
emaciated to an extreme degree. All these are so many sure signs of
death ensuing on long-continued disease of the brain, with all its com-
plications. Nowhere except in a lunatic asylum would such signs of
sinking life be recorded as the result of food being refused. The
aversion to take food arises, in such cases, as in cases of fever, from
the general and terrible disorder of the system?from a diseased con-
dition of the stomach itself, among other organs, associated with a
brain disturbed to excess. To force food into the enfeebled and dying
stomach of such patients would not be sanctioned by any well-regulated
hospital, or by any competent physician; and their distinction ought
not to be overlooked because they occur in an hospital for the
insane.'"

The discharge of patients is a matter involving no small
responsibility. The annexed case proves as much. J. P. was
admitted at Northwoods in 1859. The case was one of par-
oxysmal mania, the then present one being the third attack?the
intervals on the two former occasions being fourteen and four-and-
a-half years. The disorder was, I learnt, each time indicated by
the presence of delusions, under the pressure of which he sus-
pected those about him of designs inimical to himself; such
delusions being followed by a disposition of violence, when he
showed both a " suicidal and homicidal disposition." Such were
the insane antecedents of my patient. On admission, however, he
appeared simply agitated, but even this agitation proved but
temporary. J.P. was under my care some four months; and
during the whole of that time he was, to all appearance, rather
well than otherwise. He was at no time treated as a patient,
but after a few weeks joined daily my family circle. He rode
out with me, accompanied one of my sons on shooting excur-
sions, and went hither and thither as he pleased. In fact, we
stood, in relation to each other, rather as old friends than any-
thing else. Time went on, and I felt at length that I could
detain J. P. no longer?that he was no fit and proper inmate for
an asylum; I wrote to this effect to his wife. Now it was.

I was made to understand that, having regard to past expe-
rience, his nearest relatives wished to be relieved of him.
However, after much delay, and in spite of the opposition
offered to me?on insisting that an attendant must be found for
J. P., even though he should become (which he did) a boarder
in the house of a medical man, and on advising at the same
time, that, having regard to certain facts in the history of his
case (facts "which were kept from my own knowledge" till
they could be kept no longer), razors and suchlike should be
carefully and persistently kept from him?J. P. was formally
and legally discharged as " cured." Yet further to prepare for
a relapse, or accidents, I entrusted to him, having confidence:
in his honour and very fair promises, a letter of introduction to
the medical man, with whom he took up his residence, in which
1 detailed all necessary facts, leaving, as I thought, nothing
undone in the matter. On the twentieth day after leaving-
Northwoods, he (J. P.) killed with a razor one of the female
servants in the household of which he had become a member.
On this the fourth attack no premonitory symptoms appeared?no
delusions were manifest. Though it was given on evidence that
J. P. was, to all appearance, quite well within a few hours of the
sad and fatal casualty, yet was the whole of the blame sought
to be attached to it, visited on myself. The responsibility was:
shirked by all parties who had to do with J. P.?by the relatives
and near friends, who resisted the employment of an attendant,
and who, moreover, supplied J. P. with his razors; by the Com-
missioners, who, after the murder of the poor girl, raised a
strong objection to the manner and circumstances of J. P.'s
discharge; and by the Visitors, who declined to move in the case
in any way, either before or after his discharge from North-
woods, though they failed not to give expression to very unqua-
lified terms of disapproval after the sad event named.

It would seem that either one of two conditions represented
the abnormal mental being of J. P. He may have concealed the
insanity which afflicted him, resisted, by a strong effort of the
will, the exposure of his delusions, and controlled for a given
time the superadded impulse to violence, or the existence of his
homicidal promptings; for the insane homicide, like him, sui-
cidally inclined, does not " wear his heart upon his sleeve for
daws to pick at." It is indeed surprising, as Dr Maudsley
"affirms, " how sane apersonmay appear who all the while has
a greater derangement than was ever suspected, until some-
thing happens to elicit the evidence of it."

If such were not true of J. P., then the killing of the young
woman was due to a paroxysm of transitory mania, or?what is
much the same thing?to an uncontrollable impulse to violence,
the effect probably, or accompaniment, of long-standing though
latent disease; the paroxysmal impulse holding much the
same relation to the brain, that an epileptic fit does to the
central nervous system, or an attack of angina to the heart.
It may be stated here that J. P. was acquitted, at his trial,
on the ground of insanity. He became a patient of the late
Sir C. Hood's, at Bethlehem Hospital, who, speaking of his case,
after an observation of several months, said that, " from that
time to the present, although he had watched him with no
ordinary care, he did not know that he could attach any parti-
cular symptom of insanity to him;" and that, " supposing he
was a private patient in my asylum, and the Commissioners in
Lunacy asked me why I detained him, I do not know that I
?could give any definite reason for it."

I doubt not the case of J. P., as here recorded, is well cal-
culated to put alienist physicians on their guard, and therefore
it is I have narrated it. It is hoped, nevertheless, that the
details given will not lead to delays in the discharge of recovered
patients. The question, " To be or not to be" cannot at all
times be hastily disposed of, by even the best informed and
most experienced.

In concluding these Reminiscences of Lunacy Practice, I
may express a hope that the expectant treatment of disease,
now so largely recognised and adopted in general practice,
may not take a like hold on the mind of the alienist physi-
cian. It has been urged that much of the medical treat-
ment of insanity is little better than useless, and further, that
the use of sedatives does but encumber the cell-structure of
the brain with a restraining influence which is scarcely more
tolerable or remedial than the wretched mechanical contrivances
of the olden time, devised to restrain the morbid muscular
movements of the frenzied. But it is to the zealous and wise
adaptation, day by day, of the various remedial means?hygienic,
moral, and medical?to individual cases of lunacy we must
look for the best results?for the largest amount of relief to
our suffering patients, and the highest number of cures among
those so terribly afflicted?as all insane persons must ever be
held to be.

* See liis " Responsibility in Mental Disease," pp. 190 to 193.
