Mind
=====

80 Art. VI.?

Mind is an element or entity, which, like a first principle or
fact, is incapable of demonstration or proof. It exists?identical
and unique. It admits of neither more nor less. It is absolute
and entire, indivisible and indiscerptible. It is in its own nature
on6?kv, ens, sum, being, essence. It energises through the
ponderable organ the brain, and the material organ subserves
the immaterial essence, or vis vitce. The abrupt space that in-
tervenes between the last portion of matter and the earliest
dawn of intelligence is an unfathomable gulf, tantamount to
infinitude?for infinite it must be, since nothing can fill it up.
No correct reasoning can conduct us farther than this.

In the monogamic molluscse, which propagate by spontaneous
offsets or shoots, and not by reciprocal generation, the new
creature is not the product of two, but the self-division of one ?
and yet in these animals or animalcule, the life thus apparentlv
multiplied in each is nevertheless but one and the same life in
principle as that from which it sprang. Its being is one while
its mechanism is alone multiplied. Its immaterial being' is not
manifold, although enunciated by a material organism, which is
manifold.

In the same sense, the mind may pass from an active to
a latent state, and from a latent to an active?as in sleen
coma, suspended animation, and ovarious germination in
each of which instances the mind is as positively latent
as the electricity in the thundercloud before it is bolted
forth by fulmination, or the fire in flint before it is struck out
into sparks by collision with steel. Now none of these things
can be predicated of the material organ of mind the brain
which obviously rests upon grounds of enquiry altogether dif-
ferent from the element of which it is only the instrument
so that the mind may be either active or latent ; but not
so the brain. The mind cannot be duplicated or divided into
parts, although the brain may be, and in fact is, both dupli-
cated and subdivided. The mind is not the medium of thought
although the matter of the brain is. The mind is the genera-
tive principle, indigent of nothing?the brain is the subserving
instrument, indigent of everything. The particles of the brain^
like those of the body generally, are heterogeneous, dividual.'
personal, and transitive?the mind, on the contrary, is itself a
monad, homogeneous, individual, identical, and perpetual.

The existence of animals the lowest in the scale of animated
nature seems to be for no other purpose than that of mere
sustenance and multiplication by offsets or germs. In them
there appears, as in the hydra viriclis, no trace of a nervous
system, at least none that in the present state of our knowledge
we can properly define as such, unless the fine cord round the
mouth be a nervous filament; nor can we ascertain anything
like intelligence. They are scarcely raised above vegetables.
The ascaris whose life is as limited as any living creature's
can well be imagined, presents two white cords. The asterias,
or star-fish, ha? a circle of ganglia or brains, from which
radiate distinct nerves; this may be only the sympathetic,
whose existence may be independent of a brain. Many of the
molluscous creatures, as the tunicata, but little raised above
the spono-es, and fiied to a rock all their lives long, have
nothino- like a brain, particularly not a double one. The
oyster is the first to exhibit the bram doubled, only the two
brains are separate, without a commissural connection 'unless
the oesophageal arch can be regarded as such. It is singular
that with this approximation to a twofold bram, Garner should
have pretended to show distinct organs of on its mantilla
or beard. But no sooner are feet produced than an additional
portion of brain is bestowed, in correspondence with these
members, the pedal ganglion, which marks a kind of epoch
in the history of the nerves; for where there are feet there is
also progression, and the act of progression implies an object
of desire to be sought for and obtained by judgment, com-
parison, and volition. A more highly organised brain is there-
fore requisite. Thus the common slug has two cephalic
ganglia, evidently united by a small, but distinct, commissure.
The brain becomes a double organ. Some exceptions may be
made to this order as an established law; for the vnynapoda,
or centipedes, which are higher than the slug, have several
brains?one to each leg; while the crab, still higher than these,
has only a single brain; but then its large pedal ganglion is
almost a second brain. The supra-cesophageal bram of the
pearly nautilus is duplicated, and m the cuttle-fish this
duality is still more distinct. As soon, however, as the sensorium
becomes a more valuable organ, we arrive at those creatures
which enjoy a brain in a brain-case (myelencephala). These
animals cannot live without a skull-box, or casket, on purpose
for holding their seat of intelligence. They no longer subsist
like mere vegetation, but exist by intellectual pursuits, as in
fishes, reptiles, birds, &c. The brain is now invariably a
double organ, more or less perfect, and generally united by
commissural bands?whiting, cod, eel, skate, &c. In the frog
this is very evident. But, nevertheless, the commissures are
as yet lost or confounded in the close proximity of the hemi-
spheres. In birds, though the two hemispheres are more
manifest, yet the corypus callosum is wanting, as it is also in
marsupials. The organ of comparison is defective, and the
judgment low- In the beaver, however, with its constructive
propensities, intelligent conduct, and provident habits, not only
is the brain decidedly double, but the corpus callosum, or
organ of comparison, is proportionally large. Convolutions are
likewise visible. As we go on ascending in the scale of organic
intelligence, the hemispheres become more distinctly double,
the commissures larger, and the furrows deeper. In the
elephant, so renowned of old for its understanding, and in the
porpoise, so remarkable for its sagacious tenderness in nursing-
its young, all these characteristics are particularly visible.
The brain of the chimpanzee differs from the brain of man
only in size and weight; therefore, in the smaller size and
extent of the convolutions, the same parts without exception
exist in both. Whether the cerebral matter of the ape differs
from that of man in microscopic characters, or how otherwise
it may differ, are problems that have not hitherto been worked
out nor explained.

There is enough in all this to show that comparative anatomy
attests a truth which we were first led to assent to on the slender
ground of induction and analogy. In man, with his large
brain and exalted intellect, the furrows are decided, the com-
missures bold and strong, and the brain a double organ, and all
its intricate foldings are, as a sculptor would say, deeply
chiselled and finely finished off. It is further to be noticed,
as an anatomical fact, says Meckel, in a note quoted by the
late Sir Henry Holland, in his " Notes and Reflections," that in
the brain and spinal marrow the external parts of the two sides
are less exactly symmetrical than those within; the surface of
the brain showing this, perhaps, more distinctly than any other
part. Every one may find an opportunity of observing a
difference in the relative size of the two sides of the head of some
of his acquaintances; nor does this disparity or inequality seem
to be detrimental to the intellectual development, but, on the
contrary, rather favourable to it; for persons of distinguished
talents have had their heads larger on one side than on the
other, as Cicero and Bichat, for instance. Indeed, some go so
far as to fancy that whenever this inequality exists the under-
standing is much better than in those whose heads are more
exactly symmetrical. So, also, the convolutions of the brain
are a manifestation of mind. When the foldings and furrows
are deep, it renders the head long, and the phrase of " a long-
headed fellow" means a clever man. Plutarch says that
Pericles had so long a head that he was ashamed of it, and in
his statues was always represented with a helmet, on purpose to
hide this supposed deformity. Had he enjoyed the advantage
of living in the present day, the intellectual vanity of the great
Athenian might have been induced to hail it as a distinguished
beauty.

Again, as to Mind, whether of man or brute, it may
be predicated that it is uniform, one and the same in both;
and that Understanding is possessed by all animated beings in
various proportions and degrees; as the sagacity of the dog, the
sharpness of the ape, and the intelligence of the elephant,
which are proverbial. Even Moral Affections are enjoyed by
animals and insects. The horse is docile, the lion courageous,
the spider deceitful. All these qualities are fragmental por-
tions of the understanding, distributed severally throughout
creation, for the particular use and purpose of each being*; and
are, when taken together and summed up into one, the human
understanding' complete, and, were not the various qualities
of the understanding manifested by animals identical with that
possessed by man, there could be no intercommunion between
man and animals, for without this mutual intelligence the
rider could not manage his horse, nor the sportsman direct his
spaniel, nor the pig-boy drive his pigs, nor the blind man be led
and guided by his dog. Animals and man must understand each
other, otherwise animated nature would be a confusion. Even
sounds of the voice and the meaning of words are frequently un-
derstood by animals as distinctly and fully as they are by ourselves;
and the intent and object of our actions are perceived by them
in the same sense as we intend them to be perceived. Thus the
horse knows the sound of the trumpet, the smack of the whip,
and the driver's bidding ; the hound responds to the huntsman's
horn, the cat minds the maid-servant's call, and the cow obeys
the cry that hails her home to be milked. Stories are told of
serpents that have become familiar with man, of insects that
have mated with the prisoner in his cell, and of hares that have
sat like cats before the fire. The mechanism of the beaver is
like our own, because ours is the same as his; and the fox
pilfers our poultry yards with the same adroitness as the thief
pilfers our coffers. Thus the intelligence of animals is the
comparative anatomy of the understanding of man; what is
one in us is several in them. They are the analysis of the
mind, of which we are the standard and type. By pursuing this
train of reasoning, we might show that the less perfect under-
standings in man approximate to the lower understandings of
animals. Thus we say, as stupid as an ass, as filthy as a swine,
as timid as a lamb, as cruel as a tiger. The higher human
understandings admit of no such debasing comparison, since
they cannot be likened to anything less, than themselves. Great
minds are not brutal, but, on the contrary, so elevated that
they cannot be lowered by any comparison. They comprehend
within themselves all the mental 'qualities of every animated
being below them. It is this excellence that can never be pre-
dicated of any of the inferior animals, and entirely excludes
them from the idea of possessing either an understanding or a
soul, in the ordinary or philosophic meaning of the term.
But, as we have already shown, the mind in its fullest and
soundest development is, so to speak, at the mercy of the healthy
or diseased condition of the body. A slight ailment quickly
overthrows it, or tarnishes its vivacity and brilliance. Grenius
is often cut short by it. Rossini lost the faculty of musical
composition somewhere about the middle period of his life.
He lived to be old, and died at seventy-six years of age; but
he never recovered his original talent. Some change must have
swept over the fibres of the brain, and damaged their congenital
tenacity and fineness, to account for so irreparable a bereave-
ment.

So delicate is the tracery of the nervous structure that the
damage of a single fibre or set of fibres destroys the unity of
the whole. It is like a grand orchestra, in which one instrument
alone out of time or tune disturbs the harmony of the rest, and
the finest musical composition in the world is entirely spoilt by
the discord.

The preservation of the intellect to the latest period of age
depends upon circumstances, over many of which we have no
control. The nerves may be weak by nature, or there may
be a scrofulous or gouty taint, the heirloom of the family,
or a failure in the functions of the heart or stomach,
natural or acquired. The early part of life may have
been corroded by anxiety, weakened by privation, or over-
strained by toil, which neither we nor our progenitors could
either foresee or prevent. Wine or ardent spirits may have
been too freely indulged in, and their use apologised for
upon the plea of social engagements or a feeble constitution;
while the more sensual passions may not have been held in with
the curb of a tightened rein. Fortune may have arrived when
she has ceased to be sought for, and reputation or celebrity
bestowed or achieved when it is too late to facilitate the happi-
ness of ourselves and those about us. In each of these instances
the mind decays early, and the earlier the sooner the stimulus
of necessity is withdrawn or suppressed. Besides all this, there
is a climacteric period in man, as well as in woman. In woman
it occurs soon after forty, or at the latest at fifty; but in man
it varies between his thirty-fifth and sixty-fifth years. But,
whether sooner or later, it takes place in man, his character and
figure both undergo a change, sometimes for the better, but
more frequently for the worse. He becomes fat or thin, attenu-
ated or obese. Old age sets in apace. The hair turns grey or
white, the affections congeal, virility ceases; or, on the other
hand, the figure remains lean and lank, the features are
shrivelled the hair falls off, and the complexion tans, while the
mind improves, the wit sparkles, the understanding solidifies,
and the flash of genius burns brighter than ever. The
experience of a whole life comes into play, and the tardy seed-
lings of the spring embrown the autumn of our days with fruit.
In these cases, the organic life suffers at the cost of the cerebro-
spinal system. But, on the contrary! we see the mind degenerate
without our being able to account ffer it. Follies of the most
denlorable kind are committed in the most pitiable manner.
The old man marries a young girl, and after having been
respected for his frugality and prudence suddenly breaks out
and affects to play the boy, the gallant, and the fop. Sometimes
something worse than folly ensues. The religions man turns a
worldling, the upright a spendthrift, and the trustworthy a
swindler ? or he falls a dupe to religious enthusiasts and knaves,
mistakes' idealities for faith, fasts, prays, preaches, and insults
the world.

No doubt alteration of the brain is taking place pan passu,
with these alterations of character. It may be atrophy, indicated
by loss of memory, slowness of speech and manner, and debility
of gait and action. Or the circulation through the encephalon
may be checked or impeded by ossification or softening of the
cerebral arteries, or by some distinct disease about the heart and
large vessels; or the neurine may be undergoing a change,
naiticularlv on its peripheral surface, as well as on the surfaces
of its several ventricles or cavities. The convolutions become
paler and the furrows shallower. The weight of the whole
cerebrum and cerebellum is lighter, less complex, and seems to
be reduced to the condition of the brain in early life. Softening
of the surface of that delicate character which is detected only
by letting a slender stream of water flow gently over it, is
sometimes the only discoverable alteration. But what is a very
usual occurrence, and yet one that is often passed by unnoticed,
because it is discernible only to a well-practised eye, which may
not be present at the right moment for observing its attack, is
a very slight fit of apoplexy and paralysis?so slight, indeed,
that it occurs and passes away unperceived, and is recognised
only in its after consequences and permanent effects. This
appears to have been the case in Moore and Rogers, the poets.
We have witnessed the same in private practice, and have
observed that, though loss of life does not ensue from it imme-
diately, yet in its ultimate effects it is sooner or later fatal, and
from the date of its infliction the patient is an altered being?
he never recovers himself, but continues to exist, like a vener-
able ruin, with the marks of decay indelibly imprinted on his
front.

To the old themselves the imbecility of age is not so pain-
ful as it is to those who wait upon them. With the return of our
second childhood we lose the consciousness of our prime. The
loss of any of the senses is accompanied with the oblivion of its
enjoyment. The blind are cheerful, the deaf happy, and the
aged content. So that we are tempted to conclude that those
exquisite lines of Groethe, so ably rendered into English by their
noble translator, express a poetic fiction rather than a medical
reality:?

" Give me the active spring of gladness,
Of pleasure stretched almost to pain !
My hate, my love, in all their madness?
Give me my youth again !"

Although the sight of the angelic Margaret, as
" She sat by the casement's chequered glass,
The clouds fly by, and she watches them pass
Over the city Avail "

meditating on her love were sufficient to enkindle a spark
of passion in the icy veins of an old dotard. But no ; in the
really old, whether early or late in life, from disease or excess,
the flame is extinct, the ashes have been burnt out, and no
spark can ever fire them again.

We knew an aged gentleman who, during the stunning
effects of an apoplectic seizure, lost all his money by the failure
of a bank. On recovering his senses, he could never be
awakened to the feeling of poverty, nor the embarrassing con-
viction of being a poor dependant on the bounty of his
friends. Another, during a fit of apoplexy and its tedious con-
sequences, lost two of his dearest relatives by death, and came
into possession of some considerable property. On his recovery
he neither regretted their deaths nor rejoiced at his own good
fortune. A third, who had always been an anxious and thrifty
man of business, declared he had at length reached the
goal of contentment, and that neither loss nor gain any longer
affected him. A few months later, he died suddenly.
These cases might be explained in the dead house. But morbid
anatomy is not medicine, in tlie same sense as medicine is not
a demonstrative science. Disease is a living phenomenon only
to be correctly recognised and properly treated during life.
After death, it passes into another domain, which is that of
the anatomical demonstrator.

Humboldt is an instance of intellect undecayed by age. He
died at ninety-one, and his mind was vigorous to the last.
Strabo wrote his geography, it is said, at eighty-two; and
Michael Angelo, who died at eighty-eight, preserved his mind
and genius to the end of his days. His last will and testament
was as grand as it was laconic, while critics are disposed to
consider his last productions better than his first. On the other
hand, the brightest efforts of genius have been conceived and
executed before the meridian of life; of which Byron, Scott,
Pope, Mozart, Weber, Tasso, Shakspeare, Sir Isaac Newton,
and many others, are illustrious examples. It is popularly
supposed that Homer composed his immortal epic in advanced
life, and in painting and statuary he is usually represented as
the blind old bard. Yet this was not the case. Perhaps the
mistake arose from the Homer who recited those wonderful
verses to his admiring audience not being th& Homer who had
composed them. It is the opinion of Longinus that the Iliad
was the production of the mind in a vigorn of manhood, and
the Odyssey the poetic recreation or repetition of the evening of
life. We agree with the great critic. For there are, as he
says, some puerilities in the Odyssey, while there are none in
the Iliad; the order of events forbids the conjecture that the
latter was composed after the former; and, it must be owned
that with all its quiet beauties, the Odyssey wants the pathos,
the depth of colouring, the majestic ease and force of the Iliad.
The flame of genius burns alone, the envy or admiration of
others, if not an exhausting and fatal ecstasy to its hapless pos-
sessor. A Eaffaelle or a Carlo Maratti paint in an atmosphere
where meaner talents can scarcely draw their breath or handle
their brush with freedom and effect. Meteoric in its essence,
it shines by fits and starts, blazes for a while, and then goes out.
