Hallucination of Satanic Possession Induced by a Vesical Calculus
==================================================================

134 Art. XL?  
:Author: J. M. WINN, M.D., M.R.C.P., &c.

The following very remarkable and unique case came under
my care several years ago. The history and symptoms of the
malady are so extremely interesting that no excuse is needed
for giving them in detail.

The patient was a clergyman of the Church of England,
fifty years of age, powerfully built, with dark complexion, and
about five feet eight in height. His respiration and circu-
lation were natural, tongue clean, bowels regular, appetite
good. His countenance was expressive of extreme dejection.
His wife informed me that there was no hereditary taint in
his family, but that eighteen years previously he had an attack
of a somewhat similar character, and that his present attack
had lasted two years.

The mental symptoms were most distressing, and his
anguish of mind seemed intolerable. He complained of being
in a state of extreme wretchedness?that words were incessantly
injected into his brain by Satan. He did not hear sounds, but
saw the following sentences written on his brain : " I have not
done with you yet," " I am coming for you," &c. &c., and that
the agony was driving him to distraction.

After a few days he began to complain of irritability of the
bladder, and occasionally of inability to retain his urine. He
admitted that he had formerly passed blood during micturition.
As the urine was very acid, I ordered bi-carbonate of potash,
with morphia, which, for a short interval, relieved these
symptoms.

He continued in much the same mental and bodily state
for many weeks, his delusion of Satanic possession becoming
more fixed. When his attention could be withdrawn from
brooding over his own misery, his intellect was remarkably
clear, and he would converse rationally and fluently on various
subjects, and repeat amusing anecdotes with great felicity of
expression. At times he would question me with great logical
accuracy as to the nature of his delusion, and show much skill
in analysing his own feelings. He also evinced great powers of
observation, and knowledge of the characters of those about
him. His disposition, except when goaded almost to frenzy by
the hallucinations which haunted him was amiable, and his
expressions of regard for myself were couched in words almost
feminine.

His mental and bodily symptoms continued without material
alteration for several months. Eventually the irritation of the
bladder became so great as to confirm an impression I had for
some time entertained that his sufferings were attributable to a
stone in the bladder, and I requested his friends to have him
examined by some experienced lithotomist. They took him to
Sir Henry Thompson, who, after sounding him, said he could
not detect either a calculus or enlarged prostate. He diagnosed
cystitis, and suggested his taking a decoction of triticum repens,
with morphia, and, in the event of this failing, an infusion of
alchemiUa arvensis. These remedies were tried, with no benefit,
and at the end of four weeks he passed blood, for the first time
since he had been under my care. I now felt more than ever
convinced of the presence of a calculus, and I requested that he
might see Sir H. Thompson again. On sounding him a second
time Sir Henry discovered the existence of a large calculus,
which he subsequently removed by the lateral operation. He
got well over the operation, and as he gradually recovered his
strength he found, to his great joy, that not only his bodily
suffering, but also his mental anguish, were both at an end.
I have seen him recently, and found that he had been able to
resume the duties of his profession, and was fully occupied with
the care of a populous parish in the country.
