Religious Insanity Metaphysically Considered
=============================================

67 ET. V. 
Being an Address delivered by the Editor before the Medical Society of London,
January 25, 1875.
Mr. President and Gentlemen,?

It is my intention this evening to place before you some
of the chief characteristics met with in religious insanity. The
subject is a most important one, and it is impossible to do justice
to it in the time allotted; however, I have endeavoured to
select some of its salient points. I propose to treat the subject
metaphysically, and shall briefly consider its nature, symptoms,
diathesis, special features, complexity, and causes?social, intel-
lectual, and moral.

The world presents itself before us in a twofold aspect of
health and disease?the sound and the unsound, both of body
and mind. We are living, moving, and acting in the midst of
this twofold world, which imparts to the scene around us both
its grandeur and defects. The moving panorama appears in
varied lights and shades to different eyes. The statesman views
it from an elevated point of his own; the man of business and
the man of pleasure each of them look at it from his own
standpoint, and through his own particular medium. But the
psychologist sees it in its double aspect?the healthy and the
diseased, the sane and the insane; and discerns in these two
aspects the constituent elements of our daily existence.
Religious madness is by no means peculiar to modern times
or to civilised periods. It has been recognised as a particular
form of insanity from the earliest periods of the world. In
ages of ignorance it was regarded as a divine inspiration or
flatus.

It is the most formidable species of insanity there is; and
though it is said to leave the rest of the mental faculties un-
touched, yet we can scarcely trust the integrity of the mind
that labours under its delusions.

By some it is supposed to be nothing more than an exag-
gerated sentiment of religion; and that the person under its
influence may, by a sufficient effort of the will, overcome and
subdue it. It cannot, however, be regarded as a mere mental
emotion to be cherished or discarded at pleasure. No particular
disease can be justly said to give rise to it, but it is more than
probable that the perverted sentiment of religion provokes
some bodily ailment, by its morbid action on the nervous
system.

The infatuation usually shows itself by running aground
on some of the truths or data acknowledged by all the world.
The mind fixes upon a well-known truth, and exaggerates its
importance to the exclusion of everything else. The idea
enlarges, and at length becomes gigantic; it grows and increases ;
it has no context and admits of no relationship with any other
truth; it stands alone?it is a monomania. The person so
possessed is a dangerous lunatic.

At its first accession it is scarcely discernible; very fre-
quently it is not so much as suspected by those in immediate
contact with it, for in its early stages it is withdrawn from sight
by cunning and reserve.

At various periods of our history religious insanity pre-
vailed very widely as an epidemic, and extended over large
portions of the universe. This mental enthusiasm was usually
introduced by a particular mind of great energy, exercising its
influence over other minds, that one mind being only the
exponent of other minds of that particular epoch.

During the 15th and 16th centuries large numbers of per-
sons were dealt with by law who at that time were living and
acting under the influence of a religious epidemic.

In the reign of Francis I., 1515-47, ten thousand persons
were either killed or punished whilst under these religious
fanaticisms. The victims of these public persecutions belonged
to different grades of society. The individuals selected were
chiefly wretched old women, whose ugliness and eccentricities
rendered them remarkable, and who were usually members of
some of the convents. Large masses of females were submitted
to the austerities of these abodes, and consequently suffered
from perverted religions ideas, and were attacked with hyste-
rical symptoms. They gloried in the profanation of the
religion they had sworn to observe, and also in their professed
intercourse with supernatural and diabolical agencies. Incan-
tation was the remedy resorted to : priests and bishops devoted
days and nights to the employment of every known mode
of expulsion; but instead of any good resulting from their
interference, the disease, on the other hand, became conta-
gious in the convent, and frequently epidemic in the neigh-
bourhood, months, even years, elapsing before tranquillity
was restored.

These women, who had hitherto lived irreproachably, con-
fessed, whilst under the influence of these paroxysms, to
having perpetrated the greatest atrocities and enormities, and
they did not hesitate to accuse their dearest relatives and friends
as being the principal actors and originators of these crimes.
Many of these poor victims were burned, and hundreds perished
in consequence of their own morbid religious ideas. It fre-
quently happened that those who were falsely accused, and
excited by the religious ceremonies to which they were subjected,
eventually acknowledged all the atrocities attributed to them,
and even the priests themselves, though at first firmly
ignoring these imaginary delusions, ultimately became the
victims of these morbid ideas, and were, so to speak, epidemi-
cally seized.

After the suppression, at the time of the Reformation, of
what were then called the religious houses, the insane became^
a wandering body, and were permitted to wander, uncared for
by their relatives, about the country naked, and frequently
exposed to various forms of insult and degradation. The term
" Abraham-men " was universally given to lunatics, who depended
upon the charity of others for their livelihood. They pre-
tended to be insensible to all sensation of pain, and allowed
various experiments to be made in proof of their being thus
destitute of bodily anguish. A writer living in those times
alleged that " their skin was quite benumbed, and that they
did not feel any inconvenience from punctures, blisters, or
setons."

Decker, in the " Bellman of London," alludes to the beggars
of his time, who imitated the "Abraham-men," in order to
excite public sympathy and so extort money.

It is impossible to read the history of the irregular and
turbulent conduct, or of the groundless and absurd expecta-
tions of most fanatics, without concluding that while some
were merely designing and wicked, others were actually influ-
enced either by a temporary or a permanent insanity; and it
will appear the less wonderful that so many should become
insane at the same time, by a kind of epidemical contagion,
when we reflect on the influence of example and of any favourite
and popular notion in exciting the wildest and most outrageous
extravagancies of a misguided mob ; if we consider how apt the
brain is to be affected by a constant attention to one subject,
and how liable such attention is to be excited, when the sub-
ject is of a religious nature, and is regarded with emotion and
ardour.

A person whose religious education has been imperfect or
neglected, and whose temperament is highly susceptible, is
suddenly afflicted with some domestic grief. For the first time
his eyes are opened to the vanity of life ; his heart is softened;
he is directed by a pious friend to seek consolation in religion ;
his conscience is awakened, and he is distressed by the dis-
covery of his own sinfulness and shortcomings; grief and remorse
subdue him. The subject is all engrossing; he reads, and
meditates. Sin stands before him like a giant; this life is
now to him as nothing?the next is everything ; hell gapes at
his feet, and he sinks into a fit of despair and gloom. The
conscience once being alarmed becomes morbidly sensitive, and
the new convert begins the work of godly reformation by
abjuring amusement as a sin, and the world as a snare. He
shrinks with the greatest horror from all former habits, friends,
and associations ; grows taciturn and morose ; and withdrawing
more and more from society, finds himself shunned, in just
proportion as he deliberately shuns others.

The understanding is weakened and led astray by religious
fervour and excitement, when ill-directed and unreasonably
made use of, and this may terminate in insanity of a most
obstinate character. It is difficult at first to fix upon any one
isolated fact which is of itself conclusive of a wandering mind;
the symptoms are negative rather than positive; it is retire-
ment rather than overtact. Besides, the popular notions are so
vague upon the subject of religion, that the world is prone to
mistake religious eccentricities for true religion.

The first deviation of the mind from sober reason towards
religious insanity is so like an earnest and truthful warmth of
feeling on this all-important theme that we are very likely to
be deceived by its ingress, and thus incautiously suffer the
enemy to steal a long march upon us before we are conscious
of its proximity. It is only possible to arrive at a certain con-
clusion respecting it by remarking attentively the ordinary
behaviour of the religious enthusiast. If the religious fervour
tends to render the behaviour and motives of conduct more
circumspect, sober, and correct than they have hitherto been,
we must conclude that it is not insanity; but if, on the con-
trary, it seizes hold of new ideas, and gives way to eccentric
manner or speech, we are wont to suspect the approach of
mental disorder. But even in this case it may be nothing
more than a passing enthusiasm, a transient paroxysm, and the
excitement of the brain passes away without leaving any of its
traces behind. But if hallucinations be evinced, then there
can be no doubt as to the nature of the case, for there is
scarcely any form of religious insanity devoid of hallucina-
tions, spectral illusions, preternatural voices, and special
revelations, even in the very incipient stages.

The patient, in the midst of imaginary felicity, fancying
himself rich, handsome, and dwelling in a palace, is troubled
with mournful thoughts. This state is followed by hallucina-
tions arising in connection with some painful circumstance in
his past life. At this conjuncture nothing is more remarkable
than the abnormal sentiments and religious ideas which occur
suddenly in persons not usually religious. A lunatic with
exalted mania swears and blasphemes without the least respect
for what is holy. After he has been in this state for some
time, his condition is changed; he becomes calm, sober, and
sorrowful; he speaks of his sins, of divine mercy, of hell, of
the relation between his malady and religion.

Religious insanity very rarely occurs suddenly. It is a
disease, as I have before observed, of slow growth, but of
persistent and formidable pertinacity. It incubates, or begins
with sullenness, moroseness, enthusiastic piety, and slight
eccentricities of, at first, an unnoticeable and pardonable descrip-
tion. The patient evinces keen instinctive feelings, and often
betrays an almost unaccountable servility, cowardice, or pre-
cipitation upon unexpected occasions; this nervousness most
probably arising from a strong, though morbid, desire of self-
preservation from the fear of hell, both on his own account and
those in whom he is interested.

In the early stages of religious insanity a kind of mysterious
reserve is maintained, but after a time, and in proportion as
this form of peculiar mental aberration maturates, the patient
seeks to force his sentiments on others ; and if his notions are
questioned or rebutted, he resents such reception of them as a
personal insult. From conversation he proceeds to preaching
and exhortation, often affecting a miraculous conversion. At
times he becomes the subject of ecstatic fears, and gives way
to extravagancies of speech and behaviour; the ideas chase
each other rapidly through the mind; but after- a time this
rapidity ceases, and the ideas become irregular and involuntary,
and disease of the brain is surely progressing; there may be
indications of softening, atrophy, or inflammation. The con-
junctiva is jaundiced-, the liver deranged, the decarbonisation
of the blood is impeded, the respiration oppressed, the right
side of the heart overloaded, and cerebral congestion results.
The conscience becomes timid, and is beset with scruples.
Dangerous ideas next occupy the patient's mind, relating to
suicide, homicide, infanticide, or pyromania. As the disease
progresses the ideas become very much confused; he is restless
at night, sleepless, and during the day is in a state of excessive
excitement; at the same time a notable change is observed in
his dispositions and manners ; his appetite becomes abnormal,
his person neglected, and he is unable to fix his restless thoughts
even momentarily on worldly affairs, however urgent they may
be; even domestic ties and affection seem to lose their hold
upon him, an utter indifference being evinced for what goes on
around him. In this stage he is undoubtedly the victim of
partial insanity; reason has not its fair play; it is not gone; it
is not even impoverished, if you can but once break the charm
a work of more than ordinary difficulty, for he is spell-bound by
his own conscience. He will be rational enough, and converse
upon any other subject with his customary sense and judgment
but only touch the tender chord of religion, and his rationality
takes flight, leaving him insane or foolish.

As the disease progresses the mental depression increases ; he
cannot rouse himself from his torpid state of mind, refusing to
converse upon any subject except his imaginary wickedness.
The delusions chiefly tormenting the patient have reference to
his former life or business, and one of the most prominent
morbid ideas connected with religious insanity is that ?the
unpardonable sin has been committed, and that the victim of
this delusion is forsaken by God. The unhappy believer in this
sad delusion is generally reduced to the utmost extremity of
despondency and despair. 

A wonderful singularity is usually met with in the symp-
toms associated with this variety of mental unsoundness, and it
is my intention, as an illustration of my subject, to give an exact
description of the symptoms, as given to me verbatim from the
hps of a patient I have recently seen. I quote the patient's
own words: 

" I am the unhappiest man in the whole earth; my life is the gall of
bitterness and bond of iniquity. I feel to be under G^s condem??ation
I have no comfort in rising up or sitting down, in going out or in coming
in. I cannot eat without condemnation. I desire to cat and to drink
to satisfy the cravings of nature, but when I partake of God's good
creatures I feel it is without God's blessing. I desire God's blessi,,-
beyond all expression for it is that only which maketh rich, and addeth
no sorrow with it I feel my life has been a failure, that my works
have not been perfect before God; all men have spoken well of me, as
they did of the false prophets; I have been as much deceived mTself as
others have been deceived m me. With God .actions are weighed, and
He will bring every work into judgment, and every secret thoight,
"whether it be good or evil. J D '

" I have been greatly troubled and perplexed in my mind for the
past four or five months ; difficulties have increased ; at first there were
temporal losses, but not to such an extent as in ordinary circumstances
would have occasioned solicitude ; then my mind and spirits were dis
turbed I began to predict loss and ruin. For a long time religion has
been declining in my soul. I used very highly to prize the Sabbaths,
but for the past nine or ten Sabbaths I have not been able, something
within has made it in a way impossible to go to God's house, although
I would desire His blessing. I have not been able to obtain it; God
seems to have laid open to me all my heart and all my life. His
promises I can't lay hold of; I fear His dreadful threatenings. I fear
God has forsaken me. I have thought all my life long that I sincerely
loved my Saviour, and desired to serve Him. There seem to have
been two principles striving and working in me: I thought the good
was the prevailing one, but I have been deceived. I try to pray, and
at times I seem to be able to pray. This world seems to be all in con-
fusion, everything contradictory, men walking in a vain show and dis-
quieting themselves in vain. I feel that I have been a slothful servant,
and that I am doomed to everlasting perdition."
This patient is now in a state of acute mania, and has to be
fed mechanically.

The general appearance of a patient when the disease has
progressed is characteristic of the mental unsoundness from
which he is suffering. He has an anxious expression of coun-
tenance, the face is worn, haggard, and pale, and wears a constant
frown. He is restless, and appears to be in a most pitiable
state.

The delusions as a rule haunt the patient day and night,
and no arguments, however weighty or by whom stated, will
make the least alteration in the firm morbid belief. In fact,
the stronger the argument against the delusions, the more con-
firmed will they become.

In these cases the relatives, not recognising the real mental
condition, will allow arguments to be brought forward by clergy-
men and others, in order to disperse the insane notions, but,
alas ! with no good resulting, but positive injury. For it is not
simply a mistaken idea, but a morbid perception, resulting from
a brain functionally or organically disordered, and the person
so afflicted being an irresponsible agent, and thus incapacitated
by disease from shaking off his mistaken belief.

All patients suffering from religious insanity must be re-
garded as suicidal; they generally either have a disgust for this
life, and are consequently anxious to leave it, or are under a
morbid conception of a text of Scripture, and will attempt self-
mutilation.

Some patients will artfully seize an opportune moment to
conceal a weapon to inflict self-injury. Others will openly and
shamelessly avow their intention of destruction, and if left to
their own inclinations will starve ; frequently this pertinacity in
refusing food becomes so excessive that mechanical means have
to be used to feed them. The thoughts are generally directed
towards the evils of a future existence, and this unseen state
causes gloomy anticipations of melancholy and remorse, and they
are taunted by self-inflicting imaginations.

Whilst in this state of perturbation and gloom, the very face
of nature appears to them obscured, and a veil to be hanging
over sun, moon, and earth :
? Melancholy spreads itself
'Twixt heaven and earth, like envy between man
And man?and is an everlasting mist."
The immediate friends and relatives of a patient who has
these premonitory symptoms frequently refuse to believe in the
opinion as expressed by the physician as to the case being one
of mental unsoundness, and at the same time will not even re-
gard it as suicidal. Medical men, who have these cases
brought under their immediate eye, frequently see frightful
results in consequence of the relatives not following out their
advice.

Were I disposed, I could narrate many cases which have come
under my own observation of persons in the incubatory stage of
religious insanity who committed suicide, in consequence of the
obstinacy of the friends in refusing either to place the patient
under supervision in an asylum, or allow a proper attendant to
be placed with him until the dangerous symptoms had
subsided. , , .

As the disease advances the sadness and gloom become
excessive; he rarely smiles or exhibits any symptom of gratifi-
cation, seeking solitude and avoiding cheerful society, the mind
burdened as if by some hidden sorrow. At times he is irrit-
able, worried and disturbed by the slightest noise; the least
thing contrary to his own individual wish annoys him; he fears
danger from the smallest circumstance, and exaggerates the
slightest difficulty into one of the greatest importance. Pain
and remorse are caused by impressions which were formerly
most agreeable to him. He is either in a state of perpetual
discontentment, or, by shunning society and seeking solitude, he
is able to brood uninterruptedly over his insane imagination?
" I want to be alone, to find some shade,
Some solitary gloom, there to shake off
These tumultuous cares, that vex my life,
This sick ambition on itself recoiling ;
And there to listen to the gentle voice,
The sigh of peace, something?I know not what?
That whispers transport to my heart."*
The feeling of hatred and indifference often shows itself in
a morbid dislike to those by whom he is surrounded. This
* Thomson.

incipient stage of melancholia is accurately depicted by
Shakespeare:

" I have of late (but wherefore I know Dot) lost all my mirth, fore-
gone all custom of exercises; and, indeed, it goes so heavily with my
disposition, that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile pro-
montory ; this most excellent canopy, the air?look you, this brave o'er-
hanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire?why it
appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of
vapours."

The melancholic patient, having been in a state of dread and
apprehension for some time, gradually passes into a state of
helpless despondency.
Religious insanity is usually of long continuance, and may
terminate either in a restoration to a normal state of mind and
body, or in incurable insanity and confirmed mania.
This latter is remarkable for its destructive propensities and
depraved state of morality. The mode of its termination
depends on the character and general disposition of the patient.
Sometimes it terminates in profound insanity and hypocrisy,
the most profound and obdurate condition of the mind there
is, for the knave knowingly acts a part which he no longer
believes to be true. Superstition and fanaticism are other
modes of its termination, leading oftentime to murder, the
infliction of bodily cruelties, or revenge, the deadliest of the
evil passions.

I propose to consider very briefly the intellectual, social,
and moral causes of religious insanity. There is in the world
a common propensity to create a religion of our own, founded
simply upon the instincts of religion. It is in fact nothing
more than yielding to the instinctive feeling of piety which
pervades every breast. By mixing up our private feelings with
those in common to the rest of the world, without definition
or agreement, we confuse ourselves, become puzzled or dis-
gusted, and end by setting forth our own individual feelings in
the place of the public standard of rectitude. In so momentous
a matter as that of death and futurity, which is, in short, the
essence of Christianity, the probability is, that what is private
is wrong, and that what is common is right; for true religion is
a revelation from external sources, whereas false religions are
hallucinations from within. The external law of the Gospel is
binding to mankind, but an internal ideality is not binding
even to the idealist himself. It has been acutely said that
man makes his God like himself, whereas Eevelation proposes
to make man no longer like himself, but like its own Great
Author. In an intellectual sense, it is from mistaking a
particular idea for universal truth that religious madness
springs. This fatal mistake may be the result of imperfect
education, or of a particular education on a particiilar idea, or
it may be the result of a mind invincibly defective, perverted
or impaired by bodily disease. It is with the two last causes
that we are chiefly concerned.

Knowing as we do the all-engrossing nature of religion, and
the intensity of the emotion evoked by it in sensitive minds,
we should be prepared to expect every form of mental aberra-
tion from a perversion of religious truth. Religious madness is
usually attributed to religion itself. No such imputation can
be lodged; it is more than probable that the strong religious
sentiment and feeling guides a man rightly when he would
otherwise have failed, and that it is actual brain disease which
aggravates this sentiment, rather than that this sentiment pro-
duces the brain disease, and as a result its manifestation,
religious insanity. But it must be admitted that in some cases
religious excitement develops mental disorder.

Considering that sensitive minds are generally morbid, the
result of organic changes going on in a body morbidly alive to
every external stimulant, we shall perceive that religious mad-
ness is the complex result of partial knowledge, imperfect faith,
excessive sensibility, and cerebral disease combined. Hence
the inveteracy of its character and the difficulty that is ex-
perienced in treating it properly and successfully; for it is not
a mere mental act, it is not a violent effort of volition, but, on
the contrary, it is an excitement upon the abstract truths of
religion, originating from or closely connected with actual
organic changes of structure, so that it has often been affirmed
that religious excitement will be found to resolve itself into
animal excitement. Eeligious insanity must be considered as
a disease of the brain, and not as a metaphysical alteration and
abstraction of ideas. The victim of this form of mental
disease is subject to well-marked delusions and hallucinations.
These symptoms, especially the latter, indicate very seriously
a disturbed circulation through the encephalon, or else actual
disease of the brain itself. Hallucinations of the insane are
not voluntary, and always co-exist with impaired intelligence,
resulting from an impaired or disorganised brain. The con-
sciousness is diseased ; the lunatic is often convinced of the truth
of the false delusions of which he is conscious.

The several moral intellectual powers and qualities that
enter into and make up the mind and character of man are
very irregularly distributed.

One is favoured with a large proportion of one faculty and
a disproportionally small quantity of another, very little of a
third, and none at all of a fourth. From the lowest idiot, who
cannot even control his muscular powers so much as to move
his limbs rightly, or masticate his food, who neither is gifted
with the senses of seeing, hearing, or feeling, up to men of the
highest order of intelligence and intellect, are to be found
all intermediate grades of intelligence, without an interval
between them.

But paramount to this variety of intelligence is conscious-
ness, that fundamental principle of the mind common alike to
the understanding, the passions, and the intellect?that faculty
which cannot be entirely lost except by the total destruction of
the mind itself.

The most miserable idiot is gifted with consciousness, and
many of the insane are perfectly conscious of the extrava-
gancies they commit. Their motives may be irrational, but their
act is a conscious one, be its consequences what they may. But,
at the same time, no form of insanity ever exists without a
perversion of the conscience, as well as an impairment of one
or more of the mental faculties, inducing a loss in the power of
comparison. Judgment?and as religious insanity is specifically
a disease or error of judgment it follows therefore that the
person religiously insane is incapable of appreciating the value
of the just evidences of truth. One of the moral causes of re-
ligious insanitv is a diseased consciousness interfering with the
clearness and independence ot the judgment.

The fear of death may be mentioned as another of the moral
causes. In many cases, when the conviction that death is immi-
nent and irretrievable, the mind is so depressed that it never
afterwards entirely recovers from the shock. Indeed, the mental
faculties are so much impaired as to render the account and
narrative of these persons often incorrect and exaggerated. They
are hallucinated at the moment, deceived by their own sensa-
tions, which are perturbed and confused, and which lead them to
deceive others without meaning to do so.

I will consider, in conclusion, a few of the special features
met with in religious insanity. The zeal which accom-
panies this variety of insanity is as distinct from true reli-
gious conviction and practice as health is from the heat and
flurry of stimulants, and the majority of religious madmen have
not one correct idea of religion nor of a single article of faith.
The mind, if turned especially to one subject, particularly if it
be an abstruse one, cannot dwell on this one idea exclusively for
any length of time without incurring a great risk of becoming
disordered, and if it does not become visibly deranged, it will
form a false perception and estimate of things, and will attach
to trivial and unimportant matters a weight and importance
they do not deserve.

The greater number of people are never taught anything
accurately. They grow up by chance, they live and die by
chance, and, when they die, they depart this life to go they
know not where and to be they know not what. In all of them
the religious instinct is innate. They feel they were not born
for this short life alone. They are conscious that they were not
meant to die like the beasts that perish. They look upwards
to the heavens, and wonder who and what they are. The
meanest intelligences among them feel as much as this ? and
how much more would they not feel and do, were they but
properly instructed and trained, as moral agents and responsible
beings, to play their parts in time, so as to be sure of winning
their reward in eternity? The moralist, the philosopher, and
the politician cannot contemplate such a critical disorder of so-
ciety?shall we say of civilized society??as this without dismay
nor ponder on the future without anxiety and regret '
Religious insanity may be considered as the unavoidable
consequence of religious ignorance. Those who have been care-
fully grounded in their faith can scarcely go mad upon it It
is the same in this respect as in most others?a little knowledge
is a dangerous thing. No one can teach himself. At the best
he is only an amateur. Earnest indeed he may be, but if so'
only so much the worse, for the more earnest, and if earnest
then sincere, the more certain he is of falling into errors both
in matter and form of the gravest description. To become a
proficient, he must have a master, go to school, and learn his
rudiments, beginning from the beginning, and working upwards
to the top. Without this preliminary groundwork, every sub-
sequent effort will be contemptible and worthless. Smattering is
the bane of every art and science, and so it is of religion.
If it happens to be religion that the enquirer takes up late
in life, the mind is exclusively directed to one dogma, doctrine
or point of discipline, to the total neglect of other doctrines or
their partial obscuration ; and this magnified doctrine or doo-ma
generally one of secondary importance.

A mind untrained in religious discipline is prone to vagaries
and easily becomes deranged at the first peep into the stupen-
dous truths of Revelation.

Religious sentiment or instinct enters so materially as well
as intimately into every motive and every action, and tinges so
deeply and indelibly every thought, implicit or express, that it
may be said no event happens in the world which is not a scene
in one of the acts of a vast religious drama. It is manifested
in every deed both public and private, and is displayed with
the greatest intensity by such as are highly nervous and suscep-
tible. Even the infidel is an actor whose life is passed in
braving his own instincts, and the devotee, too, is another actor,
whose days are passed in nursing and putting forth his instincts.
Religious feelings, when intensely professed or denied, whether
true or false, cannot fail to leave their traces upon the fine
organism of the brain, and heresy and sometimes mania is
the result. The heretic is often only a religious madman,
while, on the other hand, the religious madman is sure to be a
heretic, since his insane notions are partially distorted and
irrelevant.

The most dangerous errors, both public and private, are
the miserable consequences of degenerate piety and ignorant
devotion. Wars and cruelties of all kinds have been perpetrated
by all parties to root out a hostile creed; and were we to look
only on the dark side of Christianity, we might be induced to
despair of human happiness both here and hereafter. Fana-
ticism, folly, and knavery are traceable in every form of
religion, and very distinctly can they be traced in the false
superstition so prevalent in the age we live in. Under the
cloak of religion, what enormities have not been perpetrated?
what stupidities have not been enacted?what misery not
inflicted?what confusion not created! Were we permitted
to do so, we would drop the curtain over the lurid scene, and
shut it out from every eye. But this may not be. Its extra-
vagancies are the test of its reality, and its abuse the proof of
its utility.
