News and Notes
===============
 
Handicapped Children and the Education Act, 1944
Section 33 of the Education Act, 1944, enacts that:
The Minister shall make regulations defining
the several categories of pupils requiring special
educational treatment and making provision as
to the special methods appropriate for the
education of pupils of each category.

_On April 13th, 1945, these Regulations were issued in
Uraft and?concerning as they do every type of handi?
capped child?they should be closely studied by all who
are interested in the Mental Health of the nation, whether
. educationalists, doctors, social workers, health
JSitors or ordinary citizens with a sense of obligation
?wards those who are disabled in mind or body.

In the Regulations the categories of pupils requiring
.Pecial educational treatment are enumerated as follows:
5"nd, and Partially Blind, Deaf and Partially Deaf,
Helicate, Diabetic, Educationally Subnormal, Epileptic,
^aladjusted, Physically Handicapped, and pupils
Uttering from Speech Defect.

In the case "f fhe blind, deaf, physically handicapped,
ePilept;_- antj aphasic, it is provided that the special
^ethods of education shall be applied in Special Schools,
th *n case children who are epileptic or blind,
"at these shall be boarding-schools. The other categories (including the educationally subnormal) may be
uucated in an ordinary school if the special educational
featment afforded thereby is satisfactory and if the
presence of the child concerned is not detrimental to the
^?terests of the other pupils. Where these conditions are
?t Present, Special School education must be provided.
Section 8(2) (d) of the Act, includes amongst the other
duties of Local Education Authorities that of paying
regard:

" . . . to the expediency of securing the provision of boarding accommodation, either in
boarding schools or otherwise, for pupils for whom
education as boarders is considered by their
Parents and by the authority to be desirable.''''
, The Draft Regulations enact that to be approved, a
?arding home used by an Authority for handicapped
Pupils, must provide accommodation for not fewer than
unless the Minister sanctions a smaller number,
of u boarding-out method is used instead, inspection
1 the foster home must be made before admission of the
rst pupils, during the first month of residence, and
thereafter at least once a term. Not more than three
handicapped pupils must be boarded out with any one
foster parent.

Part V of the Regulations deals with Institutions for
Further Education and Training of Disabled Persons.
Special reference is made here to the needs of the blind
and partially sighted, the deaf and partially deaf, the
epileptic and the physically handicapped.

No specific mention is made of the mentally handicapped, but we understand that this category will be
included in the groups dealt with under the Disabled
Persons (Employment) Act, if such special provision
appears to be needed in any case.

Part VI is concerned with the School Medical Service,
Conduct of Medical Examinations and Inspections, etc.,
and the final Section deals with payment of Grants for
services coming within the scope of the Regulations.
In an explanatory Circular (No. 41) issued at the same
time as the Draft Regulations and which should be read
with them, it is stated that a pamphlet dealing in some
detail with the whole subject of special educational
treatment will be issued shortly by the Ministry. The
publication of this pamphlet will be awaited with interest
and we shall hope to refer to it again in our next issue.

Handicapped Children Advisory Committee
In February, 1945, the Minister of Education
announced the appointment of an Advisory Committee
to advise him on " such matters relating to children
requiring special educational treatment as he may
submit to them or as they may consider require investigation The members of the Committee are as follows:

Mr. F. Messer, M.P. for Tottenham South.
Professor J. M. Mackintosh, Dean of the London
School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine.
Dr A. A. E. Newth, Senior School Medical Officer,
Nottingham.

Mr. E. W. Woodhead, Director of Education, Kent.
To assist the Committee in considering any specific
question under review, it is the intention of the Minister
" to appoint as additional members, persons possessing
special knowledge and experience of the particular
category of handicapped children concerned
Special Education?Boarding or Day School ?
Under Section 8(2) (d) of the new Education Act,
Local Authorities are required to pay regard " to the
expediency of securing the provision of boarding accommodation either in boarding schools or otherwise, for
pupils for whom education as boarders is considered by
their parents and by the authority to be desirable
The question as to the advantages or disadvantages
of the Boarding School (as compared with the Day
School) is therefore one of great moment, particularly in
relation to handicapped children in whose education it
is likely to play an increasingly frequent part.

In the Report of the Principal School Medical Officer
for Newcastle-on-Tyne, for 1943, there is an interesting
testimony to the value of the Residential School for
mentally defective children given by the Head Mistress
of the Bolam Street Girls' Special School, evacuated as
a unit to Close House, Wylam, Northumberland, for
3\ years.

Miss Hickman's general conclusion is given as follows:
" My experience of Boarding School training for
mentally defective children during the 3J years I spent
running the residential school at Close House, is that
it is very much more successful than the day school,
since it extends the scope for training to include social
as well as scholastic training. The children all learned
to fit into the community life of the school as useful
members in a greater or lesser degree according to their
relative mentality. Behaviour difficulties were eased.
The response in classroom work was therefore readier
and more sustained. The children worked to the full
extent of their various limited mentalities, showing an
interest in their own educational progress."

Improvement in physical health and habits was to be
expected, but it is noted that this was accompanied by
an increase in self-reliance and independence, both on
the part of the neglected and of the over-protected child,
and by the birth of a new self-respect.

" With favourable conditions for washing, and access
to proper clothing, the children became very aware of
their appearance. I found them demanding proper
clothing from their parents where once they were content
with any cast off or handed down unsuitable garment.
A feeling of self-respect grew in the girls, especially as
they felt themselves useful and able to do their school
work. Combined with this was the ever present example
of the teachers. The older girls copied the staff. The
younger girls copied the older girls. In time, the
appearance of the children improved considerably."
It is true that these happy results were not achieved
without unwonted strain and self-sacrifice on the part of
the teaching staff, but they, too, gained something of
solid value, because by living in close daily contact with
their children in the capacity of friends and helpers, and
not of teachers only, a feeling of mutual understanding
was engendered which greatly helped the classroom
approach.

The following brief record of an individual child
illustrates more vividly than any generalizations, the
happiness and fullness of life which wartime experiment
could bring?and alas, which its ending could so
tragically take away.

J. A. Age 9 years, 9 months. At time of evacuation:
pale, thin, undersized. Signs of rickets in bones of
legs. Dull, lethargic, unhappy, slouching carriage.
Scholastic attainments: practically nil. After 15
months at Close House: bright, happy, full of ready
laughter. Active and full of movement. Carriage
more erect, flesh with a healthy glow. Body well
covered though not fat. Physical health satisfactory.
No illnesses. Scholastic attainments: Making steady
and sustained progress in the 3 R's. Learned to knit
and do a little sewing. Able to wash and dress herself,
make her own bed and do simple jobs. Every sign that
this child will progress satisfactorily.

After 3 months at home. Again dirty and neglected.
Acquired that dull, lethargic look. Slouching and listless. Pale and often unhappy. Frequent septic sores
and abscesses through sickness or other reasons. Class
Work: Progress has not been maintained. Is unlikely
to carry out the promise showed at Close House under
present home conditions.

It is, however, encouraging to learn that the majority
of evacuated pupils now back at Bolam Street School,
show a higher standard of educational attainment,
behaviour and social adjustment than that shown by
their schoolfellows who stayed at home. Moreover,
many of the girls now in employment, have taken their
place satisfactorily in the community and have maintained the improvement resulting from their residential
school experience.

An Experiment in Special Education
-----------------------------------
The Chesterfield Education Committee have recently
issued a report on their scheme for combining an Open
Air School with provision for psycho-therapeutic treatment of maladjusted children?an experiment owing
much of its inspiration in the initial stages to the late
Dr H. G. Stead in his capacity as Chief Education Officer
to the Borough. The Scheme now includes three types
of provision?Brambling House Open Air School,
Brambling House Children's Centre, and Holly House
Hostel.

The object of the promoters was, it is stated in the
Report,
" to combine the physical, intellectual and psychological
approaches to children's problems ... to do away
with the usual distinction between the delinquent, the
nervous, the retarded and the ill child, and to regard
all sorts of varied conditions such as nervousness,
chronic headaches, stealing, rheumatic pains, temper
tantrums, bed-wetting, shyness, asthma, lassitude, school
failure, etc., merely as symptoms that something is
wrong with the child; and to pursue investigations
along these lines simultaneously to discover whether
that ' something ' is physical, intellectual, emotional or,
as is so often the case, a combination of all three."

The accommodation at Brambling House Open Air
School provides for 125 children with a staff consisting
of the Headmaster and five assistants. Children are
received from schools under the Chesterfield Authority
as well as from outside Authorities through the local
Hostel for maladjusted children. The purpose of the
School is remedial, and although a small minority are
likely to stay there throughout the whole of their school
life, the greater number return to ordinary schools when
their mental and physical health is established.
The majority of the children admitted are physically
defective, and although some are poorly adjusted
socially, they are able to co-operate with the teacher in
creating a stable class room atmosphere. Into this
group it is found that the over-shy or educationally
handicapped children receiving psycho-therapeutic treatment at the Centre, are easily absorbed, but experience
has shown that the "noisy, misbehaving, unco-operative'
children can be dealt with successfully only if their
numbers are kept down to about three in a class of 25.
In the free atmosphere of the school, teachers and
children learn to know each other, and through staff
meetings difficulties are discussed and efforts are made
to find a solution to difficult individual problemsCareful records are kept on each child, and there is 3
clo?e partnership between the School Doctor, the teaching
staff and the therapists. Co-operation of the parents is
ensured by providing frequent opportunities for their
visiting the school, and by home visits paid by the Child
Psycho-therapist and the Health Visitors.

The Children's Centre, attached to the School, is
staffed by a psychiatrist, a Child Psycho-therapist
(holding the Diploma of the Institute of Child Psychology)
and by one or more part-time Educational Psychologists.
Children from schools outside the Borough are admitted
*or treatment on payment of a fee.

Of the 347 cases referred during the five years under
reveiw, 85 have also attended the Open-Air School, and
of these 37 have made a satisfactory adjustment. The
close connection between the School and the Centre is
found to have many advantages. By means of it, time
secured for continued treatment as part of the school
routine, and a child is educated with normal delicate
children under specially selected conditions but without
his acquiring the label of " difficult " or " maladjusted
Holly House Hostel?the third, and most recent
constituent of this Scheme?was opened in 1943, and
Up to April, 1944, 27 children had passed through it,
?f whom 12 were from Chesterfield and 15 from outside
areas. Whilst at the Hostel, 13 children in need of
residential treatment, attended Brambling House School
ar>d Centre, 3 attended the Centre and continued
tn. attendance at an ordinary Elementary School. 9
children were received as " Care and Protection " cases
aWaiting foster-home placement or receiving treatment
to make them fit for this.

The cost per week, including education and treatment
at the Centre, has worked out at ?2 10s., and the expenditure has been regarded by the Ministry of Education as
ehgible for grant.

The staff consists of a Warden and House Mother
parried couple), an Assistant Matron, and a General
Assistant with one daily non-resident cleaner. Weekly
Visits are paid by the Child Psychotherapist.
The life of the Hostel has been too short to justify any
adequate discussion of results, but the Report draws
attention to certain conclusions which it considers can
be legitimately arrived at, from the year's work. Some
of the children admitted from outside areas have been
jound to be unsuitable cases, in view of the fact that
the Hostel is intended as a place in which children stay
|or a limited period only and then, after the necessary
treatment, can return to their own homes. No useful
Purpose is therefore served by admitting childien whose
home conditions are bad, unless there is either an assured
Prospect of improvement, or of a suitable foster-home
which should be secured before treatment is begun. In
the main, the Hostel should bs reserved, it is considered
'apart from its function as an emergency home for
children awaiting foster-home placement) for " seriously
disturbed children from reasonably normal backgrounds
who need intensive residential psychotherapeutic treatment after which they can return home.

This Report is particulaily interesting, in view of the
development of such provision contemplated in the
Education Act, 1944, and it can be commended to all who
are interested in the handicapped or maladjusted child.

Society of Mental Nurses
-------------------------
This Society is a new comer into the list of organizations interested in Mental Health. Its Chairman is
Miss Gunn, Matron of St. Bernard's L.C.C. Hospital,
^outhall, Middlesex. Miss Payne, Matron of Clavbury
L-C.C. Hospital, Woodford Bridge, Essex, is its Vicechairman, and Miss Griffith, Mill Hill Hospital, is its
Hon. Secretary. Membership is open to nurses holding
the final certificate of the General Nursing Council or of
the Royal Medico-Psychological Association, in mental
nursing or mental deficiency nursing, and the objects
are to promote the interests and the professional
standards of mental nurses, to secure for it greater
recognition on the part of the whole nursing service,
and to provide opportunities for discussion and study
of matters affecting duties and responsibilities. The
question of training is also one to which the Society
proposes to devote close attention.

Anyone interested is invited to communicate with the
Hon. Secretary at Mill Hill Hospital, London, N.W.7.

The Board of Control
----------------------
Since our last issue two new appointments have been
made to the Board of Control, necessitated by the
retirements of the Chairman, Sir Laurence Brock, and
of a Senior Commissioner, the late Sir Hubert Bond.
As successor to Sir Laurence, the Minister of Health
has appointed Mr. Percy Barter, a Principal Assistant
Secretary in the Ministry since 1940, and Secretary of
the Board from 1930 to 1939. Mr. Barter's appointment
as a Senior Commissioner has also been approved by the
King.

As a Senior Commissioner to take the place of Sir
Hubert Bond, the King has approved the appointment
of Dr The Hon. Walter Symington Maclay, Medical
Superintendent of Mill Hill Emergency Hospital.

Children on Remand
--------------------
The question of the referral of children for psychological examination at Child Guidance Clinics by
Juvenile Courts was considered by a recent Committee
set up by the Home Office to enquire into the provision
of Remand Homes made by the London County Council.*
The principle reference in the Report was made in
Para. 43, where the following statement occurs:
We gather that psychological reports are asked
for rather freely?we are not altogether satisfied that
they are not asked for too freely. In so far as they
are really necessary for a decision on the case, we
think arrangements should be made for the examinations to take place on the premises of the Juvenile
Court or in its immediate vicinity.'"

The Committee also states that in their view it seems
" shocking that they (children and young persons) should
be liable to be sent back to detention for another week,
as they seem to be . . . merely because particular
medical or psychological reports cannot conveniently be
furnished on a particular day, or are more difficult to
obtain if the boy or girl is released on bail The
evidence on which these conclusions are based is not
mentioned in the Report, but it would be most unfortunate if the recommendations here made were implemented.

In Para. 7 of the Report, on the character of the
Remand Home, the latter is defined as:
" a place where children and young persons who, for
one reason or another, are maladjusted to society or to
their home environment, are received for a short time,
and should be cared for in a way that will contribute
to their physical and moral welfare.''''

In Para. 48 a description is given of the Committee's
opinion of the requirements of a good Remand Home.
Inter alia it is recommended that " the ruling characteristic of the home should be a civilized and civilizing
atmosphere and accommodation should be such as
" to give the staff the right background of dignity and
comfort to enable them to give the children, who usually
* Report of Committee of Inquiry into L.C.C. Remand
Homes. H.M. Stationery Office.

come from ill-regulated homes, a new idea of what a
decent home might be
In the light of these recommendations it is not easy to
understand why a child should suffer harm through being
detained a week or two in such an atmosphere, indeed
one might confidently expect it to be beneficial.

Child Guidance Council
----------------------
In the last quarter two new Child Guidance Clinics
have been established and recognized by the Child
Guidance Council, one in Dorset attached to the Herrison
Hospital and one at the East Ham Memorial Hospital.
Both were established to meet a growing demand for
Child Guidance and both hope to expand and to be able
to provide a full Child Guidance Service.

In West Sussex an interesting development is the
establishment of a Child Guidance Committee which is a
Standing Committee to the County Council; the terms
of reference are to consider and advise the County
Council on all matters relating to child psychiatry and
the Child Guidance Service. The Committee consists of
representatives of the Education Committee, the West
Sussex (Combined) Probation Committee, the Visiting
Committee of the Mental Hospital and the Midwives,
Maternity and Child Welfare Committee of the County
Council. A Child Guidance Service with fully staffed
Child Guidance Clinics in three different centres is
planned.

The Inter-clinic Committee of the Child Guidance
Council has prepared a basic School Report Form which
can be used as a model and has been circulated to all
recognized Child Guidance Clinics.

It is not the experience of Child Guidance Clinics
that cases are referred inappropriately by Juvenile
Courts Magistrates. It would be disastrous if psychological examinations were to be carried out on the
premises of the Juvenile Courts, or in its immediate
vicinity; to do so would invalidate the findings of the
examination and lead to the association in the child's
mind of the specialist'?", interview with the Court proceedings or with punishment. Tt may be hoped that
the Juvenile Court Justices and the Home Office who are
requested to pay particular attention to recommendations
in these paragraphs may seek some expert advice on the
matter.

" Lord " Memorial Essay Competition
------------------------------------
The subject chosen by the Selection Committee of the
National Council for Mental Hygiene for the 1944 Essay ^
Prize in connection with the Lord Memorial ?
Competition (administered by the Council on behalf of
the Society of the Crown of Our Lord) which is open
to all certificated mental nurses of the rank of staff,
charge, or chief charge in Mental Hospitals of the
United Kingdom and Northern Ireland was: "The ^
Nurse's part in helping the Newly Admitted Patient to
settle down." There were fifty-seven entries, and the
successful candidates were as follows:

First Prize. ?3 3s. and a medal: Sister Alice M. Rose,
of Mapperley Hospital, Nottingham.
Second Prize. ?1 Is.: Staff Nurse James Ford Wright, i
R.M.N, of Herrison Hospital, Dorchester.
The winning essay is printed on pages 53 and 54 of
this issue.

Teachers (Superannuation) Act, 1945
This Act, amending the Teachers (Superannuation)
Act of 1925, will be particularly welcomed by Authorities
and bodies concerned with the welfare of defectives,
in that it removes a long-standing difficulty in the way
of employing teachers for service in Occupation Centres
for mentally defective children.

Such service (if full-time) will now count as contri- butory service for purposes of Superannuation, coming
within the definitions in Section I (1) (e), viz. :?
" as a teacher of such kind as may be prescribed in a
certified institution as defined by section seventy-one of
the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, or as teacher of such
kind as may be prescribed employed by a local authority
in the exercise of their functions under paragraph (cc) of
section thirty of that Act ".

The paragraph in question will be found in the Mental
Deficiency Act 1927,?Section 7(2) (i)?which added
to the duties of Local Authorities that of providing
training or occupation for defectives under supervision
or guardianship.

fcKKA 1 U1V1
p. 58, col. 1, line 32, para, commencing "It is not the
experience of Child Guidance Clinics" should follow
col. 1, line 6.
