The Nurse's Part in Helping the Newly Admitted Patient to Settle Down
=====================================================================

MENTAL HEALTH 53
LORD MEMORIAL PRIZE ESSAY, 1945

By SISTER A. M. ROSE (Mapperley Hill Hospital, Nottingham)
Winner of the " Lord " Memorial Essay Prize, 1944

:Reference-type:  Journal Article
:Record-number: 18349
:Author: Rose, A. M.
:Year: 1945
:Title: Lord Memorial Prize Essay: The Nurse's Part in Helping the Newly Admitted Patient to Settle down
:Journal: Ment Health (Lond)
:Volume: 5
:Issue: 3
:Pages: 53-54
:Epub-date: 1945/07/01
:Date: Jul
:Short-title: Lord Memorial Prize Essay: The Nurse's Part in Helping the Newly Admitted Patient to Settle down
:ISSN: 0025-9632 (Print) 0025-9632
:PMCID: PMC5092792
:Accession-number: 28908997
:Notes: Rose, A M, Journal Article Ment Health (Lond). 1945 Jul;5(3):53-54.
:URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5092792/
:Author-address: (Mapperley Hill Hospital, Nottingham) Winner of the "Lord" Memorial Essay Prize, 1944.
:Language: eng





Although it may well be unreliable and illogical,
is a well-known habit to form firm, lasting, and
definite first impressions. That they are often
^accurate and always superficial is to be admitted,
but nevertheless they frequently form the basis of
our later estimations and prejudice our views for
good or evil, the more so when the situation is a
new one to us, or one whose arrival we have been
dreading. Those first few hours of contact are
often the most important of all, and never is the
Patient more prone to form a judgment than in her
first few hours in the new and, to her, worrying
atmosphere, of a hospital. Since, too, it is the nurse
who has the first and, in many ways, the most
Ultimate contact with the patient, she can well make
or mar the patient's outlook; she can, in those first
few hours, settle for good or bad the patient's degree
of co-operation, her contentment of mind and with
these her v^iole attitude towards treatment, which,
ln psychiatric cases most of all, may mean a big
Point in the outlook for recovery. If the nurse can
gain fully the patient's confidence and make her
feel that a wise decision has been made in her
c9ming to hospital, she will have made a great and
Vltal step towards both the patient's peace of mind,
and her response to later handling. If she fails,
she may soon have to deal with that most difficult
of problems, the unco-operative patient.
Despite the great advances that have been made,
there are still unfortunately many who think of
Mental Hospitals in terms of the old asylum days,
as a place where one is kept locked up in cells and
cruelly used. It is fortunately much less common
to hear this viewpoint nowadays, but it is still heard,
and the nurse's duty thus starts long before the
Patient's admission, in that she should always try
to show in her personality and in her ordinary round
?f life that a Mental Hospital is a Hospital, and that
she is a nurse just as is her colleague in a General
hospital, and not just some sort of wardress.
Some of the new patient's first impressions will,
?f course, be of the hospital building itself and of
|he room where she is first received, and most of
these are beyond the nurse's control. The nurse,
however, will no doubt be called upon to go down
t? the hospital entrance hall to receive her patient,
and the impression of this first contact is very
lrnportant. There is often an atmosphere which
suggests that the patient is being " handed over
as one might transfer some article, and this is
increased if there is too obvious a show made of the
^gal documents which the relative or Relieving
Officer has brought. In the case of Voluntary
Patients, who, thanks to Nerve Clinics and more
modern views, now fortunately form a large
percentage of admissions, the nurse can be a great
help in tactfully discussing the matter with the
patient, though the responsibility must, of course,
rest with the doctor.
The patient will now probably go down to the
ward with the nurse, and it is most important that
she should be received into a bright cheerful room.
A separate room with a bathroom leading out of it
is ideal, for then the patient can be examined by the
doctor, given a warm bath, unless physically ill,
and then taken to a bed in the ward.
When the patient is being prepared for examina-
tion on admission, great care should be taken that
she is not unduly exposed, as in many cases it will
be the patient's first visit to a hospital and she may
well feel embarrassed when being undressed by a
stranger, even though it may be a nurse. She
should be put into a clean bed, warmed
beforehand in cold weather by a hot water bottle,
and given comfortable pillows. Her nightdress
should be as nice as is possible in the circumstances
of a hospital, for such apparently small points as
this will often make a great]deal of difference to her
feeling of comfort.
It is very important also that the position of the
patient in the ward should be chosen with care.
If she is physically ill she should be put in a quiet
corner of the ward; if depressed, she should be put
into a bed next to someone who is cheerful and will
talk to her and reassure her. Young people are
usually much happier, too, if they are next to one
another, for they will have more in common to
discuss. The nurse should introduce her to the
neighbours in the next beds, give her the paper, or
a book from the ward library to look at, and chat
with her for a few minutes before leaving her. A
hot drink before she is left is often a comforting
thing.
The patient should be asked about her appetite
and how she is sleeping, since both these are so
commonly affected in nervous troubles. Her meals
should be given to her on a dainty tray with a clean
napkin and pretty crockery. They should be served
as daintily as possible, and it is usually much better
to give a small portion and a second helping if
required rather than pile the plate with food, hoping
that it will all be eaten.
If the patient complains of sleeping badly, the
doctor should be informed; he will then probably
order a sedative, which should be given with a hot
drink, either just before the day staff go off duty,
54 MENTAL HEALTH
or be handed to the night nurse with instructions that
it be given at a stated time. For the first night
especially the patient will be feeling very strange
and a good night's sleep is thus doubly important.
She should be reassured that she will get better
and that she can do much to help herself by taking
an interest in books, in making friends with the
other patients and in eating and sleeping as well as
possible.
All attentions to the patient should be made when
the patient's bed is carefully screened off.
The ward should be bright and cheerful with
plenty of flowers, and the dayroom should have
attractive curtains, cushions and pictures, for with
the modern early treatment of patients in Mental
Hospitals it is safe to say that the majority are fully
in a condition to appreciate their surroundings.
The nurse should appear calm and unhurried,
for not only will such an attitude inspire confidence,
but an air of rushing, bustling activity may often
bewilder and confuse a timid, nervous patient.
The nurse should always show the patient that she
takes a great and special interest in her case, and
encourage her to discuss her worries and troubles,
but, of course, she should never let the patient hear
herself being discussed with the other members of
the staff" or with the doctor. In this connection it
is often wisest to discuss these intimate personal
worries with the patient in the privacy of the Ward
Clinical Room, just as the patient's case notes should
always be kept there.
The patient should be encouraged to write to her
relatives as soon as possible, just as they should be
asked to write often to her, so that she may best
retain her interest in her home and family and not
feel that she is entirely cut off from all her outside
world and interests. The visits of the relatives are
often an individual problem requiring all the nurse's
tact and skill, but in general the patient should be
encouraged to have as many contacts with her
outside world as possible. The reassurance of her
relatives, too, will often help the patient herself to
feel more settled, and a word of admiration for her
baby or her child on visiting days will help to
show that personal degree of interest, which is so
important.
Often there will be a dread of treatment, and,
as in all discussions in this connection, honesty is
by far the best policy. A simple and reassuring
discussion of any special treatment which may
prove necessary will prove its value many times over,
just as it is essential that special treatments such as
Cerletti electrical treatment, should be done in a
separate room away from the ward, so that those
who are waiting should be given no occasion for
alarm.
It goes without saying that in a special admission
ward the anxious worried patient, who has greatly
dreaded her admission to a Mental Hospital, should
not be exposed to the noisy, excitable and sometimes
sordid phases of the acute psychotic, just as the
newly admitted acutely confused or maniacal patient
will need especial handling and nursing technique.
It is above all the nurse's whole outlook and
manner which must play the biggest part in those
first few important hours in hospital, for it is on
the impressions gained of those hours that her
future feelings for the hospital will be founded,
and no amount of subsequent attention or kindness
will ever wholly take away the effect of tactless or
careless treatment during those first few hours.
If, after her first night in hospital, the patient
wakes up with the thought that a Mental Hospital
is not such a bad or terrible place afteP all, a great
deal will have been achieved. And if with the
continuation of tactful and careful handling, of
pleasant and happy surroundings and of a sense that
all are ready and anxious and willing to help her,
she continues to hold firmly and widen those same
views, then the nurse's task will have been well done,
and a firm foundation laid upon which to build up
the patient's recovery and a sure start made towards
the day when she will be able to leave the hospital,
and take up her normal life again.
But the foundation must be firm and good, and
the foundation is built in those first few important
days and hours and by the impressions that the
patient forms as she is helped to settle down.
