School and Society, a New Educational Weekly
=============================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.

On January 2, 1915, the Science Press will begin the publication of a weekly
educational journal entitled School and Society, which will be edited by Dr J.
McKeen Cattell, of Columbia University. The need has become evident for
a journal appearing frequently, covering the whole field of education and its
relations to the social order, combining high ethical and scientific standards
with free discussion. Enough good articles on education are now presented to
Science and The Popular Science Monthly to fill such a journal. Its establishment should contribute to the advancement of education as a science and to the
adoption of the better methods for which there is evidence.

Educational Administration and Supervision.

Under this title a new periodical is to be edited by Lotus D. Coffman, Charles
Hughes Johnston, David Snedden, and J. H. Van Sickle, assisted by a staff of
twenty-one collaborators. Educational Administration and Supervision will be a
monthly journal covering fields which can roughly be distinguished as follows:
(1) state and county systems of education, including rural education and also
educational legislation; (2) city school systems, including chiefly problems of city
administration, supervision, management, reporting and educational statistics;
(3) secondary education, including problems of organization, administration,
inspection, curriculum making, and internal supervision, management and the
pedagogy of the different subjects, and including also a consideration of these
problems of higher education involving directly the interests of secondary education; and (4) elementary education, with the problems in this field analogous to
those cited for secondary education.

In addition to these fairly distinct administrative fields there are those overlapping problems of vocational education and of school extension, the one including agricultural education, and all varieties of trade, of continuation, part-time,
and evening schools; and the other including broadly the problems of school
hygiene, of the school as a social center, and of the school's co-operative agencies.
State school officers who are struggling with the issue of free textbooks, the
subsidizing of special schools or departments, the certification of teachers, the
basis for the distribution of school moneys, the inspection and standardization of
schools, the erection of modern buildings; city superintendents who are studying
the distribution of subject matter by grades, the time limit of subjects by grades,
the preparation of a salary schedule, the means to be used in rating and promoting
teachers, the relationship that should exist between a school board and the superintendent, the wider use of the school plant, the grading and promotion systems
in vogue; high-school principals who are attempting to reorganize their schools
in the light of shifting social demands, who are attempting to differentiate, interpret, adjust and extend their many curriculums, to provide supervised study, and
to direct the social activities of the school; supervisors who are interested in
improving their teachers in service and who wish to employ units and scales for
measuring educational results; and rural school superintendents, confronted as
they are with a multitude of complex problems, many of which must be solved
at long range?all these will find this journal devoting itself to the questions which
they are daily confronting.

In short, the ideal of the editors and the publishers is to issue each month
educational matter of a distinctive character which will prove indispensable
to all school administrators, to professors and students of school administration,
and to the growing number of teachers who are beginning to read carefully and
regularly current contributions of this thoroughgoing, dependable sort.
Educational Administration and Supervision will appear monthly, except
July and August, beginning January, 1915. Ten issues will make the yearly
volume of approximately 600 pages, published by Warwick & York, Inc., Baltimore, Md.
Toledo University, a Municipal University for the People.

Toledo University, the university of the city of Toledo, Ohio, is awake to
the mission of a university as the educator of the people. Dr A. Monroe Stowe,
Dean of the Municipal College of Arts and Sciences, announces that Toledo
University is planning to serve artisans, mechanics, engineers, and business men
and women through its College of Industrial Science, while through its Municipal College of Arts and Science the University is planning to meet the needs
of men and women, young and old. Volume I, number 1 of the Toledo University Record-Herald, is devoted to setting forth how this latter aim is to be
accomplished.

"Municipalities as well as states," says Dr Stowe, "are establishing colleges
for the people. Where funds and conditions justify, these state and municipal
colleges have given the regular four years of training. Where funds and conditions do not permit the establishment of full college course, there have been
established colleges furnishing two years of training and instruction. These
colleges are called junior colleges and are increasing very rapidly in our American
cities. The junior college movement has also been strengthened by the demands
of professional schools that our students have at least two years of a college
education." Some universities have consequently organized junior colleges to
give the work of the first two years of the college course.

"The junior college has a threefold mission to perform," Dr Stowe explains.
"It prepares its students either (1) to continue their college work in a senior
college; (2) to enter a professional school; or (3) to enter the life of the community
as citizens well prepared to live efficient lives of service. While effective preparation for future college or professional school work is important, our Municipal Junior Colleges and the Junior Colleges of our Municipal Universities, if
they are to justify their existence, must actually fit our students for more
efficient living as individuals and as citizens."

The freshman and sophomore years of the Municipal College of Arts and
Science have been organized into the Toledo University Junior College. A Junior
College Arts diploma will be granted by that university to students who have
successfully completed the two years' work. "An examination of the work of
the Junior College," remarks Dr Stowe, "will reveal the fact that this work
is of such a character as to teach students many valuable lessons in living and
to familiarize them with things they need to know if they are to live more
efficiently in this twentieth century life. The student who completes this work
and finds that he cannot continue his college course, will feel that his course has
been well worth the time and energy he has spent upon it. If he desires to continue his college course, his Junior College diploma is evidence that he has
satisfactorily completed two years of substantial college work and has the capacity and ability to profit from the final two years of college work either in Toledo
University or any other college or university." The expenses are very small,
amounting to only twenty dollars for a full year. Graduates of any of the
Toledo high schools may enter upon presentation of the high school certificate.
In the freshman year the curriculum includes,?education, English language
and literature, sociology, modern history, economics, political science, physical
training, with mathematics and foreign languages as optional studies. The
sophomore year includes physiology and hygiene (preventive measures), modern
logic, three hours of foreign languages, physical training, either physics or chemistry, and from five to eight hours of electives.
Toledo University exists to be of service to the city of Toledo and to all of
its citizens. The faculty of the university is being organized into a University
Public Service Bureau, to discover ways in which the university may be of the
greatest service to the city and its people, and to perform such services as the
resources of the university will permit.
