+The Problem of Life from a Girl's Point of View
================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1914, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. VIII, No. 4. June 15, 1914
:Author:  Margaret Otis, Ph.D.,

Resident Psychologist, State Home for Girls, Trenton, N. J.
Aline Herzog was a spoiled child and the pet of her father, an
Austrian by birth. She was early a favorite with the boys and found
she could obtain her every wish by coaxing either her father or the
other men of her acquaintance. She went to school pretty regularly
from the time she was six till she was fourteen years of age, and
went as far as the graduating class in the grammar school. Her
father was a good, industrious man and very indulgent to his children. He was especially fond of Aline and thought that nothing
was too good for her. Unfortunately he died when she was sixteen,
just at the time when the girl needed him the most, for the mother
was weak morally and was easily influenced, either for good or evil.
Aline afterwards said her mother was weak and let everyone
influence her.

It was just after the father's death that the episode began that
proved Aline's destruction. In fact, on the very night after the
funeral she was sent by her mother to return a bag loaned by a
neighbor. She knocked at the door and it was opened by the
neighbor's husband. Aline said she felt drawn to him at that
moment. Mrs. Burgess was kind to her and invited her to come
again. She visited them often, played cards at the house, and was
received in a friendly, neighborly way. Mrs. Burgess soon proved
herself to be not the right sort of woman. She drank, smoked, and
it is said she was also immoral. Aline, unconsciously at first, tried
to make up to Mr. Burgess for his wife's failings,?would try to keep
the house in order when Mrs. Burgess went on a spree . The
intimacy grew and Mr. Burgess yielded to a very natural love for
the attractive young girl. He went too far and took her off to a
hotel in New York where they lived together for a short time.
Aline in speaking of this time says, "I was very happy then, or
thought I was." The happiness did not last, for the couple were
arrested and Aline was consigned to the State Home. The man
escaped through connivance of the police, and took up his residence
in New York.

Aline's life in the Home was not a pleasant one. Used to
indulgence, she did not take kindly to orders. She was unruly
and impudent. After once working her way to the Honor Cottage
she became involved in some wrong doing, refused to admit herself
in the wrong, and was consigned to the department where unruly
girls are subjected to more stringent rules than the others. Here
she stayed for four years. She became despondent and ceased trying to improve. She chummed with the most immoral of the girls
and it was never possible to trust her outside.

As Aline neared her twenty-first birthday when she must necessarily be released, an effort was made by some of her friends to
open the way to establish her in life again, that the past might be
forgotten. Her heart was touched and she was influenced to wish
to lead a virtuous life. In fact, she expressed herself as willing to
do all in her power to re-establish herself in the world. She was
now ready to give up her former love, though for a long time she
had cherished dreams of the happiness she had enjoyed. Her lover,
Joe Burgess, had written occasional letters from time to time after
Aline had first been consigned to the Home, but gradually his
interest had died out. The fear on the part of her relatives was that
she would return to Joe as soon as she was released. That fear
proved groundless, yet to prevent any possibility of this occurring,
a place was found for Aline at some distance from her former
home, in the household of a woman of wealth where the girl
could work her way and even go on with the training of her voice.
For she had a good voice, and in the Home she had been given
opportunity to develop it. It was thought that with such an
incentive she would become ambitious for herself. All went well for
a while. The housekeeper, Mrs. Stoneman, who had charge of the
establishment in its owner's absence, seemed a good-natured, kindly
personage and made things easy for Aline in every way. She was
introduced to the young people of the neighborhood and had every
privilege in the house that a girl could be granted. She was invited
to sing at entertainments and was taken out to parties. Aline
writes very happily of this period: "I have a very nice home and I
can have anything I want. No one ever quarrels or fusses and no
one nags at you. I feel sorry for the other girls at the Home. It's
no use telling them to behave because I know how hard it is when
some one always finds fault with you. I often wonder how I stood
those four years caged up like some wild beast. I couldn't help
being ungracious sometimes. Why don't the people up here say
those things about me? I wish you could hear some of the nice
things they say. I am not telling you this out of conceit. I only
want you to know that the people up here have an entirely different
opinion of me. To them I am dear and sweet and nice." And this
was true. Aline had made a very favorable impression upon the
people of the place.

The first discordant note was sounded, however, when Aline
began to make an equally favorable impression upon the boys of the
town. In ten days she writes as follows: "You said I should make
as many friends as I could. Did you mean only among my own
sex? There are many nice boys that go to school here. I know
some of them and I like them very much. Well, tonight one of the
girls and I went walking. Not very far from the house we met this
boy and we asked him to walk with us. When we returned a lady
told me that Mrs. Stoneman had been looking for me. Well, I got a
lecture. She told me that I was in her care and that I wasn't to go
with any men. ... I am through with her. I will do what
she tells me to do but that is all. Will you write and tell me what
to do?"

Mrs. Stoneman's point of view appeared shortly in a long letter
as to Aline's character. She wrote as follows: "Three weeks have
passed since Aline came to us. She is a splendid worker, is quick
and thorough and seems interested enough to do her work well.
But she has other qualities that seem to be irrepressible and that
make her an undesirable person in the house. She completely loses
her head over men and over boys even of fifteen years." Various
details of Aline's misconduct were described in full, and her own
treatment of the situation outlined. This was, in brief, to forbid
absolutely any communication between Aline and the young men of
the town. A letter sent to Aline with the intent to help her understand the world's point of view met with this response: "Conventionality! I can lead the respectable life but as to the conventional?
well, I hate convention. Isn't it better to be the sweet, true,
natural self? What does conventionality do? Doesn't it sometimes
make life a lie? Sweetness and truth don't belong to convention.
I don't know how you think but that is what I think and know.
Convention and hypocrisy belong together. It has been proved.
If all the world were against me I would stick to what I think is
nght. ... If a wealthy society woman receives men into her
house and has wrong intercourse with them the world hasn't anything to say against it. If a common, everyday girl speaks to men,
perhaps walks a little way with them, acts in a decent, respectable
way the world condemns such a woman. Is that fair? Is that
justice? What do you call that? . . . What is a hypocrite?
Some people pretend to be so good, so perfect, and all that. Are
they? Their minds might be polluted and their bodies too, but
they are so perfect in hypocrisy that they deceive everybody. I
am not pretending to be good, but I know that I have a wholesome
mind and body. Do you understand me a little better now? or
are things more complicated than they were before?"

Matters went from bad to worse. Mrs. Stoneman did not
understand how to restrain Aline, and the girl rebelled under her
attempts. To Mrs. Stoneman Aline seemed defective in self-control
and destined to become a willing victim of prostitution, while Aline's
view of her own attitude was far different. She says: "Of course
I am fond of the boys. I like all men, but I don't like any of them
enough to ever marry them or let anything serious happen. Why
I am so fond of them no one understands. I only know that. I can
trust men. You said something about flirting one time. To be
called a flirt, I have to be taught how to flirt first. That is an art
I have never learned. Do you believe me? If I flirted I'd be less
attractive."

Aline was told that she should do her best to please Mrs. Stoneman or that she could stay in that place no longer. She dreaded the
poverty and bareness of her own home, so for a time she retracted
from her defiant attitude and gave up her male acquaintances.
She wrote very lovingly and tried honestly to improve herself. At
the end of a letter was the following: "I am trying to study physics
and I am getting to be quite friendly with the stars?astronomy,
you know. I will be smart after a while. Don't you think so?
Good-night. Love, love, love. Yours, Aline."

The good mood did not last long, for soon there came a letter
from Mrs. Stoneman: "There have been developments in Aline's
case the past week which make it impossible for her to stay here.
As I told you she is defective in self-control, which means that she
must be watched every minute. She is not to be trusted to look
after herself. I am thinking of the time when Miss Rochester (the
owner of the establishment) will take up the housekeeping as she
will when I go away for a change and rest. She will be wholly
unable to cope with the problem. I have seen enough of Aline to
be quite certain that she will go into an immoral life as soon as she
has control of herself. She might not if she were fifteen or sixteen
years old, but she is too old and too far gone to do anything for
herself." In another letter: "Aline was not restrained until she
persisted in doing the things that could not be done here. The
school boy in question is only fifteen years old and was perfectly
bewitched. It upset his school work. The principal of the school
said to stop it for his sake. There was nothing else to do. Aline is
like a child. She has only the one idea, that is, to be with the
opposite sex. There are other instances with other young men.
She .embraced the school boy with kisses from which he tried to get
away. The Irishman she let kiss her on the cheek. Yesterday
Aline received a letter from 'Joe' which made her very happy. I
wish that you would plan for Aline to go from here as soon as you
receive this."

Another appeal to Aline helped the situation for a while. She
wrote: "Mrs. Stoneman told me this morning that I was very good
this week. She hasn't said anything to me about leaving, but if
she tells you again that she wants me to go, of course I will have to.
I have no wish to lead the old life. My tastes are entirely different.
I am going home to visit sometimes, but that doesn't mean that I'll
stay. If I did stay I wouldn't have to go back to Joe, would I?
If he were a single man, perhaps I could care for him again, but as
it is, I can't. It will be many, many years before I will ever love
another man. I told you that I like the boys, and I do, but I
couldn't take any of them nearer to my heart. I am set on becoming a singer and I won't have any peace until I begin my music
lessons again. I never thought so much of my voice, but I do now,
because I have made so many people happy with it. I sang for a
few old ladies, an invalid, and different people that came to the
house. Oh! they are all so pleased and it makes me very happy. I
think every thing will be all right now. Mrs. Stoneman is very nice
to me and she always treats me very kindly. She only has one fault.
She seems to have an idea that women ought to have all rights and
that women oughtn't to associate with men. She knows in her
heart that I haven't done any wrong."

This assumed goodness did not last long, and finally Aline was
sent away. She was soon to be twenty-one, showed no inclination to
conform to conventional standards, and accordingly was allowed to
go home. She showed by her attitude, however, that in her heart
she was ashamed and chagrined at her failure. After going home
she wrote back: "I am happy because I am making some one else
happy." She wrote again: "I have seen Joe Burgess and talked to
him. I can have him at my feet any moment?if I wanted him.

But you and all the rest can set your minds perfectly at ease?I
don't want him. Up in Tarrytown I had a nice time with the boys,
in the right way, because they were innocent (at least the ones I
knew) and I was too, but down here?I laugh at all men. Did you
know I've met the right one? Home, even though it isn't beautiful
and as I am used to, is home. I would rather be unhappy here than
unhappy among strangers. I am free here at any rate." In
another letter she says: "The people connected in any way with the
law always stoop to falsehood. I know it because I can prove it."
Again: "I am just beginning to live. I love life now, and I am
enjoying it too. It won't be a long life, and?so why not enjoy the
little I have before me? "

This case may show nothing unusual, but a combination of
certain traits of character and motives that make for an undesirable
element in a community: hatred of poverty, love of luxury, love of
freedom, desire to be admired by men, the feeling of being entitled
to the best the world can give in the way of enjoyment; added to
this the daily drill in vicious thought that is part of an institution
life where girls of the lowest type are housed together; and a feeling
of injustice,?of having been robbed by society of part of the young
life that is the birthright of every one. What influence can overcome the effect of this combination of early lack of training and bad
environment, together with four years of institution life which
certainly did not prove to be uplifting?

Such was the unfortunate combination of circumstances that
resulted in embittering and hardening a girl who had ability and
intelligence which perhaps might have been saved to the world.
To allow this ability and intelligence to be wasted, is false economy.
Yet it can hardly be said that Aline was subjected to unreasonably
cruel treatment either in the institution where she was confined or
in the home where she was sent, for there she was welcomed and
given every opportunity to rise if she had been able to profit by it.
But the question arises,?what shall society do with a girl of this
type? Can such a one be led to lead a reputable life? No institution in particular is in fault; the difficulty is more far-reaching.
Blame should rather be attached to existing social prejudices and
conventions. The fact that there is a prison reform movement
sweeping over the country indicates that the public conscience is
being awakened to a criticism of present methods of dealing with
wayward natures.

The result in this particular case was that Aline found employment near her home, and wrote of accepting the attentions of a man
whom she expected to marry. Later on she had changed her employment" and seemed to have a number of admirers. She is working out
her life problem in her own way. The final outcome,?who can tell?
