A Study in the Borderland of Morality
======================================

:Author:  Margaret Otis, Ph.D.
Indian Orchard, Mass.

In examining delinquent cases a psychologist is expected to
give an arbitrary answer to the question "Feebleminded or not?
Responsible or irresponsible?" Yet some of the most interesting
cases are those which cannot be classified. After reading Grasset's
Les Demi-fous and passing thence to the investigation of actual
cases, one is impressed with the truth that there are many borderline cases, so-called, individuals who may pass most tests, yet
may not be morally fully responsible, and may fail to maintain
themselves in any position in which they may be placed. Such
girls,?for the cases under present study are those of delinquent
girls,?may possess very attractive qualities and may appeal strongly
to philanthropist and reformer, and may encourage efforts to stimulate their development and to give them the moral training they lack
in the social standards generally accepted. Such a case is found in
the following history:

Lillian Blucher was the child of humble, yet fairly well-to-do
parents, of German parentage on her father's side and of French
on her mother's. Not much is known of her infancy, but she seemed
to have had average care and was trained in church going,?the
Lutheran church. Nor is much known about the father except that
he was intemperate and separated from his wife when Lillian was a
school girl. He disappeared later and no more was heard from him.
The child appreciated the difficulty in the home and suffered from
the disagreement of her parents. Her mother found her hard to
control, and a tendency to deceive, prominent in her after-career,
appeared early.

It was unfortunate for Lillian that her mother failed to obtain
a sympathetic knowledge of the young girl's needs. Obliged by her
husband's desertion to earn her own living and to care for her small
property, she was forced to be away from home much of the time
and her two children, Lillian and a boy, ran wild. At fourteen and
a half Lillian was already mature and attractive to the boys.
Developing early sexually, she felt the impulse to get away from
home influences that appears in many girls at puberty. And now it
was the traditional time for joining the church, and attendance on
a confirmation class became necessary. She was often absent from
class and deceived her mother as to her whereabouts. The mis(201)
chief that ruined her life was done, however, in the confirmation
class itself. The minister's son was also in the class and proved a
charming companion. Lillian grew more regular in attendance
after he had walked home with her one time, and they had many
whispered conferences in the intervals of the minister's explanations.
She met him often outside and at his home, notwithstanding her
mother's objections, for instinctively the mother felt that he would
not do well by her girl. Her fears were realized when one evening,
on the impulse of the moment he asked the girl to go off with him,
and in a manner perfectly characteristic of her nature, without
reflection she went. For a time she was very happy, or thought she
was, for was it not a union of souls, a true marriage, as her beloved
often asserted? Indeed, he told her that they were married and she
believed him.

This blissful experience lasted one month, and then came disillusionment. Suffice it to say that not long after she was committed to a Home for delinquent girls on a complaint from her
mother, pronounced incorrigible by the judge.

Life hereafter was somewhat different from the "true soul"
life she had just experienced. Rebellious at first, she subsided
gradually into the institutional routine, although at times she
would have outbreaks and strike at officers like an angry child.
Opinions differed greatly as to Lillian's character. Attractive,
refined, with artistic tastes, she seemed to the outward eye all that
could be desired in any girl. On the other hand she was quick to
pick up silliness, and got in with the "fast set" of the Home. There
are degrees of badness even in a Home. She never hesitated about
doing things "on the sly," although she was usually found out and
punished for all she did.

On account of her artistic tastes and lack of physical strength
for hard work, a place was found for her as lady's maid in a home
where the lady of the house took a definite interest in her and gave
her an opportunity to attend an art school evenings. She did
exceedingly well with this work and her mistress became very fond
of her. Yet her double nature appeared in full strength here. She
had such a fun-loving nature that "being good all day" was an
unnatural and too artificial a life. Fun "on the side" there always is
in plenty for those who know how. "Tom" appeared on her horizon
and her "soul life" with him became an important episode. "Tom"
was a traveling man and ready for an "affair". He really became
passionately devoted to the girl. He wrote her many letters and
sent his picture. In one letter he said: "Oh, Lillian darling, I canTHE BORDERLAND OF MORALITY. 203
not express to you what joy it gave me to be with you this afternoon, and how I enjoyed every minute of it! You were so sweet
with me and are such a little sunbeam for company." This was
the way she affected most men. They saw not the evil nature in
her that her mother did, nor the weakmindedness that was the
probation officer's view of her condition. "A sweet, lovable girlie"
was the verdict of her friends.

But forbidden fruits bring results not desired. She was found
out, and also detected in appearing at a party in her mistress's best
gown. She even had been impersonating her mistress and had
written letters in her name, little actress that she was! She was
returned to the Home in disgrace. Her mistress was naturally disgusted with her lack of gratitude and her inability to walk the
narrow path. The girl, when questioned later about these experiences seemed to consider them as merely mischievous escapades.
Cannot many a reputable woman remember many school girl pranks,
easily forgiven by kind parents?

Back in the Home she lost ambition and drifted into the worst
that was offered. Sex nature, defrauded, must have an outlet,
and love affairs among the girls were rampant. Yes, she loved a
colored girl named Imogen. A large number of love notes were
discovered. "Dear, darling Imogen,?If all the world were as
good, and kind, and true as you, I should not be writing this letter.
Dear Imogen, if I could tell you how I love you, and how sorry I am
to fall in your opinion, as I surely shall when you hear what has
happened. Imogen, sometimes when you pray, remember Birdie,
won't you? She needs your prayers so much, for she cannot pray
herself. I do not want to be wholly bad, and I have faith that God
will hear you. ... I will never leave you. One reason why I
will not leave you is because I love you, and I know if I go out, I
will only come back again to you. Yours forever, Birdie Hop-o-mythumb." "To my own Imogen to the end,?Here I am writing my
eyes out and it's moonlight. But what's the difference? I'd go
through fire for you, honest, kid, I would, and you know that.
Could it be true that you love me! Oh, how I wish it was true!
Could there be a happier girl in all this world? Oh, I should say not.
Good-night, my darling, sweet dreams! I'll lay awake and think
about you. Birdie." "Imogen, my beloved,?Be true to me, my
darling, and let my love abide with you, forever and ever, amen.
I'm making something for your birthday. What day is it? Well,
dearest, I guess you are sick of looking at my scribbling. I must
close. With true love. Birdie."

Not only was she affected in this romantic way toward Imogen,
but she soon became involved in an affair with a white girl, Nellie.
Indeed, she had the faculty of winning the love of many, and was
the recipient of countless notes and gifts. She was distinctly a
leader among the girls and the most popular girl in the school. Thus
she became involved in nearly all the mischief that was at hand, and
consequently was not popular with the officers.

So it came about that a psychological study of her case was
recommended. She stood 11-2 by the Binet test. The three questions missed were the dissected sentences in 11, and the long sentence and the problems in 12. In the association test she did very
well, but showed some inclination to repeat the stimulus before
giving the reaction word. Her reaction time was somewhat slow.
Otherwise she seemed perfectly normal. She had practically completed a grammar school education, could write a good hand, but
was quite careless and inaccurate in any book-work assigned. She
was not a very good speller, made mistakes in short common words,
and often made mistakes in English. As an experiment she was
tried in stenography and type-writing. She could do good work on
the type-writer when she tried, and in stenography she could learn
when it was merely copying and memorizing. She was very careless
and inaccurate in this also, and showed a tendency to deceive as to
the time spent on her lesson. When she was asked to learn rules,
she could memorize, but was troubled when asked to apply rules to
particular cases, or to explain why a particular case came under
some rule. That is, the application of a general principle to a
particular case seemed beyond her level of intelligence.

The abnormality in Lillian seemed to consist of the perverse
homo-sexual tendency, so that a study of her case by other means
than tests seemed advisable. She was found to be very suggestible,
and an attempt was made to help her by suggestion. She could
be easily hypnotized, so easily that it indicated a somewhat neurotic
constitution. She owned up to having "bad dreams" as she called
them. The danger of indulging in the love affairs with the girls
had been explained to her and she seemed to understand and to wish
to overcome the evil tendencies within her. Indeed, she expressed
herself as wishing to lead a perfect life. "Perfection" seemed her
ideal, and she worried over her small misdemeanors. In these moods
she would impress her friends as a very saint-like character. One
could hardly believe that she had ever been guilty of any wrong.
She loved to be praised and had the ability of representing her
actions in the best possible light, for that is the kindest way to
regard what some would say were absolute falsehoods as to things
that had happened. Most discouraging was this very characteristic,
for it necessitated a double life. At the same time she was an ardent
soul endeavoring to reform, and yet on the side she was a jolly good
fellow with her "pals". Suggestive treatment was more effective
in helping her to overcome her sexual tendencies than it was in
helping her to be truthful. Truthful she simply could not be. She
was also lacking in the ability to keep a definite end in view. Continuity of thought and purpose is not easy to acquire. She soon lost
interest in her short-hand lessons, had become involved in another
love affair, this time with an English girl just admitted to the Home,
Anna Hobs. Lillian was quite carried away with her affection for
this girl and deception was again necessary to satisfy her love and
at the same time to "keep in" with her teacher.

Yet one cannot say that this deceitfulness came from an utterly
corrupt nature, for she did honestly try to improve herself, as was
shown by what she wrote in a composition book that was given her
for the writing of verses and mottoes of the school work. This book
she used also as a diary and often wrote out her own thoughts, and
sometimes even wrote out her dreams. "I stayed after school today
and had an hour talk with my teacher. I think her talks do me
more good than the studying I do. Oh! I do wonder why I cannot get my short-hand lessons. I try, but it seems I cannot." "I
received a letter from Nellie on the five o'clock recess. I do not
know if her letter had anything to do with my bad dreams or not.
I had a very bad dream and when I was dreaming it I was saying
to myself: 'I must have bad dreams,' I fought with them and tried
not to think of them. I got up and exercised and felt better when
I went to bed again. I tried to think some good thoughts. While
I was trying to think the good thoughts, the bad thoughts tried to
come in and I would not let them. I fell asleep very soon and
dreamed the same thing over again, and about the snakes twisting
themselves about me. One snake had a red eye and the other a
green, and held something very bright in its mouth. It looked like
a diamond or something silver, and their eyes sparkled like costly
gems. I was pulling myself away from them, but it seemed the
more I pulled, the more it came about me. It was like fighting with
the devil himself." Some days she had very good success in her
endeavors to do what was right. "Thursday. Got up early, took
my cold bath, took my physical culture, went to the office feeling
more ready for work than ever. I am still trying to be a better
girl in every way. I have held my tongue tight between my teeth
when I was tempted to be .saucy. I have tried my best to-day and
feel very satisfied. Had no dream."

The bad dreams stopped completely for awhile and Lillian
showed herself a model in conduct. All might have ended smoothly
had it not been that her love for Anna Hobs gained the upper hand.
She gradually came to neglect all her duties for the chance of seeing
and speaking to her darling. They wrote to each other, of course,
and exchanged locks of hair. There was nothing Lillian would not
do for Anna. This interest speedily brought her into conflict with
the officers. A dispute arose as to her receiving a note. She saw
the note in the officer's hand. It was to her from Anna. She completely lost control of herself, flew at the officer and struck her.
This episode ended Lillian's career at the Home. A place was found
for her outside and she is still trying "to do her best."
After she had gone a diary was found which she had never
shown to any one, which contained some of her most cherished
thoughts. A few extracts may throw some light on the undercurrent of emotion that had influenced her conduct. "It is said
that time heals every thing. I have been waiting to see if it were
so. Day by day my loss is greater, day by day my grief becomes
more, difficult to bear. I try to study and type-write. I read
sometimes, or pretend to. I sit for hours with the open book before
me, and never see a line printed there. 0 Love, if I could only
dream to-night in the world with you. ... I can be strong
because I have known you. I can have courage because you were
brave. I can be true because you were true. I can be tender
because I love you. At last I understand. It is passion that cries
out for continual assurance, for fresh sacrifices, for new proof. Love
needs nothing but itself. Love can wait until life comes to its end,
and trust to eternity, because it is of God. Good night, dear book
to whom I tell my troubles." And again: "If Tom had only done
as I asked him to, to tell the superintendent all, but no, he wanted
everything done on the sly. Why should I think of him now?
It must be because I care too. Ah! Yes. Our memory cannot
be washed out, but our sins can."

It may, perhaps, be argued that this character presents
nothing out of the ordinary, an emotional, impressionable girl, not
intellectual, but artistically inclined. With great initiative and
love of good times, she easily won the love of all about her. In a
happy home, sheltered from temptation, not required to meet
responsibilities, but made the recipient of love and devotion, would
she not pass for a normal girl? Would she not be, not only popular
with her friends, but esteemed and respected? Are there not many
such who are not called upon to brave life's storms? It is true that
left to herself, she would fall a prey to the first temptation, but with
a strong personality to depend upon ahd guide her, either a mother
or a husband, she would be a loving, capable woman. Her faults
were many. But is not the view point possible that it is normal to
lie, to steal, and to love? Perfectly normal if these things are done
to one's own advantage, but it is the sign of a weak mind when one
acts in such a way that injury to one's self is sure to follow. We
may, then, judge the abnormality in this case to be the easy yielding to impulse and the preference of the immediate to the far
distant good.
