The Exceptional Child in School
================================

:Author:  A. W. Trettien, Ph.D.,
University of Kansas.

In March, 1913, the parents of a nine year old lad brought him to
the office of the University of Kansas for physical and psychological
examination. To all external appearances the boy was normal.
He was of average size, and was well built; his senses appeared to be
normal; his motor control was good and he possessed a good stock
of common sense. Yet he had made very little progress in school
work. He knew some of his letters, and a small number of words
that he spelled out laboriously. He took little interest in school
work in general, and as a consequence he was inattentive, mischievous, and occasionally "ugly" toward the teacher and his parents.
At times he would sit for an hour in a passive or dreaming attitude,
paying no attention to what was going on about him.

He was fond of playing out of doors, riding a pony, and taking
hikes with the boy scouts. Here he showed considerable initiative
and intelligence. He was not reliable in attending to simple duties
about the home. On the contrary he was lazy, forgetful, inattentive,
untruthful and he did not hesitate to protect himself by the most
exaggerated falsehoods. This was the report of the parents, who
are intelligent and thrifty people. They had lived upon a farm
where the boy had spent most of his life. The father confessed
that he was not apt at figures and did not enjoy study.

A careful physical examination of the boy revealed no physical
defects nor abnormalities. He ate sparingly; his general metabolism
appeared rather slow. The mental tests, using the Binet scale,
placed the lad at seven years. His perceptions within the narrow
and immediate circle of his interests were accurate but rather sluggish. His power of attention was limited, and it required a
distinct and strong stimulus to awaken him to action. His imagery
when confined to his interests was accurate. He was very slow to
perceive word forms and to remember them. He spelled out his
words when trying to read, but understood little that he himself
read, although he enjoyed being read to.

Learning to spell words appeared to be entirely beyond his powers
of accomplishment. This in brief was the lad's condition when he
was presented in the spring of 1913. His disposition was growing
worse, due to uncontrolled habits and new undirected impulses.
(48)
THE EXCEPTIONAL CHILD IN SCHOOL. 49
What was this boy's trouble? In infancy the lad had suffered
from an attack of high fever which without doubt had affected his
neural reactions. He became less active and as a consequence he
became an over-indulged and wilful child at home. Instead of being
stimulated to action he was allowed to form the habit of passing off
into somnambulistic states for half an hour at a time. When
he became old enough, he was sent to a rural school where he
learned some of his letters which had no meaning for him and
also to spell out a few words by the letter method. When he
was not awake and in mischief, he was day-dreaming and accomplishing nothing. At home his mother read and told him stories from
which he learned and remembered many facts.
Beginning in October, 1913, the boy was given a special course
of instruction for one half hour daily, in addition to continuing his
attendance in the city schools. At first he would forget to keep his
appointments, or to bring his book. He would forget his assignment
and remember little of what he had been taught on the previous day.
After carefully diagnosing the case the following line of training was
undertaken with the results stated.

Before beginning his study he was put through a rapid and
vigorous calisthenic drill; this improved his circulation and caused
him to concentrate his attention to receive and to execute commands.
The second step consisted in reading to him a simple story to get
the thought. He was then given a thorough training in learning
to read, beginning with concentration of attention, then passing to
the sentence, the word, and finally the spelling methods. He made
for himself a dictionary containing the words that he had learned
to spell. In every case in reading or spelling he was kept mentally
alert in order to make him work with concentrated and maximum
attention and, if possible, with interest, stopping before fatigue set
in. In every case an effort was made to prevent mental confusion.
At the close of the lesson a definite command for the next day's
assignment was given, to come at a certain hour, to bring the required
book or other material, and in only one instance did he fail to
remember the suggestion given. There were times when other
interests with his companions might have caused him to forget?but
at the appointed hour, rain or shine, he appeared for his lesson.
With what results? After five months the boy can read understandingly in the third reader and is doing passing third grade work.
One day he appeared and was given the following sentence
to be written from dictation: "I would go down town if I could."
He had previously learned to spell every word used. After listening
to the dictation he wrote, "I wod go don ton if I cod." He had
relapsed into the old habit of inactivity. He was taken from his
desk and put through the course of rapid and vigorous physical
exercise, and then given the command to spell all the words correctly.
After that the original sentence was dictated and he wrote?"I
would go down town if I could." He has written very creditable
letters at home and has brought them to his lesson.
The method of procedure with this lad is simple indeed:

1. Physical exercise sufficient to stimulate a normal circulation,
that will admit of
2. A maximum power of attention to the matter at hand, and a
review with interest and profit of the impressions that have been
clearly made.
3. Applying the material that has been mastered to his life
interests as in the case of making the dictionary and the letter
writing, the reading of the scout rules, etc.

4. Giving the first stimulus with such accuracy and clearness
that the impression may become permanent in his experience.
5. By suggestion inspiring the response to action which breaks
the old habits and forms new modes of reaction.
6. Arousing by personality his confidence and a desire for the
work to be accomplished.

The boy had become the victim of a system which gives a
teacher thirty pupils, without the resources to meet individual
needs. No doubt she was doing her best, but he was losing out
before he had even begun to master the conventional tools of modern
society. With the growth of the lad's knowledge and the development of his mind, he is now mastering his impulses and is beginning
to be a more congenial companion.

Every community in the land has a group of children who may
be represented by this boy. Backward in school, with fair ability
but anti-social in many of their instincts, they are growing up to
form a large class of dangerous members of society. As consulting
psychologist of the Boys' Industrial School of Topeka for the last
three years, I found that 86 per cent of the boys examined were
from one to seven years retarded in their mentality, due to various
causes,?disease, malnutrition, unhygienic social and home conditions, or early home and school neglect. It is variously estimated
that about 5 per cent of the children in the average community are
of this type of arrested development. These grow to maturity and
fill the ranks of paupers, tramps and criminals. The schools are
doing very little for them.

In the state of Kansas the appropriations called for by the
institutions of charity and correction and the hospitals for the infirm
in 1912-14 amounted to nearly four million dollars as compared with
three millions for the support of the higher educational institutions
in the same period. In the light of this illustration, two steps are
necessary to increase the efficiency of our public school system:
Every community needs the services of a trained psychologist
for at least part time, to make examinations and tests of the exceptional child, and to advise with parents and teachers regarding the
best methods of training.

Within every graded school system there should be an ungraded
class taught by specially trained teachers, to which this group of
exceptional children may be sent. Every child should here receive
the training which will meet his individual needs. With what results?
Many of these unfortunate children may be saved to the commonwealth, and they will become an asset to the state instead of a
liability; citizens instead of wards.