Manual of Mental and Physical Tests
====================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM
:Author:  Guy Montrose Whipple, Ph.D.
Ed. 2. Part I, Simpler Processes. Baltimore: Warwick and York, 1914.
Pp. xvi+365.

In the preparation of this edition, Professor Whipple has followed a plan
similar to that of the previous one. His aim has not been to make a complete
compilation of tests, but to present those which seem to offer most promising
results. Owing to the growing interest in the formulation of tests, the material
to be presented is much more extensive and more detailed elucidation is essential.
These two factors have led to a great increase in the bulk of this work, necessitating its publication in two volumes. The first volume includes the methods of
measurement and the treatment of mathematical results, the tests of anthropometry and motor ability, as well as the tests of sensory acuity. When published,
the second volume is to contain tests of the more complex processes such as
imagination, general intelligence, etc.

The first volume is divided into seven chapters, the last four of which deal
only with tests. Chapter I is a statement of the nature and purpose of mental
tests, and the attempt is made to differentiate between the research-experiment
and a test. The procedure of the two may be identical, the only difference being
one of aim. The research-experiment is more or less theoretical, aiming to
discover new facts and leading to the formulation of laws, while the test is practical, attempting to determine present mental status and possibilities for the
future. The second chapter refers to the general rules for the carrying on of
tests, and besides insisting on rigidly standardized conditions, emphasizes the
desirability of using a number of tests, giving repetitions of those used, and having
them answered orally rather than by writing. In the third chapter a discussion
is presented which unfortunately is too often disregarded by those who use
tests, and by those who attempt to standardize them. With all the discussion
of general intelligence that we have had, few psychologists have recognized
the necessity or value of those measures of variability and correlation. To the
reviewer it seems certain that the most satisfactory way to ascertain whether
or not there is such a thing as general intelligence is to obtain the coefficient of
correlation for the results of an extended series of tests on a large number of
individuals. By the size and sign of this coefficient we should be able to say
definitely whether with a high degree of ability in one test there is a corresponding
ability in all other tests. Commendation is due the author of this work for the
presentation of these methods, and the only suggestion to be offered is that more
space should be given to their elucidation.

The remaining chapters of the volume deal with the anthropometric tests,
tests of physical and motor capacity, of sensory acuity, and of attention and
perception. As the author states, not all the tests intended to determine the
efficiency of these functions are included here, but only those are selected which
seem to promise most satisfactory results. The presentation of each test includes
a description of the necessary apparatus, the method of procedure in the applica(208)
tion of the test, the treatment of the data, with results and standards obtained
by various investigators and whatever conclusions may be drawn in reference
to the differences in mental status among the various people tested. Such a
statement of standards and conclusions is very desirable for those who are looking
up the development and value of a test, and the bibliography which has been
extended and brought up to date makes it possible to verify and obtain in detail
ali the necessarv material.
David Mitchell.
