Wider Use of the School Plant
==============================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
:Author: Clarence Arthur Perry, with an introduction by .Lutner liaisey Uulick, JVL.JD. JNew York: Charities
Publication Committee, 1910. Pp. xiv. + 423.

By "wider use of the school plant," Mr. Perry means the use of
school buildings and equipment outside of the regular day-school hours,
for the benefit of a larger part of the community than that which includes only the children of school age. IIow "wide" the use may be, is
seen by a glance at some of Mr. Perry's chapter headings,?Evening
Schools, Vacation Schools, School Playgrounds, Public Lectures
and Entertainments, Evening Recreation Centres, Social Centres, Organized Athletics, and lastly, Social Beterment.
Social betterment, of course, is the real purpose of this book, as of
other books published by the Russell Sage Foundation. It is the goal
of all our present philanthropic endeavors. But one must be clear about
the kind of social betterment which is intended. The community is not
to take its bettering as children take cod liver oil and other disagreeable
things that are good for them. Just what is to be aimed at may be best
understood from the words of Mr. Edward J. Ward, the man who organized the social centres in Rochester so well and securely that they stand
as models for the nation:

"The Social Centre was not to take the place of any existing institution; it was not to be a charitable medium for the service particularly
of the poor; it was not to be a new kind of evening school; it was not to
take the place of any church or other institution of moral uplift; it was
not to serve simply as an 'Improvement Association' by which the people
in one community should seek only the welfare of their district; it was
not to be a 'Civic Reform' organization, pledged to some change in city
or state or national administration; it was just to be the restoration to
its true place in social life of that most American of all institutions, the
Public School Center, in order that through this extended use of the
school building might be developed, in the midst of our complex life, the
community interest, the neighborly spirit, the democracy that we knew
before we came to the city."

To all those who are engaged in extending the usefulness of school
property,?and to those whose interest is leading them to undertake
pioneer work in this direction, Mr. Perry's book can be of practical assistance. It is full of definite ideas as to programme and schedules of
expense involved, and gives in well digested form the experience of the
most successful leaders of the movement. As Dr Gulick remarks in the
brief introduction which he contributes to the volume: "Mr. Perry has
deliberately selected the most successful aspects of the work in all parts
of the country. He has not portrayed the failures?and there have been
many; he has not spent time in magnifying the difficulties?although
they are real. All the illustrations represent actual undertakings, and
being the best in each field, they may give the general reader the impression that the battle has already been won, that all obstacles to the
wider use have been removed. The truth, however, is quite otherwise.
While based entirely upon facts, the account does not purport to show
the conditions existing in the average community."

The usefulness of this book is enhanced by a good index,?a feature
too often lacking in otherwise promising works,?and by full and exact
bibliographical references to the current literature. An abundance of
photographic illustrations, admirable presswork, and an appropriate binding complete the general satisfaction which Mr. Perry's book conveys
to the reader. A. T.
