Educational Aspects of Christian Science
========================================= 

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1911, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. V, No. 2. April 15, 1911.
:Author: Charles Keen Taylor,
Philadelphia, Pa.

A few years ago, in my capacity of school-teacher, I endeavored to become acquainted with as many kinds of schools as
possible. Eive years were spent in this work, and during that
time I taught in quite a number of schools in widely separated
places, the object being to obtain a knowledge of boy-school problems, as well as boy problems, at first hand. Among the opportunities that presented themselves was one to teach in a boarding
school in New England, owned and managed by Christian Scientists. At that time I knew very little about this sect or its beliefs,
and although fairly unbiased, thought the chance too good to be
neglected. I therefore became a member of the faculty of this
school, remaining there for a full scholastic year.

A brief description of the institution may not be without
interest. Although the fees charged by the school were but six
hundred dollars per annum, the equipment was superior to that
of other schools whose fees are far larger. The dormitories were
comfortable and excellent in every way, the table was beyond
reproach, and the school building containing the class rooms,
although an inexpensive affar, was entirely adequate. As for the
actual teaching, the writer has found no better anywhere.
The school gave quite a little time to athletics, and possessed
a fine gymnasium in which basket-ball was played all winter.
There was no effort made at regular or systematic physical training, however, and there was no attempt to remedy by corrective
gymnastics such physical faults as the boys possessed. There were
no physical examinations of any kind whatsoever. In fact, there
was little care of the physical life of the boys except as regards
the elemental needs of sleep, food, warmth, and to some degree
at least, bodily cleanliness.

The school was beautifully situated on a high promontory
which was nearly surrounded by water. It was just far enough
away from a fair sized town to be convenient for the faculty, and
a little too convenient for the boys.

The faculty seemed to be an exceptionally able group of men.
Of these, three were Christian Scientists,?the headmaster, the
senior master, and the master in charge of the juniors. That only
three members were representatives of the faith of the school
seems surprising, but the fact is that college graduates were rather
scarce among the Christian Scientists, especially college graduates
who were able to teach any scientific subject, such as mathematics,
physics, or chemistry. The other members of the faculty represented a variety of religious beliefs, but in spite of this it was a
remarkably congenial body of men. They were all fond of their
work and obviously fond of boys, taking great personal interest in
their charges.

The method of management again was above reproach. The
custom in many well-known schools is to make the teachers feel
that they are employees, whose advice or criticism is neither requested nor desired. In this school, however, the headmaster
placed much power in the hands of the faculty members. They
met every week as a committee, of which the headmaster acted as
chairman, and any point concerning the boys could be discussed
and settled by a faculty vote, irrespective of the personal opinion
of the headmaster. He possessed the veto power, to be sure, but
I never knew him to use it. This policy gave each member an
extraordinarily personal interest in all that concerned the welfare
of the school, with the result that everything was admirably managed and the actual work of the teachers most effective and
successful.

The boys themselves, strange as it may at first appear, represented one class of society. They were all supposed to be "scientists" with but one exception (and he was expelled for smoking!).
Very few of the boys were sons of college men, and they were
nearly all representatives of the class which has recently come
into money and is not quite sure what to do about it. The boys
were mostly rough diamonds; they had money, sometimes a considerable amount of it, but it was evident that it had not been in the
family for any great length of time. They were of ages ranging
from ten to twenty years, and of all grades of mentality from the
mentally brilliant and morally excellent, to the imbecile and moral
pervert.
"But what," you ask, "are moral perverts and imbeciles doing
in a private boarding school which charges six hundred dollars
per annum?" Well, you see, this is in keeping with the other
fact mentioned a while ago,?the fact of there being no physical
examinations. The pure Christian Scientist can not recognize
any physical deficiency. Physical deficiencies are "illusions of
mortal mind." How impossible it would be, then, for a Christian
Scientist to point out to a boy the latter^ physical deficiencies!Imbecility and moral perversion, of course, relate to physical infirmities,?or at least so the Philistines think,?but no true Christian Scientist could honestly and consistently think so, much less
bar a boy from a school on account of them. The management
may have had its doubts, when it thought of some of the characteristics of several of the boys, but if these doubts existed, they
were never expressed. That these defectives did a vast amount
of damage among the other boys there can be no question, but of
that later.

The first boy with whom I became acquainted was at that
time not quite fifteen years old, and attracted my attention about
the second week of the school year. I noticed that he seemed
lonely and melancholy, that he was thin and hollow-chested, and
that he seemed physically unable to take part in the play of boys
of his own age. The boy's friendship was gained mainly through
taking him for a walk to town and back. On the way he became
quite confidential, asking me how it was that he had no endurance,
could not run more than a few steps without nearly falling, and
the like. I told him that, if he wished it, I would give him a
looking-over in an endeavor to find out what the trouble was, and
what to do about it. The boy was the son of a Christian Science
healer, but for the time being, at least, he seemed to think that
there was more in the purely physical side of the human make-up
than he had been taught to believe, and he declared his willingness
to do anything that would make him as strong as the other boys.
This talk was followed by a physical examination, which showed
the boy to be in wretched shape. For instance, his chest expansion
was a scant inch, whereas for his height and age it might well
have been four inches. He was given certain simple exercises
and directions as to his day-to-day programme, and he left the
room encouraged and resolved to carry out my instructions to the
letter.

That night, after the boys' bed-time, there was a knock on
my door, and the same boy came in. It seems that his confidence
had been fully gained, and that he wanted to tell something more,
but found it very difficult. After a while be plucked up courage
and told me tbe story of tbe last three years of bis life, and it
was one that haunted me for many days afterward, accustomed
though I was to such stories. The boy had never received the
smallest hint or warning concerning his body. No moral topic
that would have aided him had ever been touched upon, the result
being that when he came to know unclean boys, as all boys do at
some period of their lives, he fell an easy victim to their habits,
and by the time he was fourteen he had become acquainted with
the worst forms of vice by actual experience. Now he was nearly
fifteen, and already a physical wreck, all of which he was beginning to realize. He cried bitterly, and the burden of his cry was,
"If somebody had only told me!" But of course no one of his
faith would have told him. After he had fallen they might have
done a little, in a vague, impractical manner, but to have warned
him beforehand would have been to acknowledge a physical side
of life which has only an illusory- existence! The illusion nearly
ended this boy's career before it had well begun. Yet he had
strength of character remaining, and summoning this to his aid
and with the help of constant praise and encouragement he managed not only to break entirely with his ruinous ways, but to
become a strong boy physically and one of the best students in the
school.

When this boy found that he was winning his battle, he
passed the good word around to others who were in a similar state,
for there is a confederacy among boys so close that most of them
know the secrets of the others. As a result of this news-spreading,
perhaps a dozen boys in all came to me to talk over their failings,
physical and moral. The first one to come was a big fellow of
seventeen, whose mentality was of such a grade that he was classed
with eleven-year-old boys, for whom, by the way, ho was no match.
Some years before, he had ranked much higher, but lately had been
losing a grade a year. What was the underlying cause ? Nothing
of which a "scientist" would take cognizance. He had merely
wrecked his mind through immorality, and besides being a moral
pervert had become little more than an imbecile. Ho had his fits
of despair, in which he seemed to realize what he was and what
was ahead of him, and it was in one of these moments of realization that he came to me for help. Like the first boy, lie cried like
a ten-year-old, and moaned, "No one ever told me anything when
I was a kid." This case was the more terrible because I not only
felt impotent to help him, but there was the further knowledge
that this boy's presence in the sehool was a serious menace to the
other boys who were, as yet, uncorruptecL His momentary awakening passed, although other moments came and went, in which
the lad realized that the asylum was staring him in the face.
It was not pleasant to know that there were four other moral
imbeciles in that school, the youngest being fourteen years of age,
and the oldest twenty. This boy was the worst of the lot, but to
all intents and purposes there could not be any hope for a single
one of them outside of a special institution, and not a great deal
of hope even there. Meanwhile this pleasant five associated freely
with the other boys, large and small, with effects not to be described
or even imagined. I had some talk with all but one of the five,
and it was only the same story over and over,?they had been
given no knowledge, either at home or elsewhere, concerning the
temptations they were bound to meet, and of course no warning
of the consequences of giving way to these temptations.
Before Christmas several boys had come for help, and some
seemed to have begun life over again, but it was after the Christmas holidays that the climax came. A day or two after the
beginning of school a fine, tall, handsome boy of fourteen, who
had evidently heard that I had some knowledge of things physical,
came to me in great trouble. One can not detail the story: it is
enough to say that in the holidays some college freshmen had taken
the boy to a house of ill fame. It was a hard story for the boy to
tell, but it was harder to discover that the worst venereal disease
had made its appearance. And only fourteen years old! Not
such an exceptional case, however, as one might suppose. Up to
this time, knowing the feeling of the management upon such subjects, I had made no mention to the headmaster of the conditions
I had discovered, but with this boy the limit of endurance had
been reached. The headmaster was called and informed of the
presence of the much-dreaded disease. There is a comic side to
even serious things. The poor man evidently clean forgot that
disease is an illusion of mortal mind, for tlio youngster was
bundled out bag and baggage in a very short time, and all things
made clean after him. Then immortal "Science" resumed her
sway, and all went on as before, on the surface at least, although
doubtless there began to bo inward questionings, for I had given
some rather strong hints as to conditions among the other boys.
Shortly afterwards the whole thing came to a focus. I was
certain that there was a great deal of surreptitious drinking among
the older boys. Nothing was said, however, until one evening
when I was convinced that at least two older boys were in their
room, partly if not entirely intoxicated. The unfortunate headmaster was informed of the fact, and a speedy examination followed, in which the matter was proved beyond a doubt. Moreover,
words muttered by one of the boys who was the worse for wear,
indicated that they were not the only ones in the institution who
indulged now and then.

Things began to wake up. The entire faculty got together.
Boys were called in one at a time and put through a grilling
examination, which resulted in showing that nearly all of the older
boys had partaken of alcoholics while at the school, some doing
this habitually. The intense feeling aroused in the faculty over
this disclosure seemed to offer the psychological moment for further revelations. So the non-"scientific" members, who had been
informed concerning other conditions, drew up and presented a
paper on the amount of immorality then flourishing in the school,
and pointed out the fact that the boys were not altogether at fault,
because they had never received defensive education of any kind.
The lack of such training in the school was made the subject of
severe criticism, and there was a demand for a definite plan of
action, the carrying out of which would tend to help the boys who
had already become addicted to immoral practices, and pievent
from falling those who were yet clean,?by this time only a
minority of the scholastic body.

The senior master, really a very capable man, but an ardent
and consistent "scientist," made a terrible to-do over that paper,
but the need of some special work among the boys was so evident
and so firmly insisted upon, that the faculty finally came to an
unanimous agreement. The result was that the boys were separated into small groups, and a group was assigned to each master.
The fifteen-year-old boys fell to me. To these boys, carefully and
effectively, were given the elements of moral education which long
before they should have received from their parents. Searchlights
were turned upon all dark corners. Never was there such a housecleaning! Indeed, this work was so organized that it became a
part of the regular school work, and with splendid results, for
with the exception of the imbeciles already mentioned, from whom
little could be expected, there remained by the following spring
hardly a boy who had not returned to good moral habits.
Little more need be said, for I feel that my point has been
made clear. X offer no comment upon many obvious good points
contained in the Christian Science doctrines. I make no criticism
concerning this church or its general theories and beliefs, but I
have endeavored to show that, with children at least, the ignoring
of the physical side of life may have very serious results, for however adults may be able to theorize themselves into any state of
mind they please, such things are beyond the capabilities of children, whose characteristics are primarily physical, and who will
be certain to give way to the physical temptations inherent in all
men, unless these same natural impulses are trained and educated.
Science tells us that natural impulses unrestrained lead to license,
that suppressed, they lead to perversions, and that educated and
trained, they become necessary virtues. Christian Science says
otherwise, and for this reason, if for no other, severe condemnation
should be given to those Christian Science theories which are so
absolutely opposed to the simple, natural laws known to every
psychologist and every student of children.

Before closing, I am unable to resist relating a little incident
which occurred one afternoon and evening. Disease or illness,
remember, is an illusion of mortal mind, an imaginary idea to be
abolished by the mind itself. That grippe came into the school
and put a dozen boys and two healers,?who were faculty members,?on their backs, seemed to take nothing away from this
belief.

It seems that one small boy of eleven had purchased a cocoanut. His mother was paying the school a visit at the time. "Mrs.
Martin," I said, "are you aware that Tommy has just eaten an
entire cocoanut?" "Yes, aren't they nutritious!" said Mrs. Martin cheerfully. She, of course, was a "scientist." Tommy's room
was right opposite mine, and a door or two below was the room of
the master,?a "scientist" and a healer, as well as a reader in
their church,?who had charge of the juniors. At about eleven
o'clock that night, Tommy's door was heard to open, and Tommy's
feet went pattering to the door of Mr. Brown, the healer. Tommy
rapped on the door.

"Who's there ?" cried Mr. Brown, in a muffled voice. "Me?
Tommy?cocoanut!" came the incoherent reply. Mr. Brown was
a healer, and a reader, but ho was also a man experienced with
children. "Don't come in here, Tommy!" cried he, "don't come
in here!" But woe, alas! Tommy did go in and rushed in his
agony to the bedside of the unfortunate Brown. What went on
beggars description. Finally they got the lights on, and voices in
evident anguish were dolefully upraised.

After a while Mr. Brown said, with tears in his voice, "But
where was your Science, Tommy, where was your Science ?" But
the Science wasn't any match for that cocoanut!
