Retardation Statistics from the Smaller Minnesota Towns
========================================================

:Author: Fkeeman E. Ltjeton,
Superintendent of City Schools, Anoka, Minnesota.

The statistics here brought together were gathered, for the
most part, in two separate investigations. One, relating principally to retardation in all its aspects, was conducted under the
auspices of the Minnesota Psychological Conference. The
other, concerning itself mainly with the first year of retardation
or with "repeaters," was made at the request of the Associated
School Boards of Minnesota.

The Schools Studied.

The schools contributing the data on retardation proper are
fifty-five of the smaller systems of the state. Each maintains a
high school, known as a "state high school" owing to the fact that
they are carefully inspected and listed with the State High School
Board for a large yearly grant, direct from the treasury. They
are, therefore, schools that are kept at the highest state of efficiency
possible under present conditions.

Only Grade Pupils Considered.

Only the pupils in the grades below the high school are here
considered, for several reasons. First, the high school students
are invariably promoted by subjects, hence accurate statistics as
to retardation among them, in the usual sense of the term, cannot
be obtained. Then again, with the eighth grade once passed, and
often earlier, the most retarded pupils, being safely beyond the
compelling influences of the truancy law, or of social opinion,
quickly drop out of school, and the problem of retardation becomes
so confused with the problem of elimination, as to make the value
of the figures doubtful.

A State-Wide Study.

The schools studied were well distributed over the state so
as to embrace every variety of conditions affecting size, location,
and environment, and so as to make the study fairly representa(13)
tive of the entire state. The results are believed to be an index
to the conditions prevailing throughout Minnesota.

The Ayres Standard of Retardation.

In Mr. Ayres' investigations, published by the Russell Sage
Foundation, children in the first grade are considered normal if
they are under eight years of age. In the second grade, ages
under nine are normal, and so on through the grades. The reasons for thus allowing an extra year are not given. The text
merely says that these are the ages allotted to those grades by
''common consent." But certainly it is not in accord with the
actual practice in Minnesota, and I doubt if it is generally true
elsewhere. Its effect is to conceal one year's retardation for each
and every child during his progress through the grades, provided
he entered at six years of age, and last year only 441 children in
the schools under consideration were over six years of age at
the time of entrance, while almost as many entered earlier, as
they are usually admitted if they reach their sixth birthday before
the middle of the year.

A child entering the first grade at six should be in the second
grade at seven, the third grade at eight, and so on. JSTow suppose
he fails to be promoted at the end of the first year and remains
in that grade two years, repeating the work and retarded, yet
his age when he enters the second grade would be only eight, and
that by the Ayres method would be considered normal. It is clear
then that by the method Mr. Ayres used it is possible for every
child in an entire school system to be retarded one year and yet
for the system appear absolutely free from retarded pupils.
The Minnesota Standard of Retardation.

In every school system covered by this investigation the children are admitted at six years of age or younger. We have
reckoned the entering age as six. Further, in every one of those
schools, promotions are made only once a year, in June. Each
grade, by definition, means a year's work. Therefore the child
who enters the first grade at six, should enter the second at seven,
the third at eight, and so on, grade by grade. And again, the
state expects to provide the child with only eight years of elementary schooling, which is to begin in his sixth year. From
the administrative point of view, then, the child, who waits till
he is seven years of age before entering school, is already behind
the schedule. He will get out later, begin work later, and lose
one year of his economically productive life, which is what the
state has primarily in view in the education of its children.
The Tabulated Statistics.

The complete results of the investigation are given in table
A. This gives the grade-age status of 17,279 grade children in
the fifty-five cities and villages of Minnesota included in this
study. Attention should be called to the fact that the data was
collected in the fall and deals only with children actually enrolled.
This makes the showing favorable to the schools, for some children
who failed to win promotion in the spring, no doubt dropped out
during the summer.

Retardation is computed upon the Minnesota basis of entering at six, and spending a single year in a grade and no more.

TABLE A.

Shows Grade by Grade, and by Sex, the Amount of Retardation.
Number
Per Cent
Total
2691
2065
2164
226S
2129
1044
1862
2007
Boys
1436
1096
1134
1134
1109
977
929
Girls
1255
969
1030
1134
1020
, 967
933
Retarded I Normal
Boys
38.7
54.0
61.1
65.9
68.8
73.7
70.4
Girls Boys
33.6
41.1
57.7
56. 1
63.2
67.7
65.9
886 ! 1121 74.0 67.0
63.8
37.8
33.1
28.3
25.2
21.0
24.3
30.5
Girls
59.0
47.2
40.9
35.5
29.8
25.0
27.1
26.4
Advanced
Boys
7.5
8.2
5.8
5.9
6.0
5.3
5.3
5.8
Girls
7.4
11.7
7.4
8.4
7.0
8.0
7.0
6.6
Total, 17,279 Average, 58. 9 34.2

In studying this table you will note four things, all probably
contrary to popular belief. First, the boys equal or exceed the
girls in number in every grade up to the seventh where they fall
only four behind. It is in, or at the close of the seventh grade,
then, that the boy meets his decisive defeat. Secondly, the workings of the process of elimination can be clearly and best seen in
the last three grades. Elimination is not stronger at the close
of the eighth than during the three preceding grades. The
normally placed child would enter the sixth grade at eleven; the
retarded ones would be older, but discouragement, economic
pressure in the homes, and the inapplicability or the non-enforcement of the truancy law permits them to drop out. Thirdly, the
retardation begins heavily in the first grade and steadily increases
grade by grade through the eighth, with the exception of the
downward drop of the curve in the seventh grade, due probably
to rapid elimination at that critical point. Fourthly, the retardation of the boys is greater than that of the girls right from the
start and remains so, grade by grade, varying from an excess of
5.1 per cent, in the first grade to 7 per cent, in the eighth grade.
The average percentage of retardation officially reported to
exist in these schols, under their own standard of requirements, is
58.7 per cent. As I have said elsewhere, when the course of study
makes requirements such that only 41.3 per cent of the pupils can
or do meet them, we have as the result a curious state of affairs,
where to be abnormal is the usual or normal condition.

Reduced to the Ay res Standard.

The Ayres method of computing retardation would be incorrect according to the conditions governing the school systems under
consideration. But for the sake of comparison, the data on hand
have been computed by that method also and the results are shown
in table B. There, the average percentage of retardation is 30.9.
That is bad enough. This, however, is only 52.0 per cent of the
amount actually known to exist in these schools. The balance is
concealed by the allowance of an extra year in the grades, for
possible late entrants, when these are too few to warrant any such
allowance.

Mr. Ayres' figures, published elsewhere, give for thirty-one
important cities an average of 33.7 per cent retarded children,
varying from 7.5 in Medford, Massachusetts, to 75.8 per cent
among the colored children of Memphis, Tennessee.

TABLE B.

(This is Table A Reduced to the Ayres Basis for Comparison.)
Number
rotal Boys Girls
2691
2065
2164
2268
2129
1944
1862
2007
1436
1096
1134
1134
1109
977
929
886
1255
969
1030
1134
1020
967
933
1121
Per Cent
Retarded
Boys
14.6
22.5
30.6
38.2
44.2
47.4
44.2
45.3
Girls
9.1
17.3
20.8
27.7
34.8
38.5
36.3
39.5
Normal
Boys
77.9
69.3
63.6
55.9
49.8
47.3
50.5
49.2
Girls
83.5
71.0
71.8
63.9
58.2
53.5
56.4
53.9
Advanced
Boys
7.5
8.2
5.8
5.9
6.0
5.3
5.3
5.8
Girls
7.4
11.7
7.4
8.4
7.0
8.0
7.0
6.6

Total, 17,279 Average, 30.9 62.0 7.1
STATISTICS FROM MINNESOTA TOWNS. 17
The following statistics, presented for purposes of comparison,
deal in every case only with, children in the grades, as before.
Minnesota. Ayres.

1. The fifty-five cities above, enrolling.... 17,279 58.7 30.9
2. Forty-one graded schools in Minnesota. . 5,340 64.6 33.9
3. Four special cities in Minnesota  3,753 66.5 33.7
4. Fargo, North Dakota  2,087 55.6 24.9
The schools in item two above are small ones with from four
to six teachers as a rule; but they are inspected for state aid, and
are the schools from which the high schools of the state are
recruited.

The "special" cities whose figures are not included with the
fifty-five towns in item one, are among the best in the state and
are commonly regarded as having fine schools.
Repeaters.
Possibly one of the best ways to get at the real loss in a
school system is to compute it from the number of repeaters. By
this method no confusion arises over the question of their age
at entrance nor the proper age limits for each grade. Elimination
works confusion here, as it did before. At the same time we
must bear in mind that the "repeaters" are only one year's contribution to the full army of retarded children. Financially, it
i?? only during the time when he repeats that the retarded child
costs the state anything extra?is a loss. The state expects to
provide him with eight years' schooling, but no more.
In order to ascertain at first hand the amount of repeating
in the schools of Minnesota, I recently sent out a printed questionnaire to all the superintendents in the state. Ninety-six,
slightly less than half, replied promptly and with well-arranged
data.

The figures given include a total of 40,710 grade children.
The number found to be repeating the work of their grade, and
the per cent of the total number of repeaters to be found in each
grade is as follows:

Grades I II III IV V VI VII VIII
Number 664 309 296 374 396 330 318 443
Per cent 18.1 9.8 9.4 11.9 12.6 10.5 10.1 14.1
Also 168 others are repeating the work for the second time.
This is 7.4 per cent of the total grade enrolment in the 96
systems, but this does not adequately measure the ground lost
last year in these schools, for two reasons. First, the data being
gathered in the fall from the actual enrolment in the schools, and
not being compiled from office records, does not account for the
number of pupils who dropped out during the summer, and the
number thus eliminated must be considerable. Secondly, (and
this is an important factor never alluded to so far as I have
discovered in the literature on the subject), there is a practice,
almost uniform among superintendents, of promoting a child
arbitrarily at the end of two years in a given grade, whether his
work merits it or not. This practice conceals a very considerable
amount of the worst sort of repeating, that is, second-time repeating, and likewise, by forcing the child on through the grades
whether he merits promotion or not, reduces the apparent amount
of retardation. Akin to this practice is another which has the same
effect. It is the custom of promoting some children "on trial,"
even if they do not quite meet the requirements of the class, where
for one reason or another they are permitted to remain. And need
it be added that when once a child has been allowed to go on with
the class he is rarely reduced to the grade below, no matter how
poor his work? The causes which operated to place him above the
grade he merited operate to keep him there.

The data show 1612 children promoted on trial this year;
there are no figures to show the numbers arbitrarily promoted at
the end of the second year in a grade. It is certain that these
two practices reduce the actual number of repeating and retarded
children considerably.

Compared with Ay res' Results.

While my figures show a considerably larger percentage of
retarded children, those of Mr. Ayres, curiously enough, show
in the fifty-five leading cities given in his tabulated report, that
the average percentage of repeaters is 15.4, more than double
mine. I think that is due, as I have pointed out, to the fact that
his method conceals part of the retardation, whereas it would not
so conceal the repeaters. He is dealing with large cities. In
them the number of repeaters is great. But where the number
of repeaters is great the amount of retardation must be great, too.
Having carefully studied the laggards in our Minnesota
schools from two standpoints, it is interesting to note how strikingly the results agree. We found the percentage of retardation
to be 58.9 and that of repeaters to be 7.4. Now, bearing in mind
that the number of repeaters is merely one year's quota of retarded
ones, and multiplying the 7A by eight, the number of years in the
grade course, we have 59.2 as the calculated number of laggards.
The ascertained number is only .3 of one per cent less than this.
The Money Cost of Repeaters.

School administrators and the public generally would consider the gist of the whole problem to be the fearful expense.
Money spent in doing the same work twice over is money wasted.
Minnesota expends annually upon her schools about $15,000,000
and if 7.4 per cent of this is spent on repeaters then the loss is
$1,110,000. It is estimated that the nation similarly losses from
57 to 80 millions annually from the same cause.

We justly boast in Minnesota of our great school fund of
$27,000,000, but here is a sum, two or three times as great,
wasted annually in the United States because of some maladjustments along a single line in the management of the public schools.
The True Loss.

The true loss, however, is the spiritual one which cannot be
submitted to statistical investigation. The retarded pupils personally lose that fine spirit of initiative, of progress, of growth,
of self-reliance, and of eagerness to achieve, which constitutes the
chief glory of youth, and which sends him from school into life an
effective member of society. By allowing him to become retarded,
the school system trades that birthright of the American boy for
the pottage of idleness, failure, and self-distrust.
