Do the Elementary Schools serve Boys less than Girls??
=======================================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.
Chicago, August 2, 1911.
To the Editor of The Psychological Clinic:
My Dear Sir:?While making a study of retardation in the Stock
Yards district this past year, I wrote the enclosed comment. ... I
only wanted to speak a word in protest against the idea that boys are the
greatest sufferers under the present educational methods, and to add
one to the number of those who wish something more vital and intimately
connected with the child's life than is given under the all too prevalent
passive, bookish methods of education.

Very truly yours,
Caro Bugbey MacArtiiur.
It seems to be taken for granted, since statistics show more overage boys than girls in the schools, that the schools are serving boys
less than girls. It is conceivable, however, that the elementary school
girls, instead of being better off, are left worse off than the boys.
The aim of education is theoretically conceded to be the training
of mental powers, even more than the acquisition of facts. Yet many
recitation and study periods represent an effort to "cast bread upon
the waters," and the examinations, to "receive it again after many
days." If the worth of elementary education lies in facts acquired,
the school does seem to be better fitted to the girl than the boy. If
its worth lies in resulting ability to think, to approach and solve new
problems in eagerness and concentration, the boy by his rebellion saves
his soul.

Discipline is presumably to teach self-control; but the attitude of
mind expressed by a teacher in a foreign district the other day is
by no means solitary: "I like to teach here. When you tell a child
to do a thing, you can make him do it, and the parents won't interfere."
To this scheme of things the girl adapts herself better than the
boy. All her social influences tend to cultivate docility, tractability,
the receptive and passive attitude of conduct and of mind. The boy
is allowed more liberty, and breaks through many restrictions, which
the girl seems unable to break. He is 011 the streets, among men,
broadening his interests. lie early learns to defend himself and repel
encroachments 011 his liberties. Consequently, he has decided ideas
about bis likes and dislikes, and refuses to be coaxed or bullied into
any more uncongenial tasks than necessary. He will work indefatigably
and with mental initiative and originality on something to his liking.
The more tractable girl does better each assigned task. By rebellion,
the boy saves his soul.

It seems odd to suppose that elementary school work should be
very different for boys than for girls; yet curricula and methods are
thought to be better fitted to the "needs and natures of the girl than
of the boy pupils." Except for the small amount of vocational work
given in the grades, why should there be any difference in the training of boys' minds and of girls' minds? Why should girls know less
or more of reading, writing, grammar, arithmetic, geography, history,
or physiology than boys? Boys will make longer use of vocational
training than girls in most cases; but among the poorer classes, at
least, not sex but age determines the need for work; and it is quite as
necessary that the girl be fitted to earn as the boy. Certainly her
"needs" then are much like those of the boy. And that the school
should be one more social agency for decreasing her powers of initiative
and cultivating in her a passive attitude is scarcely of advantage to
her "nature." Because the boy rebels against the restraints of public
school discipline with its frequent over-emphasis 011 the petty, he preserves his individuality, his keen interest in and enthusiasm for the
things which are a part of his own life, and not mere accessories,
and does not diminish his self-initiative in the following out of
those interests.
