Qualities of Men
=================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

:Author: Joseph Jastrow. New York: Houghton, Mifflin
& Co., 1911; pp. 183.

Dr Jastrow has spared the critics their painstaking but generally
inadequate explanation of the author's intentions by the following:
"The purpose of my ambitious venture is to survey the varieties of
human qualities, and to do this dominantly in a practical vein, to
gauge the measure and to note the manner of distinctive inequalities,
to distinguish and portray their several influences on the careers of men;
then more critically, to appraise their worth, to observe the success
which attends them, and, if fortune favor, to reach some insight into the
play of personal forces that shape our fate individually, collectively,
nationally." If the author does not quite cover all this ground, the
reader must remember that 183 small pages is scant room for such a
large order.

Professor Jastrow lays great emphasis and with reason on the quality
of sensibility, and contends that there are few callings demanding any
high order or quality in which sensibility is not a vital factor. It is the
lack of sensibilities which is largely responsible for ugliness, vulgarity,
stupidities and immoralities. Dr Jastrow believes that the "gentleman
born" is likely to be more generously treated in this respect than the
"common man," but he does little to prove his contention, what he says
pointing rather to the advantages of environment than heredity.
He dwells on the superiority of the poietic or creative type, "men
who can plan and foresee, and are not afraid to dream; men moved by
principle as well as practice; men cherishing their individuality, not
cowed by convention nor awed by power; men in whom the very nobility
and worth of their theories enables them to meet adequately the conditions that confront them." He makes a strong plea for the safeguarding and encouragement of the poietic callings, and points out the
potential influence of our colleges and universities in aiding or stifling
poietic originality. He also believes that a deficient appreciation of this
quality is a national trait, founded on national convictions and ideals.
Stress is laid on the importance of a community's ideals, inasmuch
as the qualities selected or idealized are bound to become more and
more prominent, while those which sink into disrepute gradually disappear, as shown, for instance, in the decline of the swooning, frail,
tearful female of a past day and the rise of the athletic, confident, "even
domineering young woman" of to-day.

We agree "that communities are judged by the qualities of the men
they choose for their leaders," but is it true, I wonder, that "the purpose
of Society is to utilize and encourage the aristocracy of capacity it
commands"? It would be pleasant to think so, even though we had to
confess the "purpose" amazingly befogged.

In the academic career Dr Jastrow thinks that "the second-best
qualities lead to preferment more rapidly than first-best ones, that the
environment in which academic men are required to labor is not as
stimulating as it might well be and that their activities are too much
beset with uncongenial routine, too interferingly hampered by
unappreciative control."

The remedy for this and for the other evils pointed out is to "rest
larger directive authority in the hands of poietic men, particularly in
callings that require special qualities of appreciation," not to "apply
commercial standards to non-commercial pursuits," to "be patient with
genius, respectful to dissent, responsive to reform, attentive to criticism,
grateful to leadership, considerate of principle, and appreciative of
quality." This is not all the remedy, but it is enough to give one pause.
It reminds one vaguely of the preparatory oath for membership in the
"King's Daughters." To some it may sound very Utopian and rather
unattainable, but as a star to which to hitch the reformer's chariot, it
seems sufficiently effulgent. Professor William James is quoted as saying
that "though it is no small thing to inoculate seventy millions of people
with new standards, yet, if there is to be any relief, that will have to be
done." Professor Jastrow's virus, though it may lack the popularity to
insure its reaching that number of persons, is eminently healthy and
sound and likely to "take" wherever the injection is permitted.
