Need for Correlation of Binet-Simon Tests With other Tests of Doing
=====================================================================

:Author:  Eleanor Keller,
Vanderbilt Clinic, New York City.

The standardized tests for intelligence that have won the
widest recognition are doubtless the Binet-Simon tests. These
as used generally in the United States are the result of a gradual
development. In 1904 Paris required the selection of all the mentally defective children in the public schools, to be ascertained by
individual examination of pupils. For this purpose Binet and
Simon chose from many tests a certain number arranged in the
order of increasing difficulty, and tried them out on a selected group
of children of pedagogically average intelligence. Ten children of
each year, three to seven, and fifteen of each year, seven to twelve,
were chosen. The tests were then arranged in groups to suit each
age. To adapt this scale to testing feebleminded children, the
inmates of the Salpetriere were examined with it. The results
correlated well with the classification previously made by diagnosticians who had devised tests from their experience with feebleminded children. Binet was anxious to secure a uniformity of
diagnosis into which the personal equation of the examiner would
not enter. He was a student of language development, and believed
that steps of intellectual progress are well marked by language
ability. He divided all feebleminded into three groups: (1) idiots,
in whom the power to express thoughts by language is wanting, their
wants being made known by gestures or grunts; (2) imbeciles in whom
the power of speech is often very poorly developed, isolated words or
short, broken sentences frequently suffice, though the higher imbecile
may speak as well as the next class but power to read or write it
lacking; (3) lastly the morons who in addition to speaking can also
read and write. While there are no hard or sharp lines of division
between these classes, the idiots are grouped as one or two years old,
the imbeciles as three to eight, and the morons as eight to twelve.
In Binet's opinion, if there is congenital brain defect causing feeblemindedness, the subject does not pass into adolescence. Twelve
years of age evidently marks for Binet the dividing line between
childhood and adult life. Binet and Simon, assisted by their students, revised this scale again and again from 1904 to 1911.

In America Goddard in Vineland, Huey of Johns Hopkins,
Whipple of Cornell, Wallin of Pittsburgh and Terman of Leland
Stanford University have changed and adapted these tests for use
among American children. Previous to 1910 Goddard tested his
translation and arrangement of the Binet-Simon tests on 400 feebleminded and about 2000 normal children.1
Dr Leonard P. Ayres of the Russell Sage Foundation has compared the results of Goddard's tests of 1547 normal children with his
own results, gathered by him, showing the progress of children in
the public elementary schools of twenty-eight American cities.
Dr Ayres has marked as normal all children who have covered the
seven grades in seven years; those who have completed the same in
six years as one year in advance; those taking eight years as one
year behind; those taking nine years as two years behind, etc.
When all reports are massed we get a normal curve for all cities;
but by doing so we cover up the many variations in the different
1 See Pedagogical Seminary, Sept., 1910, June, 1911.
s Ayres, Leonard P. The Binet-Simon Measuring Scale for Intelligence: Some Criticisms
and Suggestions.

I' i ' i   ; " i
-7 -6 -5 -1* -3 -2 -1 H +1 +2 +3 ?
Distribution curves showing variations from normal of 1547 children tested
by the Binet-Simon scale (solid line) and 14,762 children in 28 cities rated by their
progress through seven grades (dotted line). Curves based on relative figures
showing distribution of 1000 cases of each kind. (Ayres.*)
grades and cities. If the distribution curve were based on ages the
normal curve would not be obtained.

This distribution curve obtained by measuring all returns from
all cities, rating their standing by progress through the grades,
almost corresponds to the curve obtained by Goddard for his 1547
children tested by Binet-Simon test. The curve is based on ratio
of 1 to 1000 as there are 14,762 children by grades and 1547 for the
Binet-Simon tests. Dr Ayres rightly concludes: "If this were
true there would be far less need for securing a measuring scale of
intelligence than there undoubtedly is, for in our public school system we should have just such a scale, scientifically correct and
already at hand."

Let us bear in mind that Binet's method of standardization was
testing public school children of Paris, a selected group chosen by
school standards. Progress was based on language development.
Remembering the overemphasis that the schools put on language
work, talking versus doing, are not the results just what might be
expected? Do the tests measure native ability or do they not rather
measure scholastic attainment?

It is significant that those psychologists who have used the
Binet-Simon most, agree that tests for the youngest are too easy
and those for the older pupils too difficult. With the disappearance
of the old faculty-psychology and the rise of experimental and
objective psychology, we note an advent of better things in the
increasing interest of medical practitioners, neurologists, and
psysiologists in the mental life of the child. They would all put
more emphasis on what a child does than on what he says. A measuring scale of intelligence would prove more significant when doing
rather than talking is given greater prominence. Not that language development is not closely correlated with mental development, but any series of tests founded so largely on this one point
must tend to give it undue weight. The finer musculature and
neural centers involved in speech are but a part of the muscular
and neural development of childhood. If the normal order of
development is from the larger musculature, neurones and synapses
involved, to the finer, would not a graded series of tests call for use
of these muscles more than does the Binet-Simon scale?
The Binet-Simon tests fail the clinician in three kinds of cases:
in the lower range, in the upper range, and in certain neuropathic
cases.

1. In the lower range, the child, often backward in speech
development, is still intelligent in every other way, making his
wants known by gestures, smiles, etc. If tested by the BinetNEED FOR CORRELATION OF TESTS. 21
Simon scale, a great wrong would be done such a retarded child.
Such a child might be classed as an idiot or low grade imbecile, but
there are other marks than speech which help in his diagnosis. Low
grade children are brought at an early age to the clinics. They
are a menace to other children at home, absorb entirely too much
of the mother's time and there is a great need for standardized tests
to diagnose these cases properly and separate them from the merely
retarded. They should be passed over to institutions for proper
care and training as early as possible. They can be made happy
among their peers, cleanly in habits and in a small way helpful as
institution workers. Otherwise they will be a source of misery to
their families and themselves and an unnecessary cost to the
community.

2. Furthermore in the upper limit of the scale, little satisfaction
is gained by use of the Binet-Simon tests, that is for those girls and
boys of thirteen through fifteen who read and write, but have been
laggards in school; never interested in the sedentary work of the
school, longing to do things, and often landing in the truant school.
Such a child would often be diagnosed as a moron, if the grade
teacher or the strict devotee of the Binet-Simon scale were the
diagnostician. The teacher complains of lack of attention, restlessness, disorder, etc., etc. Give such a boy something to do, involving
initiative, continuous attention, memory, judgment, and see his
response. Give the same problem to the congenitally feebleminded
and note the difference. In the latter case there is no initiative, no
continuous attention, poor judgment. In order to carry out his
work all must be planned for the feebleminded step by step, almost
incessant guidance and care is needed, but the boy who has failed
in arithmetic, grammar, etc., takes a new lease of mental life if
given something to do, something involving the exercise of the
larger musculature; something calling for initiative, persistent
attention, reason, judgment. Tests of doing rather than of talking
will help to separate these two classes and test native ability rather
than scholastic attainment.

3. The children who have been pressed (neuropathic cases) and
in whom the nervous affection is marked by facial tics, twitches,
stuttering, stammering, lisping. They are often ahead of grade, but
lack any wholesome interest in school. They are brain-fagged at
twelve years of age. They have happened to have that type of
mind which enables them to grasp abstract reasoning early in life.
They shine in the arithmetic and grammar classes. These are
subjects which make a premature demand on the association centers.

If as Kraes and others assert the entire middle cortical layer is
lacking in association fibres in childhood, but after the new growth
of the later teens they increase rapidly and continue to grow in
complexity up to fifty years of age, should our course of study put
such emphasis on subjects like arithmetic and grammar before the
lower teens, subjects which call for the exercise of these centers?
Should healthy boys and girls who fail here but succeed in tasks of
doing, gathering and retaining facts to broaden their experience, be
diagnosed as retarded? These neuropathic cases may show affections due to premature exercise of the association center. Would
not tests of doing help us separate these cases from the retarded
and feebleminded?

Furthermore for clinical use, tests of doing help one to get a line
on choreic tendencies, and note a lack of coordination, give signs of
dementia praecox, or other cerebral affections, and assist in the
separation of dementia from amentia. What the clinician particularly needs are first, tests of doing rather than of talking; and
secondly, tests involving the larger as well as the finer musculature.
To Binet and Simon is due credit for arranging a scale according to age?a scale intelligible to all, but founded as it is on speech
development, tests of doing are needed, to correlate and perhaps
take the place of some tests in the scale.

It requires a trained and experienced psychologist to give the
Binet-Simon tests, to record results and personal and family histories and in conjunction with these try out other standardized
tests, preferably those of doing. It is also necessary to study the
normal child, his interests and activities at certain ages, in order to
formulate other tests leading to a more just estimate of the child's
native ability at certain ages.
