Opportunities for Vocational Education
========================================

NEWS AND COMMENTS.

An investigation has just been completed by the Public Education Association, which promises to be a great aid to the advocates of vocational training
in this city. The Association has collected data in regard to vocational courses
taught in all of the schools, public, private, and philanthropic, in the vicinity,
and the results have just been published in a pamphlet under the title, "A Survey of Opportunities for Vocational Education in and near Philadelphia."
The scope of the investigation includes industrial, commercial, and professional education, and 180 institutions are covered by the survey. The material has been carefully classified and analyzed, and arranged in chart form, so
that the student desiring information in regard to a particular course can at a
glance compare the requirements, the tuition fees, and the time required, in the
various institutions offering such a course.

A carefully arranged index at the back of the volume, lists over 250 subjects
having a vocational bearing, taught in the institutions included, with references
to the pages on which more detailed information regarding them may be found.
This study, which was compiled by Miss Jane R. Harper, special investigator for the Public Education Association, represents the first attempt to bring
together the great mass of information in regard to vocational education in
Philadelphia, and presents in understandable form material which should be
of the greatest help to parents and teachers, to vocational counselors, and to
students seeking courses of training for their chosen Une of work.
Philadelphia Board of Education assumes Administration of School Lunches.
The School Lunch Committee of the Home and School League of Philadelphia disbanded in June after an existence of nearly eight years. During this
period its work has been that of experimentation and demonstration. It has
established lunches in the elementary schools of this city, administered them
successfully, demonstrated that they can be self-supporting, and it has now
issued a final report in which the results of this extended experiment are made
available for use by others.

The School Lunch Committee has voluntarily transferred its activities to
the public school authorities of this city. At the May meeting of the Board of
Education the report of the committee was accepted, its recommendations
adopted, and the superintendent of schools authorized to extend elementary
lunch service immediately to twenty-five additional schools.

The committee has carried on its work and is now terminating it because
it holds that the function of a privately supported organization is to experiment
and demonstrate. It never can eventuate on a large scale and it should not
if it could. The function of a publicly supported organization is to eventuate
on a large scale. It can seldom experiment and it lacks freedom and flexibility
in demonstration. The School Lunch Committee has experimented and demonstrated successfully. It is a source of profound satisfaction to its members that
the public school system is now taking over its work, continuing it, and extending it.
A College for Teachers at Johns Hopkins University.

Another step towards a teachers' college in Baltimore was taken in the
recent creation of the degree of Bachelor of Science in Education, by the Johns
Hopkins University. This marks a partial fulfillment of hopes which the University has entertained for a number of years. As early as 1910, the University
announced its desire of establishing a department for the higher training of
teachers as an organic part of the University.

The curriculum leading to the new degree will be based on the College
Courses for Teachers and the Summer Courses. The former, which were established in 1909, are conducted during the regular session in the afternoons and on
Saturdays. The latter have been conducted since 1911. The new degree will
be open to men and women on equal terms. The regulations concerning matriculation and the curriculum will be determined by a special advisory committee
of the faculty. The title of director of these courses has been assigned to Professor Edward F. Buchner, who organized and has conducted both these branches
of the University's activities.

Pennsylvania Conference of Charities and Correction.

All persons interested in social welfare work in Pennsylvania are cordially
invited to attend the state Conference of Charities and Correction at Scranton,
October 21, 22, and 23, 1915. The program is of the best, and includes such
able speakers as Hon. Thomas M. Osborne, of Sing Sing, N. Y., on Prisons; Miss
Julia Lathrop, of the Federal Children's Bureau, on Public Health; and Dr.
William T. Healy of Chicago, and Judge Raymond MacNeille of Philadelphia,
on Juvenile Court Work. For hotel accommodations and additional information, apply to Mr. Maurice Willows, assistant secretary of the local committee,
346 Adams Avenue, Scranton, Pa.
