The Factor of Experience In Intelligence Testing
==================================================

:Author:  Rudolph Pintner and Donald G. Paterson.
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

This paper will endeavor to show that the factor of experience
in intelligence testing depends upon the type of test used. In a
previous article1 the writers showed that those defectives over fifteen
years of age, as compared with defectives below fifteen years of age
of the same mental age, greatly excelled in two tests of the BinetSimon scale, i. e. naming the days of the week and the months of
the year. Results from a similar comparison with a different type
of test show that when real intelligence tests are used children greatly
excel adults of the same mental age computed by the present BinetSimon scale.
A discussion of the results of our previous paper was made in
the February (1915) number of The Psychological Clinic by
Dr J. E. Wallace Wallin,2 who restated a previous study of his
concerning this factor which we call experience. He showed that
adults excel in reading tests as compared with children, concluding
that here the practice or experience factor was the cause. In the
form board test however the children excelled, due according to Wallin's opinion to a more extensive practice with such devices in the
school room. In the color-naming test the children also excelled in
the time taken to re-act to the situation. The children excel in uncontrolled free association as they do in immediate memory also, i. e.
recalling the content of a reading selection. In all these cases Wallin's
contention is that this superiority on the part of the children is due
to schoolroom practice. We do not agree with this position but
hold rather that the children excel because these tests are more
adequate measures of intelligence than are such tests as the weekdays, months, and reading tests.
If we accept Stern's3 definition of general intelligence as general
mental adaptability to new problems and conditions of life, then
those tests that call for adaptations on the part of the re-agent to
relatively new situations will best discriminate between degrees of
1 Experience and the Binet-Simon tests. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. VIII, No. 7,
December 15, 1914.

2 J. E. W. Wallin. The Binet-Simon tests in relation to the factors of experience and
maturity. The Psychological Clinic, Vol. VIII, No. 9, February 15, 1915.
'Stern, William. Psychological methods of testing intelligence. Tr. by G. M. Whipple.
Baltimore: Warwick & York, 1914, p. 3.

intelligence. Empirical evidence shows this to be the case. Based
upon an analysis of the Binet-Simon tests given to feebleminded
children, Chotzen4 found that among children of the same mental
level, some tests show a decided increase in capacity with increase
in chronological age, others no alterations, while there was an actual
decrease in others. Stern5 quotes Chotzen thus, "The tests accompanied by strong increase with age relate, then, almost exclusively
to matters of information. . . . No increase at all is present with
tests that demand ability to judge and to combine or with such as
put severe demands upon apprehension?comparison, problemquestions, noting omissions, repeating five digits." It is thus seen
that tests in which the experience factor is ruled out to a relatively
greater extent correlate most highly with general intelligence.
TABLE I.?SHOWING RESULTS OF KNOX CUBE TEST.
M.A.
21 or above.
No.
Ave. No.
Lines
Passed.
20 or below.
No.
Ave. No.
Lines
Passed.
15 or above.
No.
Ave. No.
Lines
Passed.
14 or below.
No.
Ave. No
Lines
Passed.
15 to 21.
No.
Ave. No,
Lines
Passed.
1.14
21
2.04
14
1.64
14
2.35
1.42
11 1.18
37
2.13
31
1.58
17
2.52
20
1.80
15 1.80
36
2.80
32
2.03
19
3.31
17
2.23
11 2.45
39
3.92
36
3.16
14
4.00
25
3.i
24
2.79
39
4.20
51
3.54
12
4.16
27
4.29
10
21 4.27
31
4.54
55
4.38
4.80
26
4.50
11
13 ! 3.76 15
5.46
26
4.73
4.00
13
5.69
Total . . 102
Grand Total. .320
218

Keeping these points in mind we will proceed to consider the
results obtained in testing 320 feebleminded inmates of the Ohio
Institution for Feebleminded Youth6 with the Knox Cube Test7
revised and standardized by Pintner.8 The tests were not made
tIbid., p. 89.
6 Ibid., p. 89.

6 The writers wish to acknowledge the courtesy of the Superintendent, Dr E. J. Emerick.
7 Howard A. Knox. A Scale based on the work at Ellis Island, for estimating mental
defect. J. of the Am. Med. Assoc., March 7, 1914, Vol. LXII, pp. 741-747.
8 The standardization of this extended Cube Test to be published shortly.

with the view of showing such facts as we here present, but for the
purpose of comparison with normal children of corresponding ages.
Bias in giving the tests to the older and younger feebleminded
individuals is thus ruled out. The test as here given consisted of
ten different combinations of tapping four Binet cubes with another
cube. Each combination is called a "line". Table I shows the
average number of lines passed by feebleminded children of different
mental ages (determined by the Binet-Simon Scale, Goddard Revision). The cases are classified in five groups based upon chronological age. Under the first heading is given the mental age, under
the second, the group above 21 years chronologically; the third,
those below 21; the fourth, those above 15; the fifth, below 15 and
the last those between 15 and 21 years. Under each group is given
the number tested and the average number of lines passed.
This chronological grouping is quite arbitrary and was decided
upon merely to see what changes take place in the relative efficiency
of three stages in chronological development, i. e. children below 15,
between 15 and 21, and over 21. Wallin holds that the difference
between those over 21 and below, of the same mental age, is due
to physical growth, to maturity. As we conceive it, that question
can not enter into such a consideration as we have before us, for
this reason, that if their superiority in any test is held to be due to
the factor of growth alone, then they should excel in all the tests of
that age and would consequently test higher. The comparison would
then break down. The factor that causes this discrepancy between
the two groups is one of experience, i. e. they will excel in those tests
which depend upon daily experience. The difference is due to the
kind of test and not to any maturity difference or any intellectual
superiority.

Although maturity and experience are two factors which are
no doubt closely inter-related, yet they are different, and it is well
to avoid confusion between them. The distinction is not made
clear by Wallin, and it seems to us that he at times regards them
as one factor only. We doubt whether maturity, "the processes of
physical maturation" as Wallin calls it, enters very much, if at all,
into the tests that have been discussed in these articles. We can well
imagine that very young children may not be able to do as well on
the form board because of their inability to co-ordinate the movements involved in grasping and placing the blocks. This would be
due to a maturity difference and would apply to young children
only, younger than any that have been considered by Wallin or
by us. Experience, on the other hand, refers to the number of
times an individual has been confronted with the same situation,
and should be kept distinct from maturity. We can not conceive
of maturity differences entering into any of the tests under discussion with the individuals tested, but experience differences obviously
do, and yet only in some specific tests. We have mentioned the
days and months test as cases in point. Wallin suggests the reading test as well, and doubtless rapidity of reading depends to some
extent upon experience. The children are superior to the adults
on the form board. We agree with Wallin that the form board
"represents a novel situation," and we feel that he contradicts himself when he says further on that the children do better because of
their greater experience with situations of this kind.
In considering the results in table I it will be seen at once that
on the cube test in each group there is a constant increase in
efficiency for each mental age. However between the five groups
in any mental age (age XI excepted) we find differences of efficiency
that are significantly constant. Take age V for example, we find
those below 15 doing the best with an average of 2.35; those aged
20 or below come second with an average of 2.04; those aged 15 or
above, third with 1.64; those aged 15 to 21, fourth with 1.42, and last
those over 21 passing only 1.14 lines. The same tendency is seen
for each mental age. The curve shows graphically the average
efficiency per mental age for those over 21 (solid line) and for those
below 15 (dotted line).

This curve enables us to see at a glance that the children are
superior to adults throughout all mental ages. This is in direct
contrast to the results found in our paper on the days and months
test.

Now, we could take the average number of lines passed for
all ages for each group, but this would not be accurate for we have
not tested the same number in each group in each mental age. It
gives us an average which is not a proper basis for comparison. By
inspection of table I we see that the younger the child chronologically, the more lines he passes. This holds for all mental ages up to X.
Now, the Binet-Simon scale is more adequate at the upper end even
although it may not be accurately standardized in ages XI and XII.
We mean by this, that ages X, XI, and XII are composed for the
most part of tests that present new situations to the re-agent. We
never put dissected sentences together, we do not draw designs from
memory and so on. But we do make change and count pennies,
we often have to find the date and think of the day or month and
sometimes buy stamps and count them. These are things an
individual, even an inmate of an institution, is doing more or less
constantly. So from our point of view and in line with Chotzen's
results, we would not expect to find any age increase in efficiency
when subjects mentally arrested above a mental age of IX are considered. Thus there would be no great difference between the five
groups in mental ages X and XI. That is exactly what we find.
Those over 21 make a great jump in efficiency from IX to X,
and although the tendency for the younger children to excel is still
present, it is not nearly so conspicuous. We can not explain the
apparently chance dropping off in age XI of the adult group, but
it is to be noted that only 13 eleven year olds were tested as compared with 24 and 21 in ages IX and X.
Our interpretation of these results is that up to age X the
Binet scale contains some tests which depend very largely upon
daily experience and hence the older the child tested the more
liberal is the estimation of his mentality as computed by the present
Binet scale. That is, given two individuals, one twelve and the
other twenty-one, both having a mental age of VIII, we believe
that the one twenty-one years old is not really VIII but has a
mentality below VIII. But if both cases had been measured by
a scale that has eliminated the experience factor as far as possible,
their difference in mentality would have been shown. Now any
two individuals, no matter what their chronological age, testing the
same by such a scale, would show about the same average performance in any other test involving practically no experience.
We will next take up the consideration of a different test, i. e.
Knox's Feature Profile. This test is placed before the child with
the following verbal direction, "Put this together." It pre-supposes on the part of the subject an ability to read a diagram, to
perceive the seven pieces of the profile, as a head, to synthesize in
other words the various parts into a whole. The results are given
in table II.

TABLE II.?SHOWING RESULTS OF FEATURE PROFILE TEST.
Chron.
Age
Group.
Mental Age.
P F
P F
P F
%
F %
10
%
11
%
21 or above..
0 0
25
18
36
17
10
63
11
91
20 or below.
0 1
12
16
17
65
22
85
15 or above..
0 1
14
3 14
17
11
15
16
16
50
36
13
73
15
15 to 21.
7 12
0 4
10
55
19
87
80
14 or below ..070
Total over 21?86
Total below 21 = 93
Grand Total.. . .179
33
71
100
100

Under each mental age are given three columns, one showing
the number of passes (i. e. when subject puts the parts together
correctly within five minutes), one the number of failures, and the
third the percentage of passes. The first column gives the chronological group considered and by reading across the table is found
the increase in efficiency from mental age to mental age, by reading
up and down is found the difference in efficiency for each group in
any mental age. There are 179 cases recorded, 86 above twenty-one
chronologically and 93 below twenty-one. This table is not so satisfactory as table I in showing these group differences because of the
relatively few cases tested below 15 years.

Below age IX there is no basis of comparison because of the lack
of subjects. In age IX however we find that those below fifteen
have a percentage of passes of 71, those below twenty-one have 65
per cent, those fifteen to twenty-one have 55 per cent, those above
fifteen have 50 per cent, while those above twenty-one trail along
behind with only 36 per cent of passes. It is significant that even
with the small number of cases we find exactly the same tendency
that manifested itself in table I. In age X we find the same tendency as in age IX but to a lesser extent, as in table I.
In the Cube Test it is obvious that the test does not depend
upon experience in the limited sense of the term as we use it, but
depends upon the ability to imitate, to attend to an externally
enforced rhythm. It may be said that the Feature Profile Test
depends upon school training in that children in school play with
blocks and puzzles, but even so the test is so simple that an adult
(who has had years of school training also) were he really of the same
mental age as the child would be as efficient in meeting the new
situation. We hold then that it is not a question of physical growth
but rather of a too liberal estimation of an adult's intelligence by the
Binet-Simon scale.

In conclusion we may ask, what does all this show? We believe
that first, it is of value in calling attention to the fact that the interpreter of Binet test results must take into account this factor of
experience when summing up his case, and secondly, that tests
dependent upon experience (when proven so by sufficient evidence)
should be eliminated from scales designed to test adults over fifteen
years of age, and thirdly that it is of the utmost value as a method
of determining the relative value of any additional tests that the
psychologist may wish to standardize. With reference to this last,
point we mean that by this method we have empirical pi oof that
the test in question is or is not a real test of general intelligence.
Using this method then as a criterion, we can say that naming the
days of the week and the months of the year (and possibly other
Binet tests such as counting thirteen pennies, copying a square and
a diamond, naming colors, telling forenoon from afternoon, and
defining in terms of use) lack the essentials of true intelligence tests
while other tests such as the Knox Cube Test and Feature Profile
Test possess those characteristics which meet the requirements laid
down by Stern for tests of general intelligence.
ñ