Natural Education
==================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM

:Author:  Winifred Sackville Stoner. Indianapolis: Bobbs Merrill
Co., 1914. iJp. 295.

Mrs. Stoner tells how she trained her little daughter, by a system which she
calls "natural education," so far to exceed the average child of her years, that
Winifred Sackville Stoner, Jr., has acquired a nation-wide reputation for her
mental and physical attainments. Mrs. Stoner does not claim more for her
daughter than that she is "a healthy, normal, happy child, possessed of unusual
physical strength and more knowledge than most children of her age." This
result was achieved through "the help of living close to 'Mother Nature,' and in
the company of the great giants, 'Observation' and 'Concentration,' and the
sprifeely fairy 'Interest,' assisted by mortals' best friend, 'Imagination.' " However this may be, Winifred's achievements are rather breath-taking to the
average reader.

As Mrs. Stoner, like Ellen Key, is a firm believer in pre-natal influence,
Winifred's education began before she was born. Mrs. Stoner read good books,
had beautiful thoughts, heard good music, looked at the beauties of art and
nature, and indulged in happy imaginings and the performance of good deeds.
When the baby was six weeks old, she sat alone; she also lay quietly or kicked
pugnaciously, according to whether her mother read her Tennyson's "Crossing
the Bar" or "Horatius at the Bridge." Before she was six months old, she could
ring at request the red, blue, or green bell, which hung at the foot of her bed.
At one year, she scanned from memory the first ten lines of Virgil, repeated
"Crossing the Bar," brushed her own teeth, and talked like a grown-up person.
At sixteen months she learned to read. At eighteen months she directed her
nurse how to get to the parade grounds at Old Point Comfort, or to the wharf
to watch the boats, and she knew the difference between a ship, yacht, steamer,
brig, launch, etc. Before she was two years, she astonished hotel clerks by
writing her name in the register. At the age of two, she asked an art-dealer
why he did not have a Venus de Milo in his shop as well as a Venus de' Medici.
At that age also, she was sent to near-by stores to make purchases, and she
invariably called the clerk's attention to any error in change, if only a penny or
two. From the age of two, she began to keep a diary. Before she was three,
she copied tales and wrote original rhymes, letters, and stories on the typewriter. At three, she rode horse-back, was remarkably proficient in spelling,
knew all of her notes and could play simple airs on her play-piano. Before she
was four, she had learned Latin declensions and conjugations as singing exercises,
and when just four "she lost faith in the wisdom of some professors who did
not understand the salutation 'quid agis' and gazed at her blankly when she
spoke of the courses at the table ab ovo usque ad mola." At four also she
embroidered a mat, and received a diploma for being able to read, write, and
speak Esperanto. Before she was five, she could scan from memory the first
book of the iEneid, knew over five hundred sayings from great Latin authors,
and knew by heart all of Longfellow's "Hiawatha." At the age of five, having
read the poem only once, she repeated "The Battle Hymn of the Republic."
She taught her playmates Esperanto, translated Mother Goose rhymes into
Esperanto, had a high school knowledge of history, literature, and mythology,
and expressed her thoughts in eight languages. Before she was six, she learned
the waltz, two-step, and three-step. At seven, she played chess. At eight,
she composed a jingle which named all the bones in the body. Between eight
and ten she did all her mother's marketing, and was pronounced a shrewd buyer.
At the time the book was written, when she was ten years old, she could recite
portions of Caesar, Cicero, Sallust, Livy, Horace, etc., and had translated their
works. At that time, also, she was teaching a large class of children ranging in
age from five to fourteen, in the Teachers' Rooms of Carnegie Institute.
This incomplete summing up by no means represents all Winifred can do,
only these are the performances mentioned, together with the age at which they
were accomplished.

In training Winifred's mind, Mrs. Stoner was not afraid to give it plenty
of occupation from earliest infancy, her belief being that it is lack of occupation
which engenders bad habits in both old and young. She does not believe that
thinking and study by themselves have ever produced evil results, and she
fed Winifred's brain as early and as generously as her stomach. She was treated
as a thinking human being from the day of her birth. The sense of hearing was
the first to be developed, by letting the child hear constantly sweet and rhythmic
sounds. Then her ear and eye were trained by the colored bells already mentioned, which hung at the bottom of her bed. When she was six months old, her
mother "placed a border of white card-board four feet in height around the walls
of her nursery. On one side of the wall I pasted the letters of the alphabet,
which I had cut from red glazed paper. On another wall I formed from the
same red letters simple words arranged in rows, as bat, cat, hat, mat, pat, rat;
bog, dog, hog, log. You will notice that there are only nouns in these lists.
On a third wall were the numbers arranged in ten columns, one to ten in first
column, ten to twenty in second, etc. On the fourth wall there were pictures of
notes in the musical scale." Her colored nurse, who had a sweet voice, sang to
her the letters of the alphabet, while Mrs. Stoner pointed to them. About here,
one begins to wonder how a family of ten would have fared, if a single child
needed and absorbed so much time and attention.

Later on in Winifred's life, games were used in endless ways to teach
arithmetic, literature, geography, music, dancing, history, mythology, and
languages. Most of these games were played with cards and were invented by
Mrs. Stoner as the occasion arose, though parcheesi was also used. Through the
type-writer, Winifred learned construction, punctuation and spelling. Jingles,
too, played a prominent part in collating facts and impressing them on the mind.
All out-doors was used as a school house, and the study of trees, flowers, birds,
insects, and animals, combined with drawing and photography, constituted a
valuable part of Winifred's training.

Mrs. Stoner has very decided ideas on discipline. She highly disapproves
of all corporal punishment, all scolding, the saying of "don't" and "must," the
rousing of fear in a child, teasing it, or permitting it to say "can't." In her
daughter's case, she was apparently able by prizes, rewards, and deprivations,
approval and disapproval, the telling of fairy stories applicable to the morals of
the case, and other quiet means, to get the desired results.

She dismisses Dr Montessori with a curt word of praise for her work with
defective children, but thinks her system can never be of benefit to normal children
because it lacks imagination. One feels quite certain that even if Montessori
had contributed a hundred times more than she has to the science of pedagogy,
Mrs. Stoner would still have condemned her work on account of the Italian
educator's reference to "foolish fairy tales." For fairies are Mrs. Stoner's pet
hobby. She even goes so far as to state that she has "never met anyone reared
in a fairy-less home who grew into a warm-hearted, happy man or woman."
This and similar generalizations arouse in us a faint suspicion that with all her
learning, Winifred will probably lack scientific accuracy and restraint of
expression.

There is no doubt that Mrs. Stoner has done an amazingly fine piece of
work, developing her little daughter mentally and physically to a very high
degree of proficiency, and opening up to the child endless channels through
which pleasure reaches her. The question is,?could you achieve approximately
the same results by applying these methods to other children? Mrs. Stoner
apparently believes you could. Even granting that Winifred is not a very
unusual child, there still remains the fact that Mrs. Stoner is a very unusual
mother, and Winifred has no brothers and sisters with whom to share her. The
sad conviction is therefore born in on the mind of the reader that the applicability
of this interesting experiment will be necessarily limited, owing not so much
to the lack of proper children as to the dearth of suitable parents.
E. R. W.
