Classification of Fifty Backward and Feebleminded School Children
===================================================================

L! 8 R A R Y "|
JUN. 25. 13i5
The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1915, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. IX, No. 4.
June 15, 1915
:Author:  J. Harold Williams, 1

Research Fellow under the Buckel Foundation, Stanford University, Cal.
During the past year, assistance from the Buckel Foundation
Laboratory has been asked by superintendents and principals in
several cities in California in classifying school pupils, with a view
to the establishment of special classes for backward and defective
children who seem to profit little from the regular class room instruction. This brief study will include fifty of the children who have
been examined for this purpose, and who are taken as representative of the cases concerning which inquiries are made.
The cities from which these cases are taken are Fresno, San
Jose, Redwood City, and Palo Alto. In the first three cities named
there are no special classes, but steps are being taken toward their
establishment. In Palo Alto there is a well organized "ungraded
room" in which effort is being made to provide proper instruction
for subnormal and otherwise exceptional children.

The children selected for examination and classification represent nearly all degrees of variability. The teachers were asked to
select those who were backward in their school work, either because
of apparent mental incapability or unwillingness to do the work of
the regular class. In many cases children of superior ability have
been examined, and from these certain interesting and important
facts have been obtained. This particular study, however, will
deal only with those considered by their teachers backward or
subnormal.

The examinations were made by the use of the Stanford Revision
of the Binet-Simon Measuring Scale of Intelligence, by Dr Lewis
M. Terman, of Stanford University.* A particular advantage of
this revision is the careful standardization of tests extending several
years beyond the original 13-year level. This permits of more
accurate grading of the older pupils, who often present some of
the greatest difficulties to the teacher.

Table I shows the data under consideration. It will be noted
that these fifty children range in age from 7 to 16 years, and in
school from the receiving class to grade seven.

The distribution of chronological and mental ages is shown in
chart I. The median chronological age is 10 years; the median
mental age 8 years. At the ages represented, a general retardation
of two years, or one-fifth, is serious. The proportion of mentally
defective children in such a group will necessarily be large. It is
further significant that although the highest age is 16 years, the
highest mental age is 13. A proportionate difference is shown at
the lower end of the distribution curve.

The intelligence quotients of the group range from .57 to 1.17,
giving a maximum range of 60 per cent. The distribution is as
follows:

. 50 to .60  2 cases
.61 to .70  9 cases
.71 to .80 13 cases
.81 to .90 13 cases
.91 to 1.00  9 cases
Above 1.00  4 cases
The median intelligence quotient is .81.
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Name of pupil
William B..
Ivan E
Jessie C
Henry B....
Guy F
Mary K. . . .
Fernando F.
Matilda E..
Jennie V....
Elbert W. . .
Ellis G
Augusta C. .
Daniel F
Basil J
Conrad C...
Samuel F. . .
Amelia L...
Grace D. .. .
Frank P....
Owen M....
James S
Lydia R. .. .
Eugene H...
Viola T
Herman A. .
Ernest 0 ?
Hugh F
Roland S...
Amy V
May D
Ralph N... .
Vincent L...
Enoch B... .
Thomas J...
Ruth W
Arthur K. ..
Eva F
Austin K
Walter E
Julia D
Rudolf Z
Andrew N. .
Homer B
Martha R...
Robert W...
Flora E
Herbert S...
Harry A....
Charles C...
Emily V....
Actual
Age
Yrs. Mos.
11
14
9
11
9
9
10
10
7
9
12
9
14
7
8
7
9
8
11
7
13
7
10
12
13
8
13
12
9
15
14
15
15
15
14
10
8
9
9
11
10
13
12
0
2
0
1
8
6
0
4
8
0
9
10
4
0
0
0
Mental
Yrs. Mos.
11
9
5
9
7
9
7
10
6
7
10
9
13
7
9
7
10 t 6
2
5
11
10
4
1
8
3
7
1
1
10
5
9
1
10
11
1
0
6
6
0
11
5
1
2
6
1
10
4
10
1
4
6
7
7
6
6
8
6
6
6
6
8
6
7
7
11
7
12
9
8
9
11
11
11
12
13
11
7
8
7
9
9
10
6
0
0
6
0
4
8
0
0
10
6
2
8
6
2
0
4
6
1
4
8
4
4
0
6
5
7
8
0
2
10
2
2
3
10
6
6
0
2
10
7
7
1
=3 O.S
? ? ??
2
1.00
.69
.61
.81
.65
1.00
.70
1.00
.87
.77
.79
1.00
.94
1.02
1.17
1.07
.57
.74
.64
.94
.69
.76
.62
.82
.77
.70
.64
.72
.71
.82
.81
.89
.87
.86
.76
.98
.59
.77
.75
.75
.81
.96
1.08
.84
.97
.74
.85
.84
.81
.74
og
5
4
1
4
3
4
3
5
2
1
6
2
6
2
2
Rec
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
4
2
2
2
6
2
5
4
1
5
4
7
7
7
7
4
2

ScjC
Classification
Normal
Feebleminded
Feebleminded
Borderline
Feebleminded
Normal
Feebleminded
Normal ?
Dull Normal
Borderline
Borderline
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Feebleminded
Feebleminded
Feebleminded
Normal
Feebleminded
Borderline
Feebleminded
Dull Normal
Borderline
Feebleminded
Feebleminded
Feebleminded
Feebleminded
Dull Normal
Dud Normal
Dull Normal
Dull Normal
Dull Normal
Borderline
Normal
Feebleminded
Borderline
Borderline
Borderline
Borderline
Normal
Normal
Dull Normal
Normal
Feebleminded
Dull Normal
Dull Normal
Dull Normal
Feebleminded

* In ungraded room.
Perhaps a clearer way of indicating the great variability among
these children is by grouping them, although somewhat arbitrarily,
into the four groups which are commonly used in designating the
grade of intelligence. In table I each child is classified according
to this method. The percentages of the groups are as follows:
Feebleminded 32 per cent
Borderline 20 per cent
Dull normal 22 per cent
Normal or superior 26 per cent
These terms are in no way intended to describe "types" of
children, as is too often done by teachers and even psychologists.
As has already been stated, these divisions are arbitrary, and the
grouping is made only for the sake of convenience in discussion.
Some children might be as correctly placed in one group as in another.
The important fact is the child's level of intelligence, or his variability from normal.
The feebleminded group here includes those whose present levels
of intelligence indicate that in all probability they will never possess
a mentality beyond that of the average child of twelve years. In
all cases those so classified have intelligence quotients below .75;
that is, the mental age is less than three-fourths that of the actual
age. Sixteen children are included in this group, indicating that
about one-third of those selected by their teachers as "backward"
are actually feebleminded. The following are examples:
Ivan E.?(Not foreign.) Age 14. Mentality about 9?. Has reached grade
4 after six years in school. Is practically unable, his teacher says, to go farther.
Seems stupid and inattentive. Cannot name the months, make change for
simple amounts, or repeat six digits?all of these being tests in the ten-year
group. Interpretation of the fable of the Fox and the Crow: "The fox wanted
the meat and the crow didn't know how to sing." Responses to other tests
indicate equally well that his stupidity is not due to his unwillingness to learn,
but to mental incapability.

Jessie C.?Age 9. Mentality about 5?. Is in grade 1, and has never been
promoted. Is of foreign parentage, but speaks English well. Can barely copy
the square, and cannot copy the diamond at all. Does not know morning from
afternoon, or the value of any of the coins, except the penny. Is clearly an
institutional case, and should be removed from the regular class, where she has
been kept in the same grade for three years.

Amelia L.?Age almost 10. Mentality slightly above 6. Has been promoted this year to grade 2, although barely able to do the work of the previous
grade. Is one of the lowest grade Gases in the school. Is very unlikely ever to
possess the mentality of the ordinary child of ten years, Should by all means be
placed in a special class, if institutional care is not possible.
Eugene II.?Age 13. Mentality about 8?. Is in the lower section of grade
3. Has been shifted around from one grade to another, and because of his normal
appearance and physical development has been hold unduly responsible for his
inability to get along in school work. Has caused considerable annoyance and
inconvenience among the teachers. Shows indications of a very unstable and
low mentality, and neurasthenia. Is recommended for further psychological
observation, and for immediate removal to a special room where he can receive
individual attention. Is fond of manual work, and in this direction may lie the
solution of some of the difficulty.

Eva F.?Age 151 years. Mentality slightly above 9. Grade 5. Cannot
make a sentence from three words, make rhymes, arrange the weights, or comprehend any of the absurdities. Has been in this grade for some time, and seems
wholly incapable of much advancement. Has already been allowed to advance
in school beyond the limits indicated by her present level of intelligence. This
is probably due to her earnest, plodding nature. Presents no difficulty in discipline, and in this respect is one of the best pupils in the room. In an institution
of the right sort Eva could doubtless be trained in many useful things which are
denied her in the public school. It seems but little short of cruelty to permit her
to memorize her lessons every day, only to forget them before the next. With
this procedure, however, she is apparently contented.

Einily V.?Age 12. Mentality about 9. Is in the ungraded room, which
she says she likes much better than the other rooms where it is so hard for her to
learn. Is a large strong girl, and in good health. Her low grade of intelligence is indicated, among many other things, in her interpretation of fables.
Some of her responses are as follows:?Hercules and the Wagoner: "Teaches you not
to do it again." The Fox and the Crow: "Teaches you not to have meat in your
mouth." The Farmer and the Stork: "Better look out where you're going." Emily
is now learning basket making and plain sewing, and other work of a similar
kind. Efforts to teach her arithmetic and reading beyond a small amount have
hopelessly failed. The ungraded room has unquestionably saved her from complete discouragement, which in a child of her intelligence might have led to
undesirable results.

Although many of the sixteen cases of which the foregoing
are representative are in reality fit subjects for commitment to
institutions, it is improbable that with the present inadequacy of
provision in California this will be accomplished. At the very
best the school will only be able to keep them in attendance until
adolescence, when most of them will go out in the world to take
part in the perpetuation of degenerate stock. Some will be laborers
and ordinary working people, doing fairly well under close supervision, but subject to the many influences which prey upon weak
mentality to produce delinquency and criminality. Proper institutional care or segregation for these few cases alone might be a direct
saving to the state of several thousands of dollars.

The borderline group includes those whose mentality may reach
a slightly higher limit of development than those who may be considered definitely feebleminded. While for many of this group
institutional care would also be advisable, on the whole a level of
intelligence is represented through which persons may be held more
independently responsible than the former group. The borderline
cases are a frequent source of annoyance and special difficulty
because of their intermediate position between normality and feeblemindedness. A recent study of delinquents by the writer found
about 25 per cent of 150 delinquent boys to belong to this grade of
intelligence.

Elbert W.?Age 9. Mentality about 7. In grade 1, where he has been
for three years. A quick, active little colored boy, whose antics and playfulness
have given to many the erroneous impression of superior intelligence. May prove
to be not greatly inferior among his own people, but it is absurd to expect of
him the same mental development of which the normal children in his class are
capable. Those with whom Elbert started to school are now two years beyond
him, and it may be a positive detriment to him to continue his repetition of first
grade work.

Herman A.?Age 8. Mentality about 6|. In grade 2. Is of foreign
parentage, but speaks English well. No language difficulty which would interfere
greatly with the determination of his intelligence-level. Slightly above the
feebleminded group, but can be taught only with great difficulty. Cannot do the
work of his grade. Should be in a special class.

Ruth W.?Age 12. Mentality about 9. In grade 4. Seems to have almost
reached her limit in school subjects. Is willing and steady, and would probably
learn many things of value to her if placed in a special class before her deficiency
becomes relatively too great.

Rudolph Z.?Age 15?. Mentality about 12-?. Has been automatically
promoted to grade 7, with the hope that he would "learn better among the children
of his own age." Is stupid, blunt, and shows even less willingness than capability
to learn. Has been guilty of several acts of a delinquent nature. Is addicted to
cigarettes and liquor, and has been drunk several times. In all probability will
some day be sent to an institution for delinquents, which will be of more practical
value to him than the public schools have been. The ordinary public school is
almost powerless in such a case, and the bad influence which Rudolph has had
upon the other boys in the school is sufficient moral reason for putting him in
the care of the state.

The dull normal group includes those who are mentally backward, or merely "dull." Although there is much more which can
legitimately be expected in the mental development of these cases
than in those to which reference has already been made, there is
reason to believe that much time has been wasted in the hope that
many of such children could be made absolutely normal, or equal
in intelligence to average children of their respective chronological
ages. Children who exhibit the characteristics of this group will
probably reach low adult intelligence, and for them industrial training and vocational guidance are of far greater importance than
progress in the common school subjects. It is perhaps unnecessary
to point out here the futility of continual punishment and "nagging"
as a means of developing the intelligence of the children of this
group, or of stimulating them much beyond their capability. If
it is necessary, as is often the case, for such children to remain in
the regular classes, only by individual attention and patient treatment can the teacher be of much assistance in their competition
with the normal and superior children with whom they will be
associated.

Jennie V.?Age 7?. Mentality about 6|. Is in grade 2. While she presents no particular retardation from the standpoint of age-grade distribution, yet
the tests clearly indicate that she is not mentally equal to the children of her age.
Probably she should not have been started in school at such an early age, although
normal children would have no great difficulty under the same conditions. The
fact that her parents can barely speak English is perhaps sufficient reason why
she should be in the public school, but she is in need of the individual attention
which can only be obtained in the special class.

Ralph N.?Age 8 years 9 months. Mentality about 1\. In grade 2.
Another case where the special class could be of great assistance until the difficulties of language have been overcome. Likes manual work, and should be given
an opportunity in this line. Will probably reach low adult intelligence.
Enoch B.?Age almost 9. Mentality about 7?. In grade 2. Should
probably make better progress in the regular class than could be expected of most
of those of this group. Is physically delicate, and is subject to several continuous
ailments. Would pass for normal, by mere observation, among any group of
school children, except for his disinclination to play with the others. Special
attention would doubtless furnish him with much encouragement.

Thomas J.?(Colored). Age 14. Mentality about 12|. Has just been
promoted to grade 6, as previous to this examination his intelligence has been
greatly underestimated by his teachers. His mother is a capable and energetic
woman, with relatively high social standing. Thomas, however, shows the
racial characteristic of inattentiveness and lack of ambition. With his ambition
aroused by the presentation of something of interest to him, which the principal
of his school is attempting to bring about, we should expec t him to become a useful
citizen, and one of not greatly inferior intelligence.

The normal and superior group includes more than one-fourth
of the children selected by their teachers as "backward." The
fact that children of normal and even of superior intelligence should
have been so classified is of great significance. It is not surprising
that such children should often present some special difficulty
in discipline or instruction; but we wonder if the teacher is not
occasionally at fault in considering them "backward". In some
cases there is no apparent retardation. Matilda E., for example,
is in grade 5 at ten years of age. The difficulty may easily lie in
the possibility that the teacher has failed to take note of the fact
that Matilda is the youngest pupil in her room. Furthermore,
Matilda is from a foreign home, and her parents do not speak English except when necessary.
William B.?Age 11. Grade 5. Is of foreign parentage, but has no difficulty with language. There is no apparent reason why he should be backward,
unless most of the children in his room are of superior intelligence.
Mary K.?Age 9|. Grade 4. Tests exactly normal. Is somewhat nervous
and shy, but should present no special difficulty. Is often ill, and this may
account for her slight backwardness in school subjects. Is mentally equal to the
average child of her age.

Basil J.?Age 7. Tests slightly above normal. Is "backward" because of
mischievousness and incorrigibility. On one occasion the teacher was heard to
say that she "would never promote such a hopeless case." Probably better
results could be obtained by temporarily transfering this boy to a special class,
where the ironclad promotion system does not prevent the teacher from exercising the patience and kindness which are so necessary in dealing with children of
any degree of exceptionality.

Samuel F.?Age 7. Tests 7?. Has been in the receiving class for two years
on account of his "inability to learn to read." There is no apparent reason why
this should be in the case, if sufficient attention is actually given him. He has no
defects of sight, hearing, or speech, and is said to be capable in every other way.
Whatever the difficulty may be, individual teaching is apparently the only
solution. It is probable that it may easily be overcome.

Robert W.?Age 9. In the ungraded room. Has been placed here to make
up for school retardation due to absence while ill. Has done remarkably well,
and will soon be ready for the regular class. Were it not for the ungraded room
it is doubtful if this could have been so easily accomplished.
The school retardation in the three cities of this study having
no special classes is shown in chart II. The dotted line represents
the distribution of the grades which we could normally expect the
children of the ages given to have reached. The significant facts
are that of 15 children who should have gone beyond grade 6, but 7
have succeeded in doing so; and that one-half of these are in or
below grade 3, although the median age is 10 years. In all probability the prevalent system of automatic promotion by certain
teachers, after the child has spent two or three years in one grade
has resulted in many promotions beyond mental capability. If
grading were based upon mental ages, the following distribution
would result:

In grade 1  23 pupils
In grade 2  6 pupils
In grade 3  7 pupils
In grade 4  4 pupils
In grade 5  5 pupils
In grade 6  3 pupils
In grade 7  1 pupil
In grade 8  none
Thus, judged from the standpoint of intelligence-levels alone,
less than one-half of these children are capable of work beyond
grade 2. While there are probably many valid reasons why such a
distribution is objectionable, yet the foregoing table is an indication
that the present methods of grading and promoting defective and
backward children are equally impractical. The ungraded room
seems at present to be the best solution of this problem.
The following table summarizes the results by cities:
City
Fresno
San Jose..
Redwood.
Palo Alto.
No. of pupils
included
13
21
Median
age
10
9
14?
lOi
Median
M. age
9
7
11
9
No.
F. M.
No. who should be
in special class
9
20
6
All are now in special
class.

These figures are in no way indicative of the relative amount
of feeblemindedness among the school children of these cities, as
many more normal, superior, and backward children were examined
in each school than have been referred to in this study. There is
strong indication, however, that special classes for exceptional
children are of urgent need in all of these communities.

Summary and Conclusions.

1. Fifty children in the public schools selected by their teachers
because of backwardness were found to range in mentality from
middle grade morons to superior normal; 32 per cent may reasonably be classified as feebleminded, 26 per cent as normal or superior,
and the remaining number as belonging to the borderline or dull
normal grades. The range of intelligence quotients is from .57 to
1.17.

2. Many children classified by their teachers as backward are
subjects for institutions for defectives; many others should be in
special or ungraded rooms; while still others could undoubtedly
make better progress in the regular class if the teacher would but
recognize the fact that they are mentally exceptional, and not responble for their inability to act and learn like average children.
3. So many difficulties are presented by the present system of
grading and promotion that there is ample justification for the
establishment of special classes for each of the following groups:
(?) Subnormal children.
(?) Incorrigible children.
(c) Children of superior intelligence.
All of the above forms of special classes have been established in
various parts of the United States. While it is not likely that the
average school will be able to obtain all three of these immediately,
the time will undoubtedly come when these and other forms of
special classes will constitute a necessary part of the equipment of
every city school.
