On Overwork and Premature Mental Decay: its Treatment
======================================================

:Author: C. PI. F. Kouth, M.D., M.R.C.P. London : Bailliere, Tindall,
& Cox, 1876.

Although some doubt the fact as to whether insanity is on the in-
crease or not, there cannot be a question that the fierce struggle in the
present day for distinction and pre-eminence among all classes, and the
modern system of competitive examination for public appointments,
have been fertile sources of brain-disease; and everyone must admit
the truth of what Dr Routh has said on this vital subject in his
valuable treatise on "Overwork." He observes:?

" If one of our ancestors but of one hundred years ago were sud-
denly resuscitated, and made to undergo the toil and mental labour of
our days, he could not endure it. The life of an intellectual man who
would keep on a level with his compeers of the present day would be
equivalent to, at least, a dozen lives of a former age.

" In our own profession competition is carried to a fearful extent.
Formerly a young man had'to pass through a very limited groove.
Medical men were few and far between. Competitive examinations
were unheard of. Examinations for degrees and diplomas required but
a minimum of knowledge. It is within the memory of some of the
profession even now, that a student might become a surgeon after one
year's study, and many others became general practitioners, before
1815, without any examination whatsoever. Places of trust in our
hospitals were often family sinecures. India assistant-surgeoncies were
reserved only for those who had friends in office. I well remember
the time when two young men in a college, notorious only for their
very unfrequent attendance on lectures and their anything but tem-
perate habits, after three months' cramming, passed the Royal College
of Surgeons, were appointed Indian assistant-surgeons, and sent to
minister to our brave troops in that Empire. But now how different
the state of things ! A man mvst know his subjects to pass. Five
years of study and hospital practice, at least, are required, and many
appointments are open to honourable competition. The modern
system of competitive examination is no doubt yn improvement on that
?of former days, when interest alone determined tlie election of a candi-
date. Nevertheless, we think it could be clearly demonstrated that,
in many instances, it not only fails to secure the best man for the public
service, but that it frequently operates unjustly towards a rejected
candidate. We once heard the head-master of one of our first colle-
giate schools remark that his best boys?both mentally and morally?
were not those who generally succeeded at competitive examinations.
Is it not reasonable to infer that the system wants remodelling? "
Dr Kouth well describes the premonitory symptoms of premature
mental decay from overwork. Pie observes :?

" Let us now consider what are the evidences of premature mental
decay from overwork. They are, in fact, the general symptoms of
exhausted nervous power?viz., general debility of the body, inability
to walk even short distances without fatigue, general feeling of lan-
guor, unwillingness to any active exertion ; great tendency to sweat,
specially at night, but induced during the day by the slightest exertion;
generally an unsteady gait. The heart's action is weak, often irregular,
accompanied with palpitation, and not unfrequently with symptoms of
general indigestion.

" A change is gradually observed to come over the marts mind;
nnd, generally, some peculiarity developes itself in the character, not
previously noticeable in the affected person. It is not unusual in such
oases to find an undue exaltation of some peculiar talent or property
of the mind in a different direction, or one totally opposed to former
hobbies; and what strikes one more than anything in these changes is
the suddenness with which these hobbies spring up.

" A man may become intensely selfish and garrulous who was
formerly generous and reticent. lie takes, without any apparent
reason, likes and dislikes to those with whom he is associated, often
his nearest relatives, whose motives he invariably misunderstands. He
becomes subject to uncontrollable fits of moroseness or bad temper. A
previously careful man becomes unusually liberal, even extravagant; a
remarkably modest and prudent man puts off all reserve, and becomes
intensely disagreeable in genteel society; a dull man becomes a poet;
a deep, far-sighted politician will become a religious controversialist;
a man who, perhaps, never turned a note of music correctly becomes
a devotee to music. Sometimes the very morale of the mind is
changed. For instance, there is an alternation in his manner of acting
?one moment intensely joyous and excited, now greatly depressed?
one moment friendly, the next hostile. Sometimes obstinacy developes
itself to an intense degree, and nothing will move his determination ;
at another time he can be led as a child. Sometimes it is indecision of
character, ori in his opinions, which forms the prominent symptom,
often the more remarkable because occurring in one heretofore known
to be ever ready and resolute. Frequently there is an utter inability
to fix the attention on any one subject. In reading, the thread of the
story or argument cannot be long followed. Again, sometimes not
only is there an entire inability to arrange ideas in order, but the
judgment is strangely perverted."

Dr Kouth gives the following touching account of an interview
he had with the late Dr Golding Bird?one of the victims of over-
work?a few weeks before his death: ?

" I well remember a conversation I liad with the late Dr Golding
Bird a feAV weeks before his death. He was then in the zenith of his
popularity, and recognised by all as one of the ablest of our London
physicians. I called upon him one morning with a relative to consult
him. Several other medical men had preceded me. His rooms were
full, and I had to wait three hours ere I could obtain admission
into his study and consult about the case. I congratulated him on
his success in practice. 'Yes,' he said to me, ' you are right; but I
wish, nevertheless, to make your remark a text for a little parting
advice. You see me, at little over forty, in full practice, my rooms
full. I am making my several thousands per annum '?I think he said
seven?' and, if I die to-morrow, I do not leave as many hundreds to
my family. All this I have done by sheer perseverance, increasing
hard work, and no holiday. But I am to-day a wreck. I have fatal
disease of the heart. I know I cannot live many months?the result
of anxiety and hard work ; and my parting words of advice to you
are these : Coute qui coute, and?nevermind at what loss?take your
six weeks' holiday. It may delay your success, but it will insure its
development; otherwise you will find yourself at my age a prosperous-
practitioner, but a dying old man.' Six weeks after this conversation
he had put off his earthly tabernacle."

Dr Eouth's views on the moral and physical treatment of the
victims of overwork are very valuable ; but we cannot endorse all he
says on the efficacy of phosphorus, though we are quite in accord with
him as to the value of a fish-diet in these cases. Dr Winn published
an article in the British Medical Journal, September 28, 1872, entitled
" Training for the Tripos," in which he advocates the utility of a fish-
diet. Dr Winn observed :?

" There is a common saying that fish feeds the brain, which may
depend on the phosphorus it contains. Certainly, there can be no
doubt that some sorts of fish, such as soles, whiting, plaice, &c., are
peculiarly suitable to a weak digestion."

Dr Eouth's book is very instructive and well worthy of perusal.
