Diseases of the Nervous System
===============================

70 Art. VI.?
No. II.
:Author: Robert Boyd, M.D.Edin., F.R.C.P. Loxd.

President Medico-Psychological Association, 1870, late Physician and Superintendent County
Somerset Lunatic Asylum, formerly Resident Physician St. Marylebone Infirmary, and Lecturer
on Practice of Medicine.

Of these diseases, next in succession to Convulsions comes
Epilepsy, which is essentially a convulsive disorder, and is closely
allied to Idiocy. All epileptics under puberty in the Somerset
Asylum were also idiots. Convulsions, epilepsy, and idiocy appear
to form a natural order, a distinct class in themselves ; whilst in-
sanity in its various forms, which often alternate in the same
individual, would form a second class of the functional disorders
of the brain.

The practical reasons adduced for the division and separation
of these classes are, that the association of epileptics with
others in lunatic asylums is injurious, and that the younger
idiots are capable of instruction, and ought to be removed to
institutions established for that purpose. Convulsions were
shown, in the previous number of this Journal, to be a common
accompaniment and even, as it were, a forerunner of disease.
In a severe epidemic of measles in the St. Marylebone Work-
house, before the eruption appeared, some infants died almost
suddenly in convulsions.

Epilepsy, or the falling sickness, has been described
under various names by the oldest medical writers. Sometimes
it presents the most distressing symptoms, convulsive distortions
occurring in paroxysms, attended with sudden loss of conscious-
ness and sensibility, accompanied and followed by coma. The
muscles of the face and eyes are much affected, also the muscles
of the lower jaw, whilst at the same time a frothy moisture
issues from the mouth. The convulsions have for some moments
remissions, but are again suddenly renewed with great violence ;
after a short time they generally cease altogether, and the
person remains without motion, but in a state of insensibility,
and under the appearance of profound sleep. Sometimes
suddenly, but for the most part by degrees only, the person
recovers his senses and power of motion, but without any
recollection of what passed from being first seized with the fit;
all are sad and depressed after the attack. During the convulsions, the pulse and respiration are hurried and irregular; but
when the convulsions cease, they return to their usual regularity
and healthy state. Dr Beid remarks : " The first symptom of
an attack is the suspension of the action of the heart, and
consequently an intermission of the pulse, which may continue
from a few seconds to about three minutes, which was the
longest period of intermission I have yet seen." The effect of
the common exciting causes of fright, grief, anxiety, &c.,
which most remarkably disorder the actions of the heart, show
the importance of more frequently directing our attention to
this organ in our researches respecting the nature and treatment
of epilepsy. The form of the disease varies in different persons,
?r in the same person on different occasions. I here is a form
of epilepsy, termed by the French " petit mal,' without con-
vulsions. Dr Prichard describes a form intermediate between
apoplexy and spilepsy, preceded by vertigo, in which the patient
falls insensible, but without rigidity or convulsions of the mus-
cular system. In epilepsy, however, the functions of the biain
are lost, while those of the spinal cord are increased.
In some cases the eyelids shut and open rapidly, and some-
times become fixed ; the lips project and extend towards the
ears, and are covered with frothy saliva; the tongue is swollen,
and often cut between the teeth, the grinding of which is so
violent that they are sometimes broken. Grinding of the teeth
I have also observed in cases of general paralysis. Two remark-
able instances occurred in the Somerset Asylum in males in a
state of melancholia, combined with pulmonary phthisis ? one
?f whom had convnlsions, the other epileps}7. Esquirol states
that frothing of the mouth occurs sometimes in apoplexy,
asphyxia, and hysteria: "the pathognomonic character of epilepsy
consists in convulsions, the entire suspension of sensibility, and
loss of consciousness." In epilepsy the convulsions are concen-
trated, and are more violent on one side of the body than the
other. In hysteria the convulsions are expansive, and are more
uniform.

In many cases of epileps}^ there are, or appear to be, no pre-
monitory symptoms. On the other hand, there are persons who
have only the premonitory symptoms of an attack. I he con-
^ ulsions not being general, perhaps only a convulsive movement
of one limb, the head,or lips, presents itself, and there is sometimes
only a stunning sensation. Some run, others turn round. Iliese
attacks of epileptic vertigo are often the prelude to the com-
plete attack. Amongst the old cases in asylums, there is often
a great difference in the severity and in the continuance of the
attacks. In the severer forms the first intimation is a cry ; the
patient suddenly falls down insensible, and suffers from convul-
sions, which may either be general, or affect one side more than
the other. The face is bloated. Epileptics sometimes howl,
and sometimes make a noise like a person strangling. The
neck is rigid, and the trunk and limbs in a tetanic state. The
flexure of the thumb is frequent, and has been considered by
some a distinctive sign of epilepsy. The " epileptic aura " (a
term used since the time of Galen) is a sensation of cold, or, as
it were, a vapour which goes from the external parts, or from
the chest or abdomen, to the brain, when the attack is breaking
forth. The inhalation of aromatics, or stimulants, or ligatures
to the limbs, are at this time emplo}red to ward off the attack.
Many epileptics, when forewarned, endeavour to induce the
attack by quarrelling, or imbibing stimulants. Long intervals
may occur between the attacks, or they may occur daily, and
even many times a day. The duration is from a few seconds to
several hours. When the intervals are very long, the patient
may be for days in an unconscious state, and have repeated
attacks of convulsions, and death often occurs during one of
those severe attacks. Amongst females especially, the attacks
are said to return on fixed days.

With a view of fixing the treatment, the commonly adopted
division of epilepsy is into " idiopathic," which arises in the
brain or spinal cord; and " sympathetic," where the exciting-
cause is in some other remote organ. These terms are synony-
mous with "centric" and "eccentric," employed by Dr Marshall
Hall. The writers who believe in sympathetic forms admit
that the seat of the paroxysm is the encepbalon, its causes
being often in other organs. Hence they subdivide the sym-
pathetic species. Sauvages and Sagur [Systema Morborum)
make as many varieties as there are principal exciting causes.
A similar proposal with respect to insanity has been made by the
late Dr Skae, of Edinburgh, in his classification of mental diseases.
Epilepsy is complicated with defects or disorders of the
mind in various ways. The following classification is recom-
mended by the Metropolitan Commissioners in Lunacy: 1st.
Epileptic idiots whose intellectual faculties have never been
developed; 2nd. Epileptics who are imbecile or demented;
3rd. Epileptic maniacs, who, without obvious disorder of the
mind, when epileptic fits are coming on, are irritable, morose,
malicious, and dangerous, and sometimes perpetrate the most
atrocious acts. In some instances the mental disorder has the
form of acute mania, or rather raving delirium. The patient
is seized with a sudden paroxysm, during which he sings, roars,
shrieks, or resembles a man in a violent fit of intoxication.*

* A remarkable instance of this kind occurred in a man, aged 45, in the
Somerset County Asylum, wlio was suddenly seized with a rapid succession cf
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. <D

4th. Epileptics whose intellects are not impaired. Boys and
girls, -when they have become a trouble to their parents, as
well as dangerous to themselves, have sometimes been sent by
Boards of Guardians to asylums for protection. The Commis-
sioners do not consider this a sufficient reason for associating*
this class of epileptics with the insane.
Arrangements are made in dormitories for epileptics, that
other patients may not be disturbed by them at night. In the
clay there is no special arrangement?they are classed with
other patients. Some of them are rational in the intervals
between their attacks, which may be for weeks, or even months,
during which time they go to work daily with the other
patients. In those epileptics in whom these intervals were
-congest, the attacks when they occurred were most severe and
continuous?often confining them to bed for several days, and
sometimes terminating fatally. Many epileptics?some imbe-
cile or idiotic, some dangerous and of filthy habits, and some
rmless?had also to be placed with other patients; for they
could not be placed in a class by themselves, as the asylum
?would not admit of a subdivision.

idiopathic epilepsy commences in early life; the attacks
are lri'egular and occur without notice, and the convulsions
aie slight. Hereditary predisposition is a very frequent
cause. Malformation of the cranium and lesions of the
Meninges and brain are given as causes. Inequalities in the
cerebral hemisphere I have found not unusual in epileptics.
? ,Urtlours all sorts, cysts, and concretions in the brain have
a so been observed. The Wenzels, Sims, and others found
c anges in the pituitary and pineal bodies. Sympathetic
?pi. ePsy ^ay be caused by worms, gastric and intestinal
jlnRation, abscess of the liver, suppressed eruptions on the
lead recovery in the latter taking place after the eruption
Was lestored. Moxa applied to the nape of the neck, on the
appeal ance of the first symptom, is said to have been followed
j recovery. Idiopathic epilepsy, if not cured at puberty,
lemams incurable, and, according to Esquirol, epilepsy com-
bined with insanity is never cured. In a case related by him,
ieie the aura commenced in the great toe, the toe having*
een cauterized to the bone, there was no longer an aura, but
A attacks were more violent and frequent than before.
After numerous dissections of the brains of epileptics, both
-i'oville and Andral agree that there is no special lesion
epileptic fits after receiving grievous intelligence respecting liis wife. lie was in good
r^a. tll? and had ?nly about four fits in a month. Previous to the last attack, lie
pe eel about like a drunken man, was sometimes in a state of stupor, and some-
irnes in a state of fury. He had 23 fits in two days, and died.
attending tliis malady. Andral insists upon the necessity of
distinguishing between those cases in which the patient dies
in a tit, and those in which death occurs in the interval, as
in the former there will be congestion of blood in the cerebral
vessels, which is the effect and not the cause of the fit, as some
might suppose.

Although our knowledge of the causes and treatment of
epilepsy has but little advanced since the days of Hippocrates,
numerous writers have not failed to give their different views
on the subject. Mr. Monsford, on the supposition that the
nervous and electro-motor fluids are identical, has contended
that the brain is constantly generating them, and that in health
they are controlled by the will in opposition to their natural
tendencies?their formation, retention, and discharge thereby
being duly regulated; but when weakened by disease, this
control is irregularly or imperfectly exercised, and their accu-
mulation is favoured, until it reaches its maximum, when
it explodes in an epileptic seizure. This opinion is founded
on the identity of nervous influence with the electric, to
which few will subscribe. Dr Brown-Sequard states that in
many cases an unfelt irritation starts at the same time as the
aura, from some centripetal nerve, and is the real cause of the
epileptic seizure. Epilepsy often occurring without any appre-
ciable cause, it is necessary to admit a predisposing and a
specific cause. S. Frank states that of 300 cases investi-
gated by him, very few occurred in persons who had been
perfectly healthy previous to the accession of the disease,
fissot has treated specifically of tlie diseases which precede
epilepsy. Copland considers it nearly related to apoplexy on
the one hand, and convulsions on the other: in its more
idiopathic states to the former, and also to mania and idiocy;
and in its symptomatic states, to the latter, to hysteria, ecstasy,
and some other nervous affections.

Dr Alison states that there are hardly any chronic local
diseases in which congestions of blood do not occur?as in
very various derangements of the functions of the nervous
system, such as headaches, giddiness, transient imperfections
of sense or of memory, fits of epilepsy, of hysteria, or other
spasms, even of mania, in those predisposed to these diseases*
Some cases of transient paralytic affections, and many of
apoplexy, appear to result from simply increased afflux of
blood to the brain without rupture of its vessels, disorganisa-
tion of its texture, or even increased effusion of its serous
fluid. Burrows has shown that the vessels of the brain may
contain a larger quantity of blood at one time than another.
Dr Sieveking, in his learned treatise on Epilepsy and Epilep-
tiform seizures, gives the comparative statistics of that dis-
ease. He refers to Brown-Sequard's experiments, and remarks
that the seizures in the guinea-pig appear to have borne
much more the character of tetanus than of epilepsy. In
epilepsy in the human being, the evidence shows the brain to
be the organ primarily involved. Dr Sieveking does not
adopt Sir T. "Watson's views with regard to the absence of
cerebral congestion in the epileptic paroxysm: but fully agrees
with him in his views in relation to the brain and spinal cord
m epilepsy?namely, that there are good reasons for believing
that the change, whatever it is, which is the cause of the epileptic
fit, may originate in the spinal cord, and thence extend to the
train and vice versa. With regard to the part of the brain itself
affected in epilepsy, Sauvages long since ascertained, by experi-
ment, that the hemispheres of the denuded brain may be punc-
tured without exciting sensibility; but that, as soon as the
instrument reaches the origin of the nerves, or the medulla ob-
longata, epileptic convulsions are produced, and hence concluded,
that whatever especially atfects those parts, may induce the dis-
ease. Dr Marshall Hall's doctrine, that all convulsive diseases
ar? diseases of the spinal cord cannot properly be applied to
epilepsy. In the epileptic vertigo, or " petit-mal," there is
equently a suspension of consciousness without any convulsion
at all. Tlle brajn js therefore essentially concerned.

Epilepsy appears to be a functional disorder , of the brain
and spinal cord. Fright has induced convulsions, which have
Jeen repeated till they terminated in a most deplorable case of
epilepsv. The symptoms, even though so severe as to cause
eath, and that suddenly, often leave no post-mortem change
] ?m what is considered the ordinary healthy condition of the
nervous centres. No doubt changes from the ordinary state
aie found frequently in the skull, in the membranes of the
rain and spinal cord, and in the structure of the nervous
centaes, in cases of epilepsy; but the same changes are found
in the bodies of those who have never been subject to epilepsy.
? ome of these changes?such as thickening and opacity of the
inembranes, with an increased quantity of fluid in the ven-
ules, ^ believe to be a natural decay, which may be prema-
11 e, or, when the brain becomes diminished in size, the effects
old age. In epileptics there is sometimes found a partial
absorption or diminution in the size of the brain, and, on the
ner hand, it is sometimes found enlarged. An instance
occurred in a young man, aged 23, affected with epileptic
s from childhood. Three days previous to his death a rapid
Recession of fits came on ; his respiration was laboured, at
^ lines, indeed, almost suspended, with frothing from both nose
an mouth in large quantity. The chief peculiarity in this
case was the great size of the encephalon, which appeared to
be too large for the skull, and weighed 3 lbs. 6 oz. Another
rapid case occurred in a boy aged 14, a congenital idiot, of
a healthy family, and the fourth of eleven children, whose
mother had had a fever and was in a bad state of health for
six months preceding his birth. At the age of 12 he became
violent and dangerous to the younger children, and was sent
to the asylum, where he had for the first time an epileptic
seizure. He had, however, only two fits, at long intervals.

The day before his death he had twelve fits, fell into a comatose
state, and died at noon. The head was unusually large, fore-
head prominent; the enceplialon weighed upwards of 3 lbs.,
and the cerebral vessels were congested with blood.

Enlargement of the brain in cases of sudden death was first
observed at the St. Marylebone Infirmary by Dr Sims. Several
cases occurred in that institution, when, after a careful exa-
mination, no other cause for death could be discovered.
Two epileptic females in the Somerset Asylum had a pecu-
liar appearance: both having hemiplegia, were crippled, one
on the right, the other on the left side; the right wrist in one
of them was much contracted, the hand almost useless ; the
arm and thigh on that side were each two inches smaller in
circumference, and also shorter than the opposite limbs, and
both patients walked with a limp. These peculiarities in the
limbs existed in both from childhood. The fits were less severe
in these cases, and the patients were sharper in their intellects
than the other epileptics. One of them learned her alphabet,
and also to spell, after her admission to the asylum, and had
an inclination to learn. They were both passionate and spite-
ful; and one of them, not so fond of learning as the other,
was particularly given to thieving. I had never seen any notice
of similar cases, but had had previously several opportunities
of examining the bodies of such patients after death, having
invariably found a deficiency in- one cerebral hemisphere,
which in nearly every instance was on the side opposite to
the paralysed one. A most remarkable case of the kind
occurred in 1842. A man, aged 47, fell in a fit in the street,
and was brought to the St. Marylebone Infirmary, where he died
shortly afterwards. The left extremities were very much
smaller than the right. It was ascertained, at the coroner's
inquest, that he had always been lame on the left side, with
the arm contracted ; that he was slovenly in his habits, a miser
in disposition, and an inordinate eater. His business had been
that of a linendraper; he was considered a good accountant,
and had been at one time a lawyer's clerk. On making the
post-mortem examination, a large quantity of fluid escaped
which was confined in an abnormal membrane over the right
cerebral hemisphere, the convolutions of which were wanting",
and which was only half the size and weight of the other, viz.
9? oz. The left hemisphere weighed 18^ oz., which is not
above the average weight in an adult male. A notice of these
cases of arrest of development, with a drawing of one, from
the brain deposited in the Museum of the Royal College of
Physicians, will be found in the 39tli volume of the " Transac-
tions of the Royal Medico-Chirurgical Society of London.''
In 45 out of 89 male epileptics, there was an inequality
in weight of from \ to 6^ oz. between the two hemispheres ;
also in 35 out of 61 females, an inequality of from ? to
2jr OZ.

1. The youngest case of epilepsy recorded in the necrological
register of tlie St. Marylebone Infirmary was that of a male infant of
one month. When a fortnight old, the baby had fits similar to those
of its mother, who had been for some years epileptic. The fits were-
almost continual; abscesses formed on the left knee and right hand.
Head and brain, natural; weight of encephalon, 1 oz. Chest. an
ulcer, size of lialf-a-crown, which had eaten its way from the surface
between the costal cartilage, through the anterior mediastinum, to
the anterior edge of each lung ; right lung, 1-Jr oz.; left, 1 oz. The other
organs natural.

2. A cabinetmaker, aged 34, imbecile ; epilepsy of four years'
standing ; ten weeks under treatment in the Infirmary. Head: much
fluid in the cerebral ventricles; brain small, o/-s oz. . Chest', lungs
natural; heart small, G~r oz. Abdominal organs small.
3. A bootmaker, aged 35 ; married; epilepsy for four years, combined
with mania. lie suffered acute pain in the head, for which he had
been occasionally under medical treatment at his own home, and also
m the Infirmary. Ilis illness was so severe that for the last year he
was unable to follow his trade. The fits came on in rapid succession
the evening before and continued to the night of his death, with
scarcely five minutes intervening. Ilead : arachnoid thickened, brain
quite hard and wasted?it did not nearly fill the skull. The process
on the right side of the "sella turcica" projected three times as high
as the opposite one, and the sulci in the right parietal bone were un-
usually deep, and had high sharp edges; the encephalon weighed 4l?
?z- Chest: old pleuritic adhesions; organs natural. Abdominal
organs natural.

4. A linendraper, aged 40, long subject to epileptic fits, and an
habitual drunkard. Brought to the Infirmary by the police, having
fallen down in the street as if shot through the head. He had a
severe wound on the forehead. In a few hours after he had a
severe fit, and was violently convulsed. He was relieved after being
cupped, and the next day was quite rational. On the day following
the fits again returned, and continued with short intermissions for thirty-
six hours, Avhen he died. Head : general congestion of blood in the
brain. Chest: heart enlarged, 14^ oz. Abdomen: liver large and fatty,
' ? oz? Other organs natural.

5. Male, aged 19, epileptic, died of typhus; the ridges of the
skull unusually prominent in the temporal fossa ; brain, 46| oz.
G. Male, aged 20; subject to epileptic fits for four years from a
fright; died of typhoid combined with pneumonia. An encysted
tumour or gelatinous bag, the size of a filbert, was found on the left
cerebral hemisphere, with thinning of the corresponding portion of the
skull. In other respects the brain natural; weight, -47-g- oz.

7. Male, aged 18, epileptic; found dead in bed in Idiots' ward in the
St. Marylebone Workhouse. Had epileptic fits since he was five years
of age. Hemiplegia of the right aide, the wrist firmly flexed, the
right ankle likewise flexed firmly; the right lower extremity one inch
shorter than the left; the right thigh was two inches less in circum-
ference, 17 inches, the left 19 inches; the calf of right leg was 10^
inches, the left 13 inches; and the right arm and forearm were two
inches less in circumference than the left, owing to arrest of de-
velopment. Head: the left cerebral hemisphere was devoid of convo-
lutions, their place occupied by fluid contained in the meshes of a thick
membrane ; the cerebral structure, brown and tough, giving considerable
resistance to the knife, compared Avith the rest of the brain. Right
cerebral hemisphere, natural, 21^ oz.; left, 14f oz.; cerebellum,
4? oz.; medulla, f oz.; encephalon, 41^ oz. Respiratory and
abdominal organs natural. Height, 5 feet 1 inch; weight, 104 lbs.
8. A whip-maker, aged 19 ; died of typhus four days after his
admission to the Infirmary. For several years he had been subject to
epileptic fits, and was reported to have frequently had as many as thirty
fits in the twenty-four hours. Head: brain quite natural; weight, 46^
?oz. In the left temporal fossa the ridges were unusually prominent,
but not so on the opposite side. The head only examined.

9. Male, aged 25, admitted with gangrene of the lung to the in-
firmary from the Idiots' ward in the workhouse. The epileptic fits
were reported to have come on about eight years before, from a fall off
a ladder and fracture of the skull. He was seldom more than three
days at a time free from fits, and sometimes had five or six at night;
sometimes noisy and troublesome. Gradual emaciation. Head : large
healthy brain, 49 oz.; no sign of fracture of skull; the process on left
side of basilar more pointed than usual. Chest: recent lymph on
right lung; the anterior portion of the iipper lobe gangrenous, 40tt
oz., left, 27-^ oz.; heart, 9^ oz. Abdominal organs natural.
10. Idorse-dealer, aged 33. Epilepsy combined with mania. Fits
of recent occurrence, succeeded ty mania ; under treatment nearly
three.months, arachnitis, roughness of the lining-membrane of the fourth
ventricle; brain large; weight, 51^ oz. No organic disease in chest
or abdomen.

11. Male, aged 41, epilepsy combined with idioc)^, congenital; a
brother likewise epileptic. Brain small, in other respects natural;
weight, 38^ oz. Died from pulmonary phthisis.

12. Surveyor, aged 48 ; epilepsy combined with mania ; fits very
frequent, as many as fifteen reported in one night; had been subject to
them for many years; they were supposed to have been caused by too
close application to his business; under treatment for three months
previous to his death. Head : the vessels of the brain were congested
with blood ; that organ was unusually large ; weight 53^- oz. Chest:
pneumonia of the left lung. Abdomen, organs natural.

13. A girl, aged 12 ; subject to epileptic fits since she was five years
old. A large head, very broad posteriorly, narrow across from ear to
ear. She has had as many as thirty-two fits in the twenty-four hours,
never for a day quite free; seldom less than ten in a day; when to-
lerably free in the day, six or eight generally occurred during the night.
Head: brain large and extremely firm, no other change; 44| oz.
Other organs natural.

14. Female, aged 27, an epileptic for many years. Admitted from
the Workhouse to the Infirmary, for gangrene of the lung, eight days
before death ; had also obstinate constipation of the bowels. Head:
oedema of the pia mater, and softening at the base of the right cere-
bral hemisphere, with opacity of the arachnoid and gelatinous appear-
ance of the membranes ; the encephalon weighed 40^- oz. Chest: a
small portion of the back part of lower lobe of right lung gangrenous;
redness of the bronchial membranes; right lung, 14^ oz.; left,
13-jj ozs. Abdominal organs natural. Height, 4 feet 10 inches;
weight, 801bs.

15. Female, aged 32. Has had epileptic fits for the last three
years, which recently have greatly increased in frequency. Admitted
to the Infirmary only two days before death, having lost all power in
10 .ft side four days previously. She had convulsions almost with-
out intermission. Consciousness remained till the day before her
eath. ^ Head: congestion of blood in cerebral veins, opacity of
' racimoid, anterior portion of the right hemisphere adherent to mem-
r'lne> and a portion of brain of the size of a walnut disorganised,
and in structure cellular, and filled with serum; encephalon,
2 oz. Chest: pneumonia lower lobe, right lung, 23 oz.; left, 17 oz.;
le.irt, 9 oz. Abdominal organs natural.

1G. Female, aged 34, in Workhouse; epileptic fits periodic, not
P ec^enk Stupid at the time, but well in the intervals. Head:
cere ral ^ convolutions flattened. Weight of encephalon, 48 oz.
test, right lung, 16 oz
.; pleuro-pneumonia of left, 34 oz. Other
organs natural. 1 1
Female, aged 38; epilepsy since infancy. She died unex-
pec edly in a fij, and had been an inmate in the Workhouse for years.
en between four and five years of age after a fit, she had lost
partially the power of left side, and the convulsions were ever after-
1 s strongest on that side, being most frequent in warm weather.
\\ els constipated, menses irregular and scanty. Head: right cere-
ra hemisphere small, 18f oz.; left, 20-^ oz.; cerebellum, 5^ oz.;
pons. 1 oz.; encephalon, 45? oz. Other organs natural.
18. female, aged 40. A congenital idiot, subject to epileptic fits
rom childhood. She died in the workhouse ward for idiots. Head:
mall, skull unusually thick, the cerebral vessels congested with blood,
nearly an ounce of clear fluid in the lateral ventricles; weight of the
)ram, o8|- oz. Other internal organs natural.
Analysis of the eighteen foregoing cases of epilepsy, twelve
Eiales and six females.

The weight of the encephalon was natural in the infant, also
very nearly so in the two males, as compared with the average
weight of the encephalon in the sane, which is found to be nearly 46
ounces avoirdupois in the male, and 42 in the female adult.
In one male no weight is given, in three males and four
females the brain was above the average weight; and in two
males and two females below it; both of the males and one of
the females being idiots. In one of the males there was a
remarkable difference between the cerebral hemispheres, one
being only two-thirds the weight of the other, which was the
cause of the arrest of development of the limbs on the opposite
side (Case 7).

In one of the females there was also a difference of
two ounces between the cerebral hemispheres. Death was
sadden in these cases, and there was no other serious organic
disease, beyond the chronic affection, viz., the inequality of the
two cerebral hemispheres. Sharp bony ridges and projections
in the base of the skull were observed in three of the males; in
one male acute pain in the head was persistent. One was a
confirmed drunkard. An encysted tumour was found in one
male, and the skull above it was partly absorbed. A cyst
occurred in one of the females ; congestion of blood in the
brain in two males and one female ; arachnitis in two males and
one female. The brain and membranes natural in two males.
There was softening of a portion of right cerebral hemi-
sphere in one female, and fluid in the ventricles in one female.
The disorder was combined with typhus fever in two males,
and in one of them also with pneumonia; in two males and
two females with pneumonia alone ; in one female with pleuro-
pneumonia ; in one male and one female, with gangrene of
the lung; in one male, with pulmonary phthisis.
Two of the males and two of the females were idiots, and
in two males the disorder was combined with mania or raving-
delirium.

Esquirol found in 339 epileptics that four-fifths were more
or less insane.

In the Somerset County Lunatic Asylum during twenty and
a quarter years, 9|- per cent, of the patients admitted were
subject to epileptic fits, combined in the young under twenty
years with idiotcy; in those of more advanced years very frequently
with mania and with other forms of insanity. Contrary to the
experience of Esquirol, who states the number of female
epileptics to exceed the males by one-third, of the 310 epileptics
in the Somerset Asylum, the males exceeded the females by nearly
a sixth. Esquirol considers epilepsy to be contagious by the
fright which an attack occasions to some beholders. This
opinion is supported by the facts previously stated relative to the
contagiousness of convulsions, so fully described in Heckei s
" Epidemics of the Middle Ages." This disorder is so closely
allied to epilepsy that many persons hardly make a distinction
between the two. Teething in infancy is regarded as a frequent
cause of convulsions. An experienced dentist informed me
that he has known the cutting of the wisdom teeth to cause
epilepsy. So here the making of a distinction would seem to
be influenced simply by age. The greater size of the head in the
male foetus, and consequently its greater liability to injury in
parturition, renders the male more liable than the female to
convulsive diseases in early life. There were at least three
remarkable instances of persons not known previously as
epileptics having been seized with epileptic fits aftei kindly
giving their assistance to patients in their attacks ; one a
sempstress (251), aged 66, three years after admission had,
for the first time, epileptic fits, 33 occurring within four months.
The fits continued for a year, gradually becoming less frequent.
Her mental state ultimately improved, and at the end of seven
years she was discharged, relieved. . ? n
It is certain that in some cases of insanity epileptic fits
have been induced by frequently witnessing them in others, and
that the association with epileptics is hurtful to the insane.
I he Metropolitan Commissioners in their report made it a
matter of complaint that the epileptics in asylums were not
separated from the insane. Instead of enlarging the present
asylums it would be very desirable if some adjoining counties
were to unite and build suitable asylums for epileptics and idiots,
01 appropriate some of the workhouses for that purpose, many
of them being comparatively empty. The facilities under the
lunacy Acts, and recent legislation have enabled parishes to
transfer their aged and troublesome paupers, and fill the county
asylums with unfit cases.

Some time ago it was reported that an hospital for 2,000
epileptics, not insane, was to have been established in the South
of France. The means thus obtained for the study of the
milder forms of the disorder would probably lead to beneficial
results.

The terminations of the 310 cases of epilepsy, 181 males
and 129 females, admitted to the County Somerset Asylum
were:?

Recovered for the time, 6 males, 2 females.
Relieved, 10 males, 11 females.
Not improved, 17 males, 11 females; transferred to asylums
and friends.

Died, 103 males, or 57 per cent.; 65 females, or 50 per cent.
Remaining' in asylum, 45 males, or 24f per cent.; 40 females
or 31 per cent.

In two of tlie six recoveries in tlie males, the fits were attri-
butable to excessive drunkenness, not an uncommon cause in
the experience of military surgeons.

The first of these (441), a flyman, had imbibed freely on a holiday,
at Cheddar Cliffs, the favourite resort of excursionists in the neigh-
bourhood. He was subject to fits, and had attempted suicide on this
occasion ; but his senses very soon returned, and he was discharged at
once. The 2nd case (1,082) Avas of much longer duration; a printer,
aged 37, married; was admitted on three separate occasions in three years,
once after an interval of thirteen months between the attacks, and again
after an interval of twenty-one months, each attack being attributable
to the same cause?namely, excessive drinking. The fits were attended
with mania, and he Avas dangerous both to himself and others. Being
quite rational, he was discharged on probation. He had been free
from fits for a month previously. The 3rd (541), a carpenter, aged 62,
married ; was a case of eclampsia of two years' duration, who had been
for one week reported as dangerous to himself and others. Pulse 96,
health indifferent, fancies he is bewitched, and that his wife exercises
supernatural power over him. Two months after admission he took
diuretics for oedema of the legs; he worked in the carpenters' shop ; the
fits came on suddenly, and he would fall if not caught. He lost con-
sciousness, but never frothed at the mouth, or was convulsed ; grasped
tightly anything he might have in his hand. There was the spasm and
contraction, alternating with relaxation as in convulsions. At the ex-
piration of five months he was discharged recovered. The 4th (799),
a labourer, aged 43, married; first attack; duration, thirteen years ;
dangerous one week; attempted to injure his wife and children;
maniacal; fits sometimes lasted three hours; intervals of two and
three months. He was discharged relieved, and again admitted, after
nine years, in a similar state, violent and destructive. At the end of
five months he was discharged recovered for the time. The 5th (1,014),
a carpenter, aged 38, married ; first attack, eighteen months' duration;
health indifferent; pulse 75. Fits mostly occur at night, and are
peculiar; he dees not seem entirely to lose consciousness. There is
no frothing at the mouth, or spasmodic action of the limbs, but jacti-
tation of the whole body, and he knocks himself about violently.
After eight months fits became less frequent, and in eighteen months
he Avas discharged, having been for three months free from fits, and
rational. The Gth, and last male (1,069), an ostler, aged 28, single;
brought from the Bridgewater Infirmary, after having had an epileptic
fit combined Avith mania three days preA'iously; fits not frequent or
se\Tere ; in a convalescent state in six months, and discharged in eight
months, recoA^ered.

A laundress (213) aged 24, married; with child; Avas admitted for
a second attack of epileptic mania, Avhich, like the present, came on
during the seventh or eighth month of pregnancy. She Avas A'iolent
towards her husband; good health; pulse 104; fits occur about one
in a week; her previous attack, two years ago, was of two months'
duration; during the interval to this attack she remained free. She
seemed free from all dislike to her husband in a month after her
a mission, when he visited her, and she was discharged five Aveeks
a ter admission recovered for the time, and had her confinement shortly
afterwards.

A female (284), aged 25, married ; two children; first attack since
i ast confinement, seven months before admission; she has been
un tted to attend to her household duties. Her only delusion is that
? G is bewitched, and she beat her mother-in-law, whom she fancied
4/n ed ^er' linking that if she drew her blood, and that of her
Clen> she would be relieved; pulse 84 ; indifferent health ; had an
a tack combined with hysteria, during which, in the night, she
screamed and threw herself about violently, as did the male (1,014).
' ie got over her delusions, and at the end of fourteen weeks was dis-
c laiged, recovered for the time.

Ten cases of epilepsy in males discharged, relieved.
^?}lrer (75), widower, aged 72 ; subject to epileptic fits three
lived J>r?V^?Us to admission to the Somerset Asylum ; both his parents
four 1? aSed ; a paternal uncle had epilepsy ; of his nine children,
he]1" waters were epilcptic ; in bad health from asthma; pulse 90;
attack . ]n*? ^e fire and into the river. This is his second
"wife ^rst attack was eleven years before, on the death of his
1 e.' a. was afterwards for seven years free from fits. After his
Prov^1011 ^uee hts in the Asylum. His bodily health im-
e > and after five months he was discharged to his home, relieved,
per, t ^arAen?r (76), married, aged 57; his third attack; of intem-
wei'1 ? 1 ]n drinking ; fits occurred at considerable intervals, and
consicTer,K"|SeV-ere' Pu^se 72 ; he took the tincture of sumbul for some
ol.o,1 Gnra time; was quite rational, and, after several years, dis-
charged, relieved.

firs^n^011'68861' (133)' married' aged 40; the second attack. In his
his L<1 l ? seven years previous, he had a fall, and struck the back of
ulcer^ Sreat force. He was addicted to drink; pulse 92 ; had
lipiltl! ^ ^eSs; which were also ocdematous. The ulcers healed; his
year ,lmProved; he worked at his trade; and, at the end of four
i '1S' lcr Was discharged, relieved, and went to assist his son, a liair-
sser, m London.

years' ^'U^u'r (^'~j)j married, aged 45; his fourth attack ; case of two
sister .rat*on> maniacal; has several delusions; pulse 94; has a
thi t an Soon after admission he had several fits; remained
i een months in the Asylum, and being free from fits for the last
AVas discharged, relieved.

atte ah?urer (G10), aged 50, married ; third attack; excited, and
fort suicide^ first attack, seven years before admission. He had
dis ^tS ^ anc* ten hy night, in one year; he was
arged after nearxy three years' residence in the Asylum, relieved.
durat'11 excavator (762), aged 85, married; third attack; seven months'
10n, pulse 98; excited and violent; took phosphate of zinc.
Had no fit for two months previous to his discharge; twelve months
in the Asylum.

A butcher (801), aged 30, married; second attack; duration,
seven years. Cause, a blow on the head; violent fits occur almost
daily; pulse 90 or more; four fits in a day. Discharged in three
months to his home, relieved.

A collier (1,322), aged 17 ; second attack ; six months' duration ;
cause, an injury to the head; maniacal; pulse 90; after two
months he had but two fits in the month. He was discharged to his
home at the end of five months, relieved.

A tailor (1,349), aged 23, single ; first attack; three years' dura-
tion ; his father's mother insane; violent occasionally; bad health;
pulse 84 ; his health gradually improved, discharged in twenty-one
months to his home, relieved.

A labourer (1,414), aged 37, single; subject to fits from child-
hood, which occur about every six weeks; maniacal occasionally and
incoherent; health indifferent; pulse 78; he became phthisical and
quite rational; discharged to his home two-and-a-half years after his
admission by the desire of his father, relieved.

Eleven cases of epilepsy in females discharged, relieved.
An agricultural labourer (No. 44), married, aged 55 ; three months
before had for the first time epileptic fits, with melancholia, after the
fatigue of attending on a sick daughter. None of her relatives subject
to fits. Her health improved slowly and fits became less frequent.
Discharged to her home in twelve months.

An upholsteress (57), married, aged 4G ; fourth attack, of eight
months' duration; her parents lived to be aged, and she has had eight
children and four of the number died in convulsions, and a daughter
subsequently became epileptic and insane. Has worms (lurnbrici);
fretful and desponding; pulse 90; fits of daily occurrence. Her
husband stated that her first attack came on after taking some drugs
from a quack doctor for worms. She was upwards of fourteen months
in the Asylum before any permanent amendment took place. She
had anthelmintics, also cotyledon umbilicus, and finally tincture of
sumbul. She was discharged in eighteen months, having had but one
fit in the three last months.

A laundress (80), single, aged 52 ; first attack of twelve years'
duration; maniacal; destructive; fits principally occur at night, and
are very frequently as many as ninety-six in twenty-four hours; pulse
90, reduced by infusion of digitalis to G4, a large flow of urine beinc
caused. No fit for a month, she passed lumbrici, fits were less frequent
afterwards, and in two years she returned home.

A laundress (213), married, aged 24 ; had a previous attack. Both
came on during pregnancy; fits occur once a week ; maniacal. She
became quiet after admission, and soon improved in health and
was discharged to be confined five weeks after admission, to the Bath
Union.
A charwoman (370), single, aged 37 ; attacked after a fright, three
years before; maniacal; had a brother in the Asylum demented;
health good ; pulse 8G ; had five fits in the first month after admission,
and so continued for two years, when tlie fits became less frequent.
In the winter of her fourth year in the Asylum she had an apoplectic
fit; hemiplegia of the right side and gangrene of the toes. Six months
afterwards she so far recovered as to be able to dress and feed herself;
"was quite sensible and rational; and in a year returned to her friends,
having been four years and ten months in the Asylum.

A widow (371), aged 70; fits of three months' duration; trouble-
some in the workhouse ; had only four fits in six months; quiet and
harmless; discharged after being four-and-a-half years in the Asylum.
A sempstress (594), single, aged 24; after fever; second attack;
strumous habit; destructive and violent; case of six weeks duration;
pulse 78. She gradually improved under use of cod-liver oil. She
was one year in the Asylum.

A sempstress (774), single, aged 33; in bad health; subject to
epileptiform seizures for ten years, more like " syncope recurrens
than epilepsy. She had been violent occasionally at home. Alter
taking tincture of sumbul, the fits became less frequent, and she was
discharged in ten months. . . .

. A tailor's wife (823), aged 50 ; subject to epileptic fits for tlnrty-
six years; violent for three weeks ; had been in Colney-Hatch Asylum
for six months; five or six fits in a month. After seven months m the
Asylum, she was discharged, relieved.

A female (1,376), single, aged 17 ; for two weeks violent; bad
health a quick pulse; had eight fits in the first month ; general
health improved ; only one fit the month previous to her discliaige six
months after her admission.

A laundress (1,493), married, aged 47; the second attack of seven
weeks duration ; had seven daughters, four of whom were alive; first
attack after the birth of her third child ; dangerous to others; fits not
frequent but severe; one month free from them. Returned home
after six months' residence in the Asylum.

In these twenty-one cases which were relieved, ag& does not
appear to have influenced the result, and as regards the civil
state, 3 males and 5 females were single, G males and 5 females
were married, and one of each sex widowed. All tlie males
with one exception, and 4 of the females, had one or more
previous attacks. The pulse on admission, in the majority of
cases in both sexes, was above tlie natural standard. The causes
assigned were, in 3 males, drunkenness; in 2, injuries to the
head; in 2 males, phthisis; and 3 females, bad health, 2 of them
had worms; 2 males and 2 females inherited the disease ; in 1
female during pregnancy, being the second attack from the same
cause; in 1 female from fright and anxiety; in 1 female it was
combined with hysteria; and in 1 with syncope; in 1 male
and 2 females no cause was assigned. Two of the females liad
lost several infants in convulsions ; one of them had lost 4 out
of 8 from that cause.

Post-mortem examinations were made in 155 of the 168
fatal cases?94 in males and 61 in females. The following- is a
summary of the results in each sex at decennial periods of life:
age?under 20 years: there were 8 males and 1 female, all of
whom were congenital idiots:?the period from 20 to 30 included
the greatest number of males?31; i.e., nearly a third, and
only 12 females:?from 30 to 40 years there were 20 males and
23 females, being the greatest number of the latter sex, and
above a third of the whole number :?from 40 to 50, the num-
bers fell off to 13 males and 14 females :?from 50 to 60, there
were 9 males and 7 females:?from 60 to 70, 6 males and 3
females:?and from 70 years upwards, 7 males and 1 female. It
thence appears that epilepsy is most prevalent at an early age, and
also, that the greatest mortality is at an earlier age in males
than in females.

The forms of mental disorder at the decennial periods of
life were under 20 years, as already stated; all were idiots, and
with two exceptions among the males, violent and dangerous:?
from 20 to 30, 6 males and 4 females were violent and dangerous
idiots ; 19 males and 6 females were maniacal; 3 males melan-
cholic ; and 3 males and 2 females demented :?from 30 to 40,
2 males and 3 females were idiots; 13 males and 18 females
maniacal; 4 males and 1 female melancholic; and 1 male and
1 female demented:?from 40 to 50, 1 male and 1 female were
idiots ; 7 males and 8 females maniacal; 1 male a monomaniac;
4 females melancholic ; and 4 males and 1 female demented:
?from 50 to 60,1 male and 1 female were idiots; 5 males and 3
females maniacal; 1 male and 2 females melancholic ; and 2
males and 1 female demented:?from 60 upward, 1 female was
idiotic; 8 males and 1 female maniacal; 1 female melancholic;
and 5 males and 1 female demented.

Causes?Under 20 years all the cases, viz., eight males and
one female were congenital or dated from infancy. The disease
was hereditary in one male.

From 20 to 30, the disease was congenital in eight males
and three females: it existed from childhood in two females,
was hereditary in one male and two females.

Amongst the other causes were bad health after fever in one
male and phthisis in one female, falls and injuries in four males,
critical period in one female, fright in two males, religion in
one male, and the cause was not ascertained in fourteen males
and three females.

From 30 to 40, congenital in one male and four females;
from childhood in one male and two females, hereditary in five
males and four females; cerebro-spinal disease in two males ;
falls and other accidents in three males, pulmonary disease in
one male, grief in one male and three females, love in one
female, frig'lit in two males; cause not ascertained in foiu
males and nine females.

From 40 to 50, congenital in three males and one
female; from . childhood in two males and one female,
hereditary in one male, cerebral disease in one male
and one female, injury to head in one male and one female,
puerperal in one, fright in one female, religion in one female,
poverty in one female, intemperance in two males; cause not
ascertained in three males and seven females.

From 50 to 60, congenital in one male and one female,
hereditary in one female, puerperal in one, cerebial disease in
one male, grief in one female, intemperance in one female ; not
ascertained in seven males and two females.

Upwards of 60, congenital, one female; injury to head,
one male ; poverty, one male; fright, one male and one female ,
n?t ascertained, ten males and two females.

Assigned cause of death at each 'period of life.
Under twenty years, in eight males and one female menin-
gitis in one male and one female, hypertrophy of the biain in
two males, combined with pulmonary phthisis in one and
enteritis in the other case; cerebral apoplexy in one male; pul-
monary phthisis in one male; pneumonia in one male; two
males died from asphyxia in tits, one of them was cachectic.
From 20 to 30 years, the causes in thirty-one males and twelve
females were meningitis in five males, combined with pulmonary
ap?plexy in one, and erysipelas in another; the latter was also
the cause in one female; congestion of blood in the cerebral
vessels in five males and one female ; cerebral apoplexy in three
males and in two females, with p. phthisis in one; apoplexy of
the spinal cord in two males ; hypertrophy of the brain in two
males, with pneumonia in one; cerebritis and myelitis in one
male and myelitis in two females; pneumonia in six males,
combined with bronchitis in two cases, as it was also in two
females. It was associated with gangrene of the lung in one
female. Scrofula was the cause in two males; pulmonary
phthisis in five males and four females; peritonitis in one male;
ulcer in the stomach in one male.

From 30 to 40 years, in 20 males and 23 females:?menin-
gitis in 2 males and 4 females, combined with broncho-pneu-
monia in one; congestion of blood in the brain in 3 males and
3 females; apoplexy of the spinal cord in 1 male; myelitis in
1 male and in 1 female; tumour in the brain in one male;
pulmonary apoplexy in 1 male; broncho-pneumonia in 1 male
and pneumonia in 2 females ; typhoid pneumonia in 1 female;
pleuro-pneumonia and gangrene of lung in 1 male; pulmonary
phthisis in 4 males (combined with pneumonia in 3 of them)
and in 10 females; enteritis in 1 male; sudden deaths in fits,
asphyxia in 2 males and in 2 females.

From 40 to 50 years, in 13 males and 14 females:?meningitis
combined with pneumonia in 1 male, and in 3 females with con-
gestion of lungs in one and myelitis in another; congestion of
cerebral vessels in 1 male and bronchitis, and of 2 females, with
pneumonia in one; cerebral softening in 2 males, with tubercles
in the brain in one; tumour in the brain, apoplexy, and pleuro-
pneumonia in 1 female; myelitis in 2 males, with blood in spinal
canal in one and pleuro-pneumonia and gangrene of the lung in
the other; congestion of blood in lungs in 2 males; pleuritis
and gangrene of lung in 1 male; pleuro-pneumonia in two
males, in one with atrophy of the brain and in one with cerebral
congestion; pneumonia in 1 male and 4 females, with conges-
tion of blood in cerebral vessels in one; tubercular pneumonia
in 1 female; pulmonary phthisis in 2 females; general dropsy
in 1 male; hydrothorax in one female.

From 50 to 60 years, in 9 males and 7 females :?meningitis
and an unusual quantity of fluid in the cerebral ventricles in 1
male and 1 female; cerebral apoplexy in 2 males, with enlarged
heart in one and hydrothorax in the other, and in 2 females,
combined with gangrene of the cerebellum in one and cerebral
atrophy in the other; cerebritis in 1 male and pneumonia;
cerebro-spinal softening in 1 female; tumour in the brain in 1
female ; bronclio-pneumonia in 1 male and Bright's disease;
pneumonia in 2 males ; pulmonary phthisis in 1 female ; hydro-
tliorax in 1 male and enlarged heart; lumbar abscess in 1
female; asphyxia, sudden death, in 1 male.

Upwards of 60 years, in 13 males and 4 females:?meningitis
in 4 males, combined with pulmonary emphysema in 1, with
cardiac disease in 1, with pneumonia in 1, and an ulcer in
the stomach in 1 ; an unusual quantity of fluid in the cerebral
ventricles in 1 male with hydrothorax, and in 1 female;
cerebral softening in 1 male and pneumonia; cerebritis in 1
male with bronchitis, and in 1 female; paralysis in 2 males,
with gangrene of lung in one ; tumour in brain in 1 male
and Bright's disease; broncho-pneumonia in 1 male and bron-
chitis and emphysema in 1 female; pleuritis in 1 male; Bright's
disease and fatty heart in 1 female; erysipelas in 1 male.
In epileptics the average height and weight of the body,
average measurements of the skull, and the weight of the
internal organs at different periods of life in males and females,
were as follows :?

Age
20 to 40 (
years \
40 to 60
Upwards (
of 60 \
Sex
? , , Measurement
Dod->' of head
ft. in.
5 7
5 0
5 6
5 1
5 6
5 2
lbs. oz.
115 0
86 0
112 0
82 4
22-1
21-7
22-2
21-5
116
95 12
22-2
20'8
13
12-8
13
129
12-8
11-9
Cerebral Organs
Cerebrum
12-2
12-2
12-3
12
11-9
11
???3
S's
21-4
19
20
18-3
196
174
i-T
W
21-6
19-3
204
186
19-2
17-6
oz.
5-1
4-6
5-1
4-8
1
49-1
1 43-9
1-1 j 46-6
1 1 42-7
4-8
4'5
Thoracic Organs
11
11
M
11
1-1
25
22
21 I 18
25 j 21
21 ! 20
9-3
11
9-6
28
18
22
15
11-6
10-6
Abdominal Organs
5*4
6
5-3
5-4
53
oz.
54
43
49*5
45
5-2
4
5-3
3
3-2
3
35
2'7
4-4
4
4-7
4
46
34
4-2
4-2
4-9
3-7
1-6
1-9
1 144-6
1 | 40-5 | 1-1

The total average ?weights at all ages in Epileptics, compared with those in all cases examined in the Somerset County Lunatic Asylum:?
Epilep
1-9
Asym.
Epilep.
Asym.
5 6
5 6
5 2
5 1
114
104 5
88
81 3
22-1
22-2
21-3
21-3
12-9
13-2
12-5
12-8
12-1
13-2
11-7
12-6
20-3
20
18-2
18-4
20-4
20-2
18-5
18-6
a
5-2
4-6
4-9
1
1
1
?9
46-8
46-6
44-7
42'9
1-1
1-1
26
25-6
M 20
?9 I 18
22
22-3
18
16-3
10 6
10-7
9-3
8-1
56
5-7
5-2
50-5
50-5
44-7
42-8
5-3
4-5
3-8
4-3
3-2
3-5
2-9
29
4-6
4-8
3-8
4-9
49
5
4
4
1-8
1-6

Tlie post-mortem appearances in these epileptics were, in
the head, in 8 males and 1 female under 20 years, were
adhesions of the dura mater and opacit}7 of the arachnoid in 4;
congestion of blood in cerebral vessels in 1; hypertrophy of
brain in 1 ; about 2 lbs. of blood effused in brain and spinal
cord in 1 ; brain unusually firm and small in 2 ; in the female
congestion of blood in cerebral membranes. In the female the
dura mater adherent and congestion of blood in the cerebral
vessels.

Spinal cord?white specks of bone on arachnoid in 1; the
membranes adherent in 1 ; partial softening of cord in 2.
Chest?thymus present (f oz.) in 1, and adherent to peri-
cardium in 1. Pulmonary tubercles in 1 ; pneumonia in 1 ;
bronchial glands enlarged in 1.
Abdomen?ulcers in ileum in 1.

From 20 to 30 years, in 31 males and 12 females, the scalp
was infiltrated with blood in one female; the skull was unusually
thick in 2 males and 2 females, the diploe absent in one; skull
unusually thin in 1 female ; the " crista galli " and other bony
points very prominent in 1 female ; dura mater preternaturally
adherent in 6 males and 3 females, and opacity of the arach-
noid in 3 males; pia mater adherent in 1 male ; much fluid in
the cerebral ventricles in 4 males and in 3 females; congestion
of blood in the cerebral vessels in 9 males and 2 females; blood
effused on cerebral surface in 2 males and 2 females; lymph on
base of brain in 1 male; brain unusually firm in 4 males,
pale in 2 males and 1 female ; soft in 3 males; extreme atrophy
of left hemisphere, only 8 oz., in 1 male, and inequalities of
weight of 2 oz. in hemispheres in 1 female.

Spinal cord?blood in spinal canal in 3 males and on the
surface of cord in 1 female; congested in 1 male ; lymph on
cord in 1 male; cord soft in parts in 6 males and 4 females;
unusually firm in 1 female.

Chest?old pleuritic adhesions in 10 males and 2 females ;
recent effusion of lymph in 1 female ; congestion of blood in
2 males and 3 females; pulmonary apoplexy in 1 male; bron-
chitis in 3 males; pneumonia in 5 males and 2 females;
hydrothorax in 1 male; pulmonary tubercles and tubercular
cavities in 8 males and 2 females; hearts small in 6 males and
4 females; large in 3 males; and from one to two ounces above
the average weight in 6 males and 4 females.

Abdomen?old peritoneal adhesions in 3 males; fatty
omentum in 1 male; worms in intestines in 2 males ; scrofulous
tubercles on liver in 1 male, and on peritoneum in 1 female;
stomach elongated in 1 female; enteritis and ulcers in ileum
in 4 males and 1 female; mesenteric glands enlarged in 1
female.

From 30 to 40 years, in 20 males and 23 females :?Ilead
the dura mater adherent in 1 male and 4 females ; bony spiculse
on falx in 1 female; opacity of the arachnoid in 1 female ;
the cerebral vessels congested with blood in G males and 8
females; an unusual quantity of fluid in the cerebral ventricles
in 4 males and 4 females; the cerebral hemispheres unequal,
the left being- 1 oz. heaviest in 1 female; the brain large in
(j males and 6 females, and unusually firm in 3 males.
Spinal cord?blood in spinal canal in 4 males, and fluid in
canal in 1 female; the cauda partly softened in 4 males and 3
females ; softened throughout in 1 male.

Chest?old pleuritic adhesions in 6 males and 5 females;
recent lymph in 2 males and 1 female; pulmonary congestion
of blood in 8 males and 7 females; pulmonary tubercles in 3
males and 4 females; and tuberculous cavities in 2 males and
4 females; the heart large in 4 males and 1 female, and small
in 3 males and 6 females.

Abdomen?enteritis and ulcers in ileum and colon in 3
males and 7 females; entozoa in duodenum in 1 female;
tubercles on uterus in one; cancerous lymphatic glands in
1 male ; stomach soft in 1 female; fatty liver in 1 male and 1
female; spleen enlarged in 1 female; nephritis in 1 male;
horse-shoe kidney in 1 male.

From 40 to 50 years, in 13 males and 14 females the skull
was unusually thick in 1 male; projecting points in temporal
fossa in 1 male; bulbous protuberance in place of crista galli
in 1 female; matter in sphenoidal sinus in 1 female ; dura
mater adherent in 3 males and 5 females ; opacity of the arach-
noid in 1 male and 1 female ; cartilaginous specks on arachnoid
in 1 female; blood effused in base of skull in 1 male; much
fluid in the cerebral ventricles in 3 females ; cysts in 1 female ;
the brain unusually large in 4 males, and pale in 1, also in 3
females ; the brain small in 3 males and 4 females.

Spinal cord?blood in canal in 1 male ; much fluid in the-
canal in 1 male : the cord partly softened in 5 males arid in
3 females.

Chest?-old pleuritic adhesions in 1 male and in 1 female;
the pleura tuberculous in 1 male; pulmonary tubercles in 3
females, combined with pneumonia in 1 of them ; fluid in the
chest in 1 maie and J female; pulmonary congestion in 5
males and 3 females; bronchitis in 1 male and 1 female;
pleuro-pneumonia in 4 males, and gangrene in 1; pneumonia
in 6 females.

Heart?enlarged above the average in 4 males and 1 female,
and small in 3 males and 3 females.

Abdomen?ascites in 1 male ; tubercular peritoneum in
male; fatty omentum in 1 male; enteritis in 3 males; ulcer
in colon in 1 male and 1 female ; the stomach unusually large
in 2 males and 2 females; the stomach contracted and small in
2 females; the liver enlarged in 2 males; containing hydatid
cysts in 1 female, and waxy in 1 male; the spleen unusually
soft in 2 males, enlarged in 2 females; the pancreas large in
2 males ; right kidney enlarged in 3 males and 1 female, and
small in 2 males and 2 females ; granular in 1; blood in renal
capsules in 1 male.

From 50 to 60 years, in 9 males and 7 females :?effused
blood beneath the scalp in 1 male; the dura mater adherent
in 2 males and in 4 females; the arachnoid opaque and
thickened in 1 male and in 1 female; blood effused on the
arachnoid in 1 female ; congestion of blood in the cerebral
vessels in 2 males; about 2 oz. of blood on the cerebrum in 1
male; an unusually large quantity of fluid in the cerebral ven-
tricles in 2 males and in 2 females, and cerebral softening in
one of them; the brain unusually firm in 1 male; small cavi-
ties in centrum ovale in 1 female; fungoid tumour in 1
female; the cerebral hemispheres unequal in 2 females; a
difference in weight of 2 oz. in one in the right, and the other
in the left hemisphere ; spinal cord partially softened in 3
males and in 1 female.

Chest?old pleuritic adhesions in 2 males and in 3 females;
pulmonary congestion of blood in 3 males and in 1 female;
hydrothorax in 1 male; bronchitis in 1 male; tuberculous
cavities in 1 female; pneumonia in 3 males and 3 females.
Heart? fluid in the pericardium in 1 male; the heart
greatly enlarged, 24 oz. in 1 male, and above the average weight
in 3 females; the heart unusually small in 2 males and 2
females.

Abdomen?omentum fatty in 1 male; an abscess beneath
the ensiform cartilage in 1 female; the peritoneum thickened
in 1 female ; granular kidneys in 1 male.

60 years and upwards, in 13 males and 4 females:?Head
?cerebral membranes adherent in 5 males and 1 female;
opacity of the arachnoid in 5 males and 1 female; the vessels
and sinuses engorged with blood in 2 males; much fluid in the
membranes and ventricles in 5 males and 1 female; softening
and small cavities in corpus striatum in 1 male; a tumour in
right hemisphere and amaurosis in 1 male; apoplectic clot in 1
male; a rusty deposit and cavity in 1 male and 1 female ; the
brain tough in 1 male, soft in 1 female, and small in 1 female.
The spinal arachnoid adherent in 1 male; the cord unusually
pale in 1 male, and soft in 1 female.

Chest?old pleuritic adhesions in 4 males and 1 female;
liydrothorax in 1 male; pulmonary congestion in 2 males;
bronchitis in 3 males; empl^sema in 3 males and 1 female;
tubercles in 1 female; broncho-pneumonia in 1 male and 1
female; pneumonia in 1 male; heart enlarged in 4 males and
2 females; the valves thickened in 2 males; clots in aorta in
1 male.

Abdomen?ulcer at pylorus in 1 male ; stomach enlarged in
1 female; liver enlarged in 3 males, and softened in one of
them; spleen softened in 3 males, and enlarged in 1; spleen
soft in 3 males and large in 1 ; kidneys granular in 1 male;
small and pale in 1 female.

From a summary of these 155 cases of epilepsy, diseases of
the cerebro-spinal organs were found in 52*3 per cent., and in
largest proportions in the youngest and oldest; diseases of
the pulmonary organs were most prevalent at middle-age,
amounting in the whole to 344 per cent.; diseases of the abdo-
minal organs in the proportion of nearly 13 per cent.
Epilepsy, if combined with insanity, is considered incurable,
and the treatment of it, in a great measure, empirical; unless,
perhaps, when the affection is symptomatic of disease of the
circulating, digestive, or generative organs. A great variety of
remedies from all the kingdoms of nature have been recom-
mended, and many of them have long fallen into disuse.
Attention to diet and regimen is of importance. In some
instances, especially in young persons, the bromide of potas-
sium has been administered with relief; and in other instances
has had the effect of keeping the fits in abeyance, and some-
times of diminishing their frequency and severity. Aperients
have also been found to alleviate the severity of the fits,
Counter irritation to the nape of the neck by moxa, or by the
I'ed-hot iron, has been tried, as recommended by Erown-Sequard,
and like other forms of treatment may have at first mitigated
the disorder, but the fits have returned again, and often with
renewed severity. Dr Marshall Hall recommended a severe
operation, tracheotomy, but it has not been practised to any
extent, and lias not succeeded when tried. Pressure on the
carotid was also tried without relief. Dr Eouth, at a recent
meeting of the Medical Society, recommended a trial of the
nitrate of amyle.

In the treatment of epilepsy, in the paroxysms, all liga-
tures and cinctures should be at once removed, the patient
should be placed on a bed in an airy apartment, witli the head
and shoulders raised, and a cork or wedge-shaped piece of soft
wood introduced between the teeth, and the struggles should
be gently restrained, to prevent the patient from injury from his
or her own violence. When the injury is preceded by the " aura
epileptica," a tiglit band should be placed just above the part
where the sensation is experienced, as this has been known to
prevent the attack. In first attacks in plethoric and san-
guineous temperaments, blood-letting, cold affusion on the head,
and purgatives, particularly turpentine in combination, have
been beneficial. The careful regulation of the diet is of im-
portance, which should be light and easy of digestion, and also
nutritious.

The endless complications which may accompany epilepsy
must be regarded, and render the treatment most varied. The
imagination has, especially in females, much influence in many
forms of epilepsy. In many cases the moral treatment is as
important as the physical. Varied occupation is of great
service as a means of abstracting the mind from the disease;
sudden changes of remedies have rendered tlie attacks less
frequent. Except in epilepsy brought on by fits of drunken-
ness, which generally recover when total abstinence is enforced,
as does " delirium tremens,the opinion that recoveries from
epilepsy are for the most part only temporary, and that even
after many years' cessation the fits will recur, is borne out by
cases here recorded; as is also - that which holds that epilepsy
when combined with insanity, may almost be regarded as hope-
less. When combined with hysteria, and in puerperal cases,
relief has been afforded, and also in a few of the milder cases,
when between the paroxysms the mind has been unaffected. Such
cases occurring amongst the poor are sent, perhaps unavoidably,
to the asylum, the most improper place for them with a view
to recovery, as the associations in it are most likely to confirm
their malady.

The treatment employed has been regulated by the symptoms
in each individual, and these have arrived at the different
periods of life. In the youngest, i.e. those under 20 years,
counter irritants, as valerianite of zinc, artemisia vulgaris,
and also stimulants and tonics were employed, also treatment
for phthisis and diarrhoea. In those from 20 to 30, in addition
to these, bloodletting and purgatives, tincture of sumbul,
digitalis and codliver oil. Cases of pneumonia and gangrene
were also treated; from 30 to 40, blisters, expectorants,
sedatives, antispasmodics; from 40 to 60, general treatment,
setons, sumbul, mugwort, aperients, stimulants, anodynes ; also
cases were treated for phthisis, bronchitis, pneumonia, diarrhoea,
erysipelas, carbuncle, burn, and gangrene of finger; from 60 and
upwards, in addition to the general treatment, stimulants,
counter irritation, blisters; cases of influenza, bronchitis, phthisis,
dropsy, diarrhoea, and abscesses w?re treated.

In England and Wales, in a period extending over six months
the deaths from epilepsy were very nearly double those from
insanity, as given in a table in Copland, viz., from insanity
147 males, 138 females; from epilepsy 278 males, 292 females.
Congenital idiocy, and congenital imbecility, are classed
together. Congenital idiots are persons whose intellectual
faculties have never been developed. In infancy they have
large or ill-formed heads, are puny, often squint, cannot walk
until late, or articulate until six or eight years of age. Their
features are repulsive, they drivel from their mouths, their
organs of sense are imperfect, both of taste and smell, and they
are often deaf and dumb. Their bodies and limbs are ill-formed,
they are commonly rachitic or scrofulous or paralytic, and many,
about one-half, are subject to epileptic fits. Memory is strong
in some, in others it is weak ; they are generally timorous, in-
constant, and often irascible. Many arft prone to lying and
stealing, and they often sink into melancholia and are given to
masturbation ; some evince particular talents, as for music.
They commonly present much of the character of children.
There are many degrees of imbecility ; but as the original defect
may present every grade from the slightest to complete idiocy,
it is difficult to draw any line of demarcation between sound-
ness or unsoundness of mind. The examples chiefly found in
lunatic asylums are persons labouring under this weakness in an
extreme degree. It is only when the idiots are violent and
dangerous or otherwise troublesome, or of filthy habits, that
they are sent to the asylum.

There were 170 idiots, chiefly living with their friends,
periodically visited as paupers, by the parochial medical officers
in the county of Somerset, as directed by the Lunacy Asylum
Act, 1853. These visits must be paid quarterly, and a return
made, with the list of the names and a certificate that they are
properly cared for ; or if the medical officer thinks otherwise,
he must specify those which ought in his opinion to be sent
to an asylum.

In the Appendix to the Report of the Commissioners in
Lunacy for 1847 the number of idiots exceeded the lunatics
in the county by 36. In those returns but two classes are
specified, namely, lunatics and idiots; chronic demented cases
being generally included with the latter. In like manner
Dr Duglison in his statistics of insanity in the United States,*
represents that the idiots slightly exceed the insane, one idiot to
1469, and one insane person to 1485 of the general population.
Insanity owing to intemperance was more common among the
foreign, white, and free population than amongst the slaves.
* Xorth American Med. Chir. Review, July 1860.

There is a district in the county of Somerset, including the
parishes of Cliiselborough, Stoke-under-Hamden and Barring-
ton, where idiocy manifests that endemic character called
cretinism, which is so well known in Switzerland. In some
families of the district there are several cretins of both sexes
in whom the characteristic bodily deformities were present.
Bronchocele, or, as it is termed in the locality, " the thick
neck," was common among females reared in this neighbour-
hood, the patients presenting no appearance of weakened or
impaired faculties. There is no necessary connection between
bronchocele and cretinism beyond that of their common birth-
place, and it is somewhat remarkable that, although we had
several patients admitted into the asylum with bronchocele, we
had no case of cretinism. Insanity occurring with broncho-
cele is quite fortuitous, and it is common enough for such
patients to recover their reason, and leave the asylum without
any alteration in the bronchocele, which may even be larger
than before. The removal of cretins in infancy to an open,
elevated, mountainous situation, to obtain purer air and stronger
light, has been attended with beneficial results. It is also
beneficial in these cases to pay attention to personal cleanliness,
and oblige them to exert themselves in some useful employ-
ment.

A visit to the idiot asylum at Earlswood, in Surrey, is suffi-
cient to show the wonderful results that may be obtained by
proper care and training of imbecile boys and girls. Besides
school-teaching and out-of-door occupations, the boys are
taught tailoring, slioemaking, and mat-making, and the girls
also are taught industrial work.

Ten years ago, in the five counties which form the south-
western division, there were in the union workhouses 534
male and 624 female idiots. From these it was suggested that
oo
the younger ones should be separated, and that the counties
should unite and form an establishment for their care and
education.

Of the first three thousand admissions to the County
Somerset Asylum, 3*3 per cent, were idiots merely, and in
nearly an equal number idiocy was complicated with epilepsy.
The cases of epilepsy altogether amounted to 9*6 per cent. There
were 86 of this class, including idiots and imbeciles, admitted
to the County Somerset Lunatic Asylum ; 52 were males and
34 females. Of these, 4 males and 4 females were discharged,
relieved ; 6 males and 5 females not improved ; 12 males and
11 females died; and 30 males and 14 females remained in the
asylum at the end of 20? years. The 4 males relieved were,
to a certain extent, educated. All could read, and 2 could
write imperfectly. Only one of the 4 females was at all edu-
cated ; the habits of ali were much improved before they were
discharged. Of the 6 males discharged, not improved, 3 were
idiots, 2 dumb, and 1 deaf and dumb; two were removed to
other asylums not being county patients, and one was taken
charge of by his mother ; the three others, imbeciles, one of
them blind, were removed to workhouses, of the 5 females, 4
were removed to workhouses, and one with pulmonary phthisis
was taken home by her mother.

Of the 12 males and 11 females who died, 3 males and 1
female were under 20 years of age on admission; 4 males
and 3 females from 20 to 30 ; 1 male from 30 to 40; 4
females from 40 to 50 ; 2 males and 2 females from 50 to GO ;
and 2 males and 1 female over 60. Three males and tin ee
females were imbeciles, and the remainder of each sex idiots,
and usually of filthy habits. Two males were nearly blind, one
entirely of one eye, and the optic nerve of that eye was
atrophied; two males and one female were dumb, and 1 female
was a cripple, the spinal cord was soft and enlarged, and weighed
I4- oz. luve males and four females had small biains, vaiying
in the males from 33^ to 43? ounces, and in the females from
19??, an exceedingly small brain (arrest of development), to
38? ounces. In three males and four females the enceplialon
was about the average weight, and in four males considerably,
and two females slightly, above it, varying in the males from
47 to 53 ounces, and in the females from 42f to 43 ounces.
The causes of death were pulmonary phthisis in 5 males
and 6 females, generally combined with ulceration in the
ileum or colon, and sometimes in both, attended in the last
stage with diarrhoea. There was pneumonia and ulceration of
intestines also in 3 males, and bronclio-pneumonia in 1 female;
scrofula and curvature of spine in 1 male ; skull thick, and
unequal cerebral hemispheres, in 1 male; arachnitis and
distended cerebral ventricles in 1 female; cerebral apoplexy in
1 male; paralysis in 1 male; softened brain and Bright s
kidneys in 1 female; general dropsy and pericarditis in 1
female; erysipelas and gangrene of arm in 1 female.

Four males relieved,
J. M. (121), aged G6; congenital imbecility; an agricultural
labourer: can read and write indifferently ; lias latterly been violent
and destructive.; usually kindly and good-tempered ; "was industrious
in the asylum; and, after six and half years, was removed to the
union "workhouse.
_ E. P. (125), aged 50; imbecility ; a thatcher; can read and write;
noisy, and occasionally violent; transferred from a licensed house;
TART I. VOL. II.?NEW SERIES. G
98 DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
became quiet and harmless; Avas fifteen years in asylum, and was re-
moved to the wards established for chronic cases in the Bath Work-
house.

II. C. (19G), aged 26; imbecility; can read; habits destructive
and filthy ; transferred from a licensed house; sent as a criminal for
felony ; eighteen years in the asylum ; discharged in good health, and
of cleanly habits, to chronic ward of Bath Workhouse.

J. S. (239), aged 34; imbecility; can read; hereditary predis-
position ; sister died insane; obstinate, irritable, and dangerous to
others; quiet and industrious in the asylum; his health improved; he
remained two and half years, and was then discharged to live with the
farmer who had previously been his employer.

Four females relieved.

C. P. (559), aged 27 ; imbecile ; can read; hereditary, predisposi-
tion on mother's side; a violent refractory pauper ; recently discharged
from prison, where she was sent for destruction of property; quiet and
orderly in the asylum; she worked in the laundry, and, after sixteen
months, she was discharged to the workhouse.

H. M. (G48), aged 36; imbecile; youngest of two sisters; parents
dead; violent towards some of the inmates of the workhouse ; eight
years in the asylum ; industrious; discharged to workhouse.
F. A. (671), aged 5-g- years; imbecile; had convulsions when
eighteen months old; passionate; second of three sisters; parents
alive; became quiet; two and half years in the asylum; removed to an
institution for idiots.

E. B. (1,255), aged 18; imbecile; no education; cleanly habits;
occasionally violent; fourteen months in the asylum, when she became
quiet and harmless; discharged, relieved, to the chronic ward of Bath
Workhouse.

Six males discharged, not improved.

M. B. (29), aged 22; congenital imbecility; mischievous; can
read ; in good health ; cheerful; idle; one of a large family, none
of whom are afflicted; after fifteen years in the asylum was removed
to the union workhouse.

J. P. (69), aged 33; congenital imbecility; removed from a
licensed house ; reported as occasionally dangerous; no education;
quiet; works out of doors; after nine years in the asylum was re-
moved to the workhouse.

W. L. (185), aged 22; imbecility; blind from birth; general
health, good; quiet; able to dress himself and make his way about;
nearly six years in asylum ; discharged to workhouse.
G. Y. (505), aged 16 ; dumb idiot; mischievous; hasty temper;
filthy habits; suffered from worms, " lumbrici," for which he was given
oil of turpentine, with benefit; three; months in asylum; discharged
at request of relatives.

C. W. P. (856), aged 12; idiot; deaf and dumb; from St.
James'r?, Westminster; after nine months transferred to Colney-Hatch
Asylum, Middlesex.

J. E. (958), aged 13 ; dumb idiot; five years in an asylum ; trans-
ferred from Colney-Hatch, and subsequently removed, with others, to
the new Glamorgan Asylum.
J. C. (1,1G8), aged 1G ; idiocy; five months after admission dis-
charged to the care of his mother, at her request.
Five females discharged, not improved.
M. P. (82), aged 32 ; congenital imbecility; could never learn her
letters, or tell the hour by the clock; very obstinate and irritable;
youngest of three ; her brother and sister intelligent; transferred from
a licensed house ; seven years in the asylum ; quiet, and harmless;
discharged to the union workhouse.
F. J. (292), aged 32; imbecile; no education; occasionally vio-
lent ; two years in asylum; discharged, by request, to the workhouse.
M. F. (597), aged 22; idiot; no education; parents living; fourth
of five children ; violent; filthy habits ; enjoyed a bath ; nearly eight
years in the asylum; became quiet and harmless ; discharged to work-
house.

C. B. (GOO), aged 30 ; idiocy; no education ; parents living; con~
duct outrageous: second of four children ; mother states that she had
a fright previous to her birth; filthy habits ; bad health; removed,
with others, to the chronic ward in Bath Workhouse.
M. F (1,113), aged 17 ; imbecile; mother alive; father died nine
weeks before her admission ; the youngest of two sisters; violent; ten
months in the asylum; has pulmonary phthisis; her mother took
charge of her.
Tivelve males, died.
T. L. (85). aged 50 ; congenital idiot; irritable ; filthy habits ; no
education; was in a licensed house for the insane, previous to which
he was kept by his brother for eijrht years in a strait waistcoat, fastened
by a chain and ring round his leg to a staple in the floor; his mother s
mother was in an asylum, and recovered ; motion, awkward and un-
steady ; blind of left eye, from lime having been thrown in his face
twenty-two years ago by a man who was subsequently hanged,^ at
Ilchester, for violence to a female. He died of pulmonary phthisis
nearly two years af terhis admission to the asylum. Head: circumference,
20 inches; antero-posterior measurement, 11 inches; and transverse,
13 inches; more fiuid than natural in the lateral ventricles; the left
optic nerve wasted, not more than half the size of the right; the brain
appeared to be natural; encephalon, 45 oz. Chest: old pleuritic ad-
hesions ; a large cavity in apex of right lung, and tubercles in various
stages towards softening in both lungs; heart, small, 5 oz. Abdomen:
horse-shoe kidney?they were united, weight 5 oz.; othei oigans \eiy
small; body emaciated, weighed only 54 lbs.; short stature.
G. F. (137), aged 1G ; a slavering idiot, scarcely able to articulate;
the parents in good health; an only child ; of filthy habits; emaciated,
and in a very feeble state; died fourteen weeks after admission. Iluid .
brain natural, except that there was a little more iluid than usual in
the lateral ventricles; weight of the encephalon, 41-o oz.; pleuro-
gpneumonia of tlie right lung, also ulceration of the lower portion of
colon and rectum ; liver large, 52 oz.

J. S. (25G), agecl 27; idiocy; epileptic during childhood; unable
to articulate distinctly ; passionate ; transferred from a licensed house ;
filthy habits ; totters in walking ; appetite ravenous; this deterioration
came on three years after his admission ; subsequently diarrhoea oc-
curred, and he died in four years and nine months from general
paralysis; body thin; weight, 8G lbs.; length, 5ft. 7 in. Head:
circumference, 21 in. ; anterio-posterior, 13 in., and transverse
measurements, 13^ in.; the dura mater strongly adherent to the skull;
the brain appeared natural, rather small; each cerebral hemisphere, 17;
cerebellum, 4^; pons and medulla, ; encephalon, 39^ oz.; lower
part of spinal cord softened for in.; pleuro-pneumonia left lung;
enteritis also.

W. C. (313), aged 6G; imbecility; can read; quiet, but given to
wandering from home; suffering from asthma; in bad health ; he died
fourteen months after admission from cerebral apoplexy, asthma, and
enlargement of the heart. Head : circumference, 22^ inches ; antero-
posterior and transverse measurements, each 14^- inches ; a large quan-
tity of blood; about 6 oz. escaped when the skull-cap was removed;
the brain large, 50 j oz.; spinal cord natural; emphysema of the
lungs; heart, lGf oz.; abdominal organs healthy; body, 149 lbs. ;
length, 5 ft. 8 in.

J. P. (451), aged 25 ; idiocy ; dumb ; dangerous to himself; very
filthy ; died four months after admission from pulmonary phthisis and
pneumonia; the body emaciated; weight, 75 lbs.; length, 5 ft. 8 in.
Head : circumference, 22^ in. ; antero-posterior, 13 in.; transverse,
14 in.; cerebral vessels congested with blood; encephalon, 47 oz.;
spinal cord natural ; grey matter distinct, and seemed more in propor-
tion to the white than in an older subject examined at the same time.
Chest: tubercles and small cavities in the apex of right lung; tubercles
also in the left; heart small, 7^ oz.; the mucous membrane of
descending colon was ulcerated.

J. S. (509), aged 12 ; dumb idiot; eldest of five children; parents
alive ; large head ; filthy habits; ate dirt or grass; very thin ; diarrhoea
at the last. He was thirteen and half years in the asylum. Head :
circumference, 22 in.; antero-posterior, 13 in., and transverse measure-
ments, 11 ^ in.; the brain unusually large; each hemisphere, 23^ oz. ;
cerebellum, 5^oz.; and pons and medulla, 1 oz. ; encephalon, 53 oz.;
the spinal cord also large, lfoz. ; pneumonia right lung; mucous
membrane of descending colon dark coloured.

J. P. (617), aged 04; idiot; became violent four weeks before his.
admission ; in bad health ; had ulcers on both legs ; nearly blind ; died
eight years after admission; weight of body, 112 lbs. ; length,
5 ft. 6 in. Head: circumference, 22 in.; antero-posterior, 11 in.;
and transverse measurements, 10 in. ; the skull unusually thick ; the
cerebral veins congested with blood; the brain small; cerebral hemi-
spheres unequal; right, 14^-oz.; left, 13 oz.; encephalon, 33i oz.; the
grey matter darker than natural; spinal cord natural, 1 oz. Chest:
old pleuritic adhesions; organs natural. Abdomen: liver large,
G3 oz.; spleen also large, 10 oz.
101
H. D. (G92), aged 24 ; congenital imbecility ; a criminal, sent to
prison for stealing a dog value ol.; occupation, a farm servant; can
read a little; was upwards of ten years in the asylum, and died, alter
four days' illness, from an ulcer in the stomach, and hemorrhage from an
artery from the coeliac axis. The measurements of the head were
circumference, 21 in.; antero-posterior, 12 in., and transverse, 10-3>- in.;
the brain and spinal cord both unusually pale ; no other change ;
weight of encephalon, 45^ oz.; old adhesions of heart and pericardium ;
?weight of the body, 144~lbs.; length, 5 ft. 5 in.

H. T. (713), aged 27 ; congenital idiocy ; parents living; an only
child; father imbecile; of filthy habits; occasionally violent, anil
dangerous to children ; had an ear for music, and could sing; he died of
pulmonary phthisis fifteen months after his admission; tuberculous
cavities in the left lung; heart small, 7 oz. Head: ordinary size;
encephalon, 45? oz. ; the dura mater adherent to the skull; brain
firm ; about j oz. fluid in the lateral ventricles ; the white poi tion of
spinal cord softened; weight of the body, 04 lbs.; length, 5 ft. 7 in.
J. M. (1,032), aged 30 ; idiocy; dumb; paralysis; helpless, harm-
less ; has been living with his mother who died recently ; father also
dead; the eldest of three children ; died ten months after admission.
A backward curvature of the spine ; body emaciated, G2 lbs.; length,
4 ft. 9 in. Head: circumference, 19 inches; antero-posterior,^ 9tt
inches; transverse, 10 inches; cerebral structure pale; convolutions
not fully developed; right cerebral hemisphere one ounce heavier than
the left; encephalon, 35 oz.; spinal cord soft ; the organs like those
of a young person not fully developed, except the kidneys which
weighed 8f oz.

C. C. (1,048), aged 18 ; imbecile ; injury to head at the age of 3 ;
mother dead, father alive; nearly seven years in the asylum; de-
structive, and of filthy habits; emaciated; died of pulmonary
phthisis. Ilcad and brain natural; encephalon, 43^- oz.; spinal
cord rather soft; both lungs full of tubercles; heart small, oz.;
enteritis.

T- P. (1,127), aged GO ; idiocy, idle, harmless; twenty months in
the asylum; died of pulmonary phthisis. Head: natural; brain
natural; encephalon, 48 oz.; spinal cord rather soft ; old pleuiitic
adhesions ; dark pulmonary tubercles in upper lobes of both lungs not
softened; heart small, 8 oz.; weight of the body, 108 lbs.; length
5 ft. 7 ins.
Eleven females, died.

II. B. (36), aged 59; congenital imbecility; can read imperfectly;
three years in a licensed house for pauper lunatics ; six years m the
asylum; died of pulmonary phthisis and ulceration of the intestines.
Head: circumference, 21 inches; transverse and antero-posterior
measurements, each 13 inches; more fluid than natural in the cerebral
ventricles; the right hemisphere, 17 oz.; left, 17tt oz. ; ence-
phalon, 40] oz.; tubercles and cavities in lungs; heart small, 0 oz
E. D. (222), aged 59; imbecility, hereditary on fathers side;
eldest of eight children, six mules and two females5 unable to read}
turbulent; idle and irritable; dangerous and destructive; in bad
health, diarrhoea; she died a month after admission. Weight of body,
79 lbs.; length, 5 ft. Head: ventricles distended with fluid; fourth
ventricle rough from crystals, rhombic cubes; encephalon, 41^ oz. ;
fluid also in the spinal canal, and the membrane partially adherent.
Heart enlarged, 14 oz.

E. B. (331), aged G3 ; idiocy ; nearly three years in the asylum;
filthy habits ; refused food; had frequently to be fed by stomach tube ;
?weight of the body, 94 lbs.; length, 5 ft. 1 in. Head : membranes
unusually adherent; brain pale and rather soft; encephalon, 42f oz.;
spinal cord natural; heart flabby, fatty degeneration; also in the
kidneys ; albuminuria ; Bright's disease.

S. C. (379), aged 48 ; dumb idiot; violent, bites her arms; filthy
habits; she died three months after admission ; erysipelas; gangrene
of left arm. Head : small skull, unusually thick ; dura mater preter-
naturally adherent; brain natural, but small; encephalon, 34|- oz.
Chest: organs natural; Abdomen : stomach elongated and large ; other
organs natural.

M. A. G. (448), aged 24; imbecility; can read; lived with her
parents; violent for six months previous to admission, two years before
her death; scrofulous ulcers; pulmonary phthisis; body emaciated,
54 lbs.; length, 5 ft. Head: circumference, 19tt inches; antero-
posterior, 13 inches, and transverse measurements, 13^ inches; the
brain firm ; veins congested ; each hemisphere 17^ oz.; encephalon,
40-g- oz. Chest: small tuberculous cavities in both lungs, some
gangrenous; heart small, oz. Abdomen : ulcers in ileum; mesen-
teric glands enlarged.

G. M. (491), aged 25; idiocy; removed from workhouse; re-
ported violent and abusive; died three years and three months alter
admission, of pulmonary phthisis and diarrhoea; weight of body,
G8 lbs.; length, 5 ft. Head: brain natural; encephalon, 43 oz.;
spinal cord natural. Chest: old adhesions; tubercles and cavities in
both lungs ; heart, G^ oz. Abdomen : peritoneal adhesions; scrofulous
deposit in right renal capsule; ulceration in ileum.

C. S. (815), aged 15; idiocy; hasty, violent, and destructive;
youngest of several children; parents alive; insanity in her mother's
family. Eight years and two months in the asylum ; died of pulmonary
phthisis. Head: unusually small; circumference 17 ; antero-posterior
9-^-, transverse 5-^ inches. Cerebral structure appeared natural; each
hemisphere 7-g-; encephalon only 19^ ounces. Tubercles and cavities
in lungs; heart only 3 ounces. Ulceration in lower part ileum; all
organs small. Weight of the body, 51 lbs. ; length, 4 feet 5 inches.
M. R. (1,034), aged 40; idiocy; passionate, violent; refused food;
filthy habits; nearly three years in the asylum; died of pulmonary
phthisis. Head: circumference, 21 in.; antero-posterior, 11 in., and trans-
verse measurement, 11 inches. Brain unusually pale; each cerebral hemi-
sphere, 17^-; encephalon, 41; spinal cord, also pale, 1 ounce. Chest i
dense pleuritic adhesions; tubercles and small cavities in both lungs;
heart small, G-f oz.; ulceration in both ileum and colon.

E. W. (1,107), aged 48; stubborn; filthy habits; youngest of seven
children, four males and three females; had to be fed; noisy; died
three months after admission, of influenza and broncho-pneumonia.
Head-, circumference, 20^, antero-posterior, lli, transverse measure-
ment, 11 inches. Skull thin; dura mater adherent; encephalon small,
33^ oz.; spinal cord, soft at centre, oz. Chest: old pleuritic ad-
hesions on both sides; right lung in first stage pneumonia, 23 oz., left,
:17 oz. ; redness of bronchial lining membrane of both lungs.

L. C. (1,205), aged 2G; idiocy; youngest of two; father alive,
mother dead; has lived since for eight years with her married sister
filthy habits; " ophthalmia tarsi." Three years in the asylum; died of
pericarditis and dropsy. Head: circumference 19f in.; antero-posterior,
11 inches, transverse, 10 inches. Brain small and pale; each cerebral
hemisphere, 17; encephalon, 381. Chest: pleuritic adhesions; twopintsof
fluid by measure in the chest; a few tubercles in the lungs; heart and
pericardium adherent by recent lymph, weight 12 oz. Abdomen
distended with straw-coloured fluid; nutmeg liver, 53 oz; kidneys
large, each 5 oz.; cortical structure pale. Body weighed 91 lbs.;
length, 4 ft. 9 in.

A. D. (1,218), aged 43 ; idiocy ; filthy and stubborn ; no education ;
bad health; a cripple; died suddenly after dinner. Body weighed 58
lbs.; height, 4 ft. 10 in.; limbs contracted. Head: circumference, 21;
antero-posterior, 12, transverse, 11 in. Brain appeared natural; each
hemisphere, 18 oz.; encephalon, 41-g-; spinal cord rather soft, 1^ oz.
Chest: miliary tubercles in both lungs; cavities in the right apex.
Abdominal organs natural.
