Considerations on the Cures in Insanity
========================================

:Author: George PI.

davage, iVi.D., Assistant Medical (Jllicer Bethlehem Koyai Hospital.
In this article the basis of the statistics is formed by the annual returns
of Bethlehem Royal Hospital during ten years, from 1865 to 1874
inclusive. We are told that cure may be gradual or sudden, simply
progressive or vibratory?a case may pass from depression to exaltation,
or vice versa. When there are alternations of excitement and melan-
choly, it is dangerous if the periods become longer and longer at each
attack. In women, if the periods coincide with menstruation, chronic
insanity is to be feared. During the ten years, 852 male and 1,222
female patients were admitted, making a total of 2,074. In that time
367 male and 717 female patients were discharged cured, making a total
of cures of 1,084. This is 43 per cent, of cures on the male admissions,
and 58*67 on the female admissions. Cases of illusional insanity are
unfavourable. Nearly all cases of epileptic insanity are unfavourable,
and all cases of progressive general paralysis end fatally sooner or
later.

Cases get well in much larger proportion if sent to an asylum early.
The time for cure is early, and if past may be past for ever. Amongst
the unfavourable complications of insanity may be classed the follow-
ing :?Epilepsy, loss of power over the bladder, apoplectic symptoms,
hsematorrhoea auris, and paralysis. A very hopeless condition is one in
which the hands and feet are congested and blue, and the superficial
vessels distinct. As a rule, thin, wiry, dry hair is more constant in
the chronic than in the acute cases, and points to smaller chances of
cure.

It is an evil sign when a patient becomes fat and well favoured,
but gains nothing mentally.

With regard to the influence of age on prognosis, as a rule, young
cases get well more rapidly than older ones; but any form of mental
disease coming on before puberty is very dangerous. Sex and the
social state must, of course, be taken into consideration; but more
experience seems necessary before we can say how far their influence
may be relied on.

Every asylum has traditional sayings. Among these may be
quoted as follows:?Patients who make and wear rings of paper or
thread are seldom cured. The ring is often mistaken for a real token.
Patients who are constantly " wishing you good morning" are generally
hopeless.

Amongst the most rapid and unsatisfactory cases of cures are those
in which drink has played the chief part. In cases dependent upon
uterine irregularity the prognosis is by no means easy ; since, in many
cases, the same cause that produces insanity produces amenorrhcea.

In phthisis the prognosis frequently varies inversely with the
disease. In regard to syphilis, in connection with insanity, the prog-
nosis is rather that of the syphilis than of the mental state.
Dr Savage has compiled a most able and instructive pamphlet, and
has treated the subject in a thoroughly exhaustive manner. We have
great pleasure in recommending the work to our readers, who will be
amply rewarded by its perusal.
