Intemperance and Dipsomania as Related to Insanity
===================================================

Art. VII. ?
:Author: Edward C. Mann, M.D.,

Medical Superintendent State Emigrant Insane Asylum, Ward's Island, New York.
Bead before the meeting of the "American Association for the Cure of Inebriates," held at
Hartford, Conn., Sept. 28, 1875.

In accepting an invitation to read a paper before you to-day,
I do so fully conscious that most of the gentlemen composing
this Association have had far greater opportunities for studying
this speciality than I have enjoyed. I shall therefore briefly
present the subject to you as it has appeared to me during my
connection with the asylum which I have the honour to repre-
sent. I think it impossible to estimate the complex influences
that intemperance exerts upon the production of insanity, and
different authorities differ very much in their opinion on this
subject. All agree, however, that it is intimately connected
with and is one of the main causes of insanity. Lord Shaftesbury,
in his evidence before the Select Committee on Lunatics, in
1859, expressed his opinion that fifty per cent, of the cases
admitted into English asylums are due to drink. This is a
rather large estimate, but many superintendents of foreign
asylums have estimated the admissions from intemperance at
twenty-five per cent, or higher, including not only the proxi-
mate but remote cause of the disease. This percentage will be
largely increased if we take into account the great number of
cases in which the intemperance of parents causes the insanity
or idiocy of their offspring. I have traced intemperance as a
cause in almost every case of general paralysis that has fallen
under my notice, and others have observed the same thing.
M. Lunier estimates that fifty per cent, of all the idiots and
imbeciles to be found in the large cities of Europe have had
parents who were notorious drunkards. Out of 350 insane
patients admitted during two years at Charenton, in Europe,
insanity was attributed to drink in 102 instances. I think,
from my examination of the statistics of all the insane asylums,
both here and in Europe, that it is not too much to say' that
fully one-fourth of all the admissions are due, either proximately
or remotely, to intemperance.

I pass now to the consideration of dipsomania as a form of
physical disease?as insanity.

Dipsomania has been aptly defined as " an uncontrollable
and intermittent impulse to take alcoholic stimulants, or any
other agent, as opium, or haschisli, which causes intoxication?
in short, a methomania." We must distinguish between this
and the physiological state in which the individual merely
chooses to indulge in liquor to excess, rlhe great question of
importance is to distinguish the two states or conditions, when
the result, intemperance, is the same. We must observe
whether there are symptoms in our patient which can be
referred to primary disease of the nervous system. A* e must
examine for hereditary influences, which, when present, lead
us, of course, to suspect disease. Early development of the
appetite for stimulants points in the same direction. ^ But the
great diagnostic point attending the disease is the irresistible
impulse by which the patient is impelled to gratify his morbid
propensit}T, being, during the paroxysm, blind to all the highei
emotions, and pursuing a course against wlucli reason and
conscience alike rebel, it is frequently seen that these paioxysms
are preceded by considerable disturbance of the nervous system.
The patient perspires and is sleepless, uneasy and piostiated,
and so craves some stimulant.

Between the paroxysms lie is different from a common
drunkard in oftentimes disliking exceedingly all stimulants,
and is then a useful member of society. Dipsomania has been
described under three forms: acute, periodic, and clnonic.
The acute form is the rarest, occurring only after exhausting
diseases or excessive venereal indulgence. The periodic form
is much more frequent, and is observed in persons who have
suffered injury to the head or spine, females during pregnancy
and at the catamenial period, and also in men whose brains
are overworked. This form is frequently hereditary, and con-
sequently proportionately difficult of cure. These patients may
abstain for weeks and months from all stimulants, and may,
during this interval, positively dislike them. At last, however,
the patient becomes uneasy, listless, and depressed; is not
inclined to apply his mind; and, final]}r, begins to drink, and
continues until intoxicated. It is an interesting and rather
remarkable fact, that with this class of cases, as Charles Lamb,
in his "Confessions of a Drunkard,' pertinently remarks, "to
stop short of that measure which is sufficient to diaw on toipoi
and sleep, the benumbing apoplectic sleep of the drunkard, is
to have taken none at all. The pain of the self-denial is all
one." The patient continues this course for ten days,^ or
perhaps a fortnight, and then bitterly regrets his fall. This
often runs on, if not checked, into mania, and lapses into
dementia. The last and most common is the chronic form ;
?and I have always found this to be the most incurable form of
the disease, as the patients are incessantly under the irresistible
desire for alcoholic stimulants. I think the latter class of
cases require constant seclusion in an asylum if they wish to
be free from intoxication, as a discharge or leave of absence is
always followed by a repetition of the same acts. In a majority
of cases of this nature we find hallucinations of sight and
hearing, which oftentimes produce very painful moral impres-
sions, and at times even great terror in the patient. Cases of
delirium tremens are excluded in these remarks. These
patients manifest confusion of thought, perversion of feelings,,
suicidal tendencies, tremors of the facial muscles and tongue,
anaesthesia of the extremities at times, and very often paralytic
symptoms, going on to general paralysis. The subject of here-
ditary metamorphosis of the diseases of the nervous system is of
great importance in this connection. As a result of intem-
perance in the progenitors, we find transmitted to the offspring
allied but different forms of neurosis : it may be dipsomania,,
epilepsy, chorea, or actual insanity, or a proclivity to crime. It
is, at all events, an aptitude for some form or other of nervous
disorder, the particular form being often determined by causes-
subsequent to birth. The law of hereditary transmission
applies equally to the victims of dipsomania as well as to the
other insane classes, and is to be studied, I think, in three
divisions, according as it is manifested. First, in predisposi-
tion, or simple aptitude, the result of a defective organisation
and a weakened or diseased nervous system, as a result of which
the possessor is predisposed or has a tendency to seek for the
relief obtained by alcoholic stimulants when labouring under
jDhysical or mental depression ; second, in the latent state or
germ of the disease ; and third, in the actually developed dis-
ease. The first of these states, the predisposition or aptitude,
being hereditary in a strong degree, is universally acknow-
ledged to be the most difficult to eradicate, and requires the
wisest sanitary conditions adapted to both mind and body.
Most people doubt the existence of the second or latent state
or germ of the disease, ignoring the law of progressive de-
velopment, and such persons find it difficult to believe that
dipsomania coming on in maturity, as a result of ill-health,
mental shock, &c., may have originated in intemperance in the
parent or grandparent. Yet this is a fact. One very impor-
tant organic law, which should be universally understood in this
connection, is, that morbid impulses and characteristics and
traits may disappear in the second generation and break out
with renewed intensity in the third, although a tendency or
predisposition may be transmitted to the offspring, and, under
good hygienic and other favourable circumstances, die out and
fail to be transmitted any further. I have remarked in my
experience with the insane, whether the exciting cause he
intemperance or something else, that the cases most unlikely
to recover are those where the insane temperament or diathesis
is clearly manifested, and where the predisposition to disease
is inherited. Such patients, although they may have lucid inter-
vals, rarely if ever entirely recover. I think the insane im-
pulses to drink, which overcome all the efforts of the individual
who inherits a tendency in this direction, present the same
indications for treatment as do the suicidal and homicidal
impulses, namely, seclusion from society and the necessary
restraint in an asylum.

I do not agree with that class of persons who hold that under
all circumstances the dipsomaniac is to he treated as an invalid,
with the utmost gentleness and forbearance, and then, with the
strangest perversity, turn round and tell you that inebriety is
no excuse for criminal actions, and line and imprison the un-
liappy man who has been driven into the debauch by an irre-
sistible craving for drink, when properly he should be regarded
as insane, and should be sent to an inebriate asylum for treat-
ment and cure. Our laws at present fail lamentably in pre-
venting intemperance, and this is due in a great measure to the
false view in which this disease is held by the judiciary. The
different forms of dipsomania correspond in their manifestations,
and oftentimes in their causes, to other cases of mental disease,
and cannot properly, I think, be separated from them as regards
the fact of the disease. Dipsomania often appears as a result
of the same causes that operate in the production of other types
of mental disease, such as ill-health, severe mental shock, blows
on the head and spine, and sunstroke.

We are dealing in both cases with abnormal cerebration;
in the one case associated with mania, melancholia, dementia,
and idiocy ; and in the other, with a depraved alcoholic appetite
?an irresistible impulse which the mind seems powerless to
control: an insane impulse, just as surely as a homicidal or a
suicidal impulse is an insane impulse. I think that when our
cerebral patholog'v, which is as yet in its infancy, becomes
more generally understood, it will be found equally applicable
to this as to other forms of insanity. The terrible insane
craving for alcoholic stimulants is often the result of a lowered
vitality or abnormal organic development of the nervous system
that has descended from generation to generation, gaining in
intensity, until it manifests itself by the complete loss of self-
control and active inebriety in children and grandchildren
after they once taste intoxicating liquors and indulge in them.

The blunted moral perception which so many inebriates
exhibit, and which renders them peculiarly liable to a relapse
after they leave an asylum, is to be regarded in the same light,
I think, as the perverted moral sense in moral insanity.
In every institution for the insane we find inmates who
exhibit no obvious intellectual aberration or impairment, the
moral faculties being deranged, while the intellectual faculties
remain apparently in their normal condition. The manifesta-
tions of moral insanity may be a simple perversion of some
sentiment or propensity, under certain exciting causes; and
I think this exactly comprehends cases of dipsomania with loss
of self-control and perversion of the moral sense. The person,
of course, is aware that the act is wrong in both instances, but
the control which the intellect exercises over the moral sense
is overborne by the superior force derived from disease. I have
been told many times, by both insane patients and dipso-
maniacs, that the feeling on the one hand to commit some
insane deed, and on the other to give way to alcoholic appetite,
was contemplated in both instances with horror and disgust,
and at first successfully resisted, until at last, having steadily
increased in strength, it bore down all opposition. What can
be a more powerful argument in favour of the disease theory of
dipsomania ?

Pathology of Inebriety.?The basis of our cerebral patho-
logy is the fundamental principle that healthy mental function
is dependent upon the proper nutrition, stimulation, and repose
of the brain; and upon the processes of waste and reparation
being regularly and properly maintained. We know that the
cerebral cells are nourished by the proper and due supply of
nutritive plasma from the blood, and that this is essential to
healthy function ; and, indeed, the ultimate condition of mind
with which we are now acquainted consists in the due nutrition,
growth, and renovation of the brain-cells. If now we take
into the system an amount of alcohol that causes the blood-
plasma to convey to the brain-cells a noxious and poisonous,
in place of a nutritive substance, stimulating the cells so
as to hasten the progress of deca}^ and waste beyond the
power of reparation and renovation, and impressing a patho-
logical state on them, we must inevitably have resulting a
change of healthy function, and a certain amount of disease
induced. Owing to the abuse of alcohol, we have resulting a
change in the chemical composition of the cerebral cells from
the standard of health, which is the foundation of organic
disease, as it prevents and interrupts healthy function. As a
result of the overfilling of the cerebral vessels or hyperajmia
of the brain from the long-continued use of alcohol, we have
at first symptoms of irritation, due to increased excitability of
the nerve-filaments and ganglion-cells of the brain. The
symptoms of exhaustion and depression occurring at a later
stage are due to lost excitability of the nerve-filaments and
ganglion-cells of the brain, owing to a want of the proper supply
of arterial oxygenated blood to them. This is caused by the
excessive cerebral hyperemia, the escape of venous blood from
the brain being obstructed; the result being that no new
arterial blood can enter the capillaries. We may have
apoplectiform or epileptiform attacks and paralysis occurring
in the course of these cerebral hyperemias, and they may be
due either to obstructed escape of venous blood or to secondary
oedema of the brain, in which transudation of serum takes place
into the perivascular spaces and interstitial tissue of the brain,
with consequent anosmia.

We know comparatively little yet respecting the physiology
and pathology of the nervous system; and consequently com-
paratively little information lias been gained regarding the
morbid changes that take place in the brain and its appendages,
as a result of the abuse of alcohol. Such knowledge in this
direction as we do possess shows that analogous changes take
place in chronic alcoholism and chronic insanity?namely,
atrophy and induration of the brain, and thickening and
infiltration of the membranes. The nerve-cells have also
been found to be the seat of granular degeneration in some
instances, and some liistologists have claimed to have dis-
covered fatty degeneration of the various brain elements.
Respecting the latter changes, Dr J. Batty Tuke, of Edin-
burgh, who is one of the most successful of modern investi-
gators in the department of morbid cerebral histology, gives
it as his opinion that the application of the various tests for
oil will fail to detect the presence of the so-called " free oil-
globules" in the substance of the convolution, which he con-
siders to be but the scattered debris of granular cells. Ac-
cording to the great pathologist, Eokitansky, we find thickening
and increase of volume of the pia mater and arachnoid, and
permanent infiltration of the former and a varicose condition
of its vessels, as a result of continued abuse of alcohol. As
the state of the pia mater is unquestionably closely related to
the higher functions of the brain, the latter must suffer more
or less as the result of such an abnormal condition of the
former. If there exist a permanently congested and thickened
state of the pia mater, it is extremely probable that if it
becomes suddenly turgid and hypereemic as a result of severe
emotional disturbances, we shall have, resulting from the
increased pressure on the brain, coma, epileptiform and apo-
plectiform attacks, and other grave nervous symptoms. It is
fair to conclude that in the majority of cases the first changes
that occur are repeated attacks of active cerebral congestion,
followed by chronic cerebral congestion and chronic cerebral
meningitis; and that, as the disease assumes a chronic form, the
brain takes on a secondary change and becomes ancemic, atro-
phied, and indurated?a state allied to cirrhosis. In these cases
of chronic meningitis, proceeding to atrophy and induration?of
which I have seen quite a number?the prominent symptoms
have been impairment of memory, dulness of intellect bor-
dering on dementia, trembling of the limbs, tottering gait,
hesitating, slurring speech, and other symptoms indicative of
gradually progressing paralysis. In two cases of general
paralysis due to drink, in which I made a post-mortem exami-
nation, paying careful attention to the state of the brain and
spinal cord, I found in both instances thickening and opacity
of the membranes, with adherence to each other and to the
brain, showing the existence of chronic meningitis. The
brain was in both cases ancemic and indurated, and in one case
there was dilatation of the lateral ventricles with considerable
?effusion. The spinal cord was atrophied and indurated, and
there was considerable fluid in the spinal canal in one of the
cases, and also at the base of the brain. Upon hardening the
spinal cord and making thin sections, and employing carmine
staining, to demonstrate the structural relation of the cord
more clearly, I found, upon microscopical examination, that
there was atrophy and loss of the nerve-elements of the pos-
terior columns, with a new formation of connective tissue. In
making autopsies, where the cause of death has been owing,
directly or indirectly, to the abuse of alcohol, I have found
cirrhosis of the liver, fatty and waxy liver, cancer of the liver,
chronic Briglit's disease, cancer of the stomach, and cancer of
the bladder, and, in one case, a gummy tumour of the dura
mater. It is doubtless true that in many cases we shall find
upon examination no pathological changes in the brain that
are demonstrable by existing knowledge and appliances; but
I think we should rather doubt the quality of our resources of
observation than doubt the existence of pathological changes
in this most delicate, sensitive, and complex of all organs,
when we have observed during life its functions to be obviously
perverted, if not destroyed.

Treatment.?Having endeavoured to prove that dipsomania
is a physical disease?that it is, in fact, a distinct type of in-
sanity?I pass, in conclusion, to the consideration of the question
of the care of inebriates. I am strongly opposed to inebriates
being confined in insane asylums, as they are very numerous,
rapidly increasing, and a troublesome class of patients, and are
a disturbing element among insane patients. They need to
"be in an asylum adapted in construction, location, and sur-
roundings to tlieir special needs. Most of this class of patients
do not think that tliey should be placed in an insane asylum,
and do not adapt themselves to their position. They are
constantly demanding privileges which cannot be granted, and
chafe under the restraint which is imposed upon them. They
do not assimilate readily and pleasantly with the other class of
patients, but domineer over and ridicule them. They are fall
of mischief when in an insane asylum, and interfere materially
with proper discipline. Of course there are exceptions, but this
is, I think, the general rule.

Dipsomania is more troublesome to manage than simple
insanity, and requires, I think, more perfect discipline, both
moral and physical, than the latter. In the treatment of
inebriates we have primarily to build up and restore shattered
constitutions and broken-down nervous systems. We have a
class of patients to deal with whose digestive powers are
weakened, whose appetite is impaired, whose muscular system
is enfeebled, and whose generative function is often decayed;
the blood is impoverished and the general nutrition disordered.
They are indirectly predisposed to the acquisition of nearly all
diseases, as they have, by long indulgence in alcohol, lessened
the power of resisting their causes. We have to deal with the
results of a toxic poison, which has resulted in more or less
pathological change in the brain and nervous centres. We
have also to deal at times with various complications proceed-
ing from the abuse of alcohol, such as cirrhosis of the liver,
gastritis, epilepsy, various forms of dyspepsia, and, in some
cases, with Bright's disease. We must place our patient under
the most favourable hygienic influences, provide for him cheer-
fid, tranquil, and pleasant surroundings, repress cerebral
excitement, procure sleep for him, and we must also give him
plenty of good, nourishing food and an abundance of fresh
air and exercise. I believe that to this disease, as to insanity
under other forms, the remarks of Sir James Coxe are equally
applicable, that " purgatives, hypnotics, anodynes, and tonics
are useful auxiliaries; but a comfortable meal is the best of
sedatives, and abundance of exercise the best of hypnotics.
All remedial measures are, I think, inferior to wholesome
exercise of body and mind in this disease. W e must piovide
amusements of every kind, and encourage patients to woik.
We must stimulate inertia, resist every kind of perverted feeling,
and check morbid impulses ; and at last we may, if we exeicise
a wise care and discrimination, restore our patients to their
homes and to society, permanently cured.
