Problems for Pathologists
==========================

324
Art. IX.?

All medical men conversant with the progress of insanity when
under observation in public hospitals, all who have lived long
with the insane, must have noticed how perfectly compatible
grave lesions of the nervous system are with longevity, use-
fulness, and even enjoyment; and, likewise, how compatible
the phenomena of the gravest forms of mental derangement
are with the retention and exercise of a large amount of
intelligence, even of fancy, and of the acquirements and
accomplishments which adorn the sane. It is not my in-
tention at present to embrace these propositions except where
they incidentally and indirectly are connected with subjects in
which it would appear that both medical science and medical
logic are at fault, or have hitherto been set at defiance by the
difficulties attending the investigation. It has been assumed,
and, I conceive, rightly assumed, that the brain is the organ of
the mind, or in some manner connected with the manifestations
of mental conditions or faculties; but it has been further
assumed, rightly or wrongly I shall not at present say, that
in every mental act, and in every phase of consciousness, from
the perception of the odour of a flower to the most profound
and protracted philosophical or mathematical ratiocination,
there is a corresponding structural change in the cerebral
matter or its dependencies; that the slightest disturbance, or
disease, or suspension in such acts or phases is attended with or
caused by a corresponding morbid alteration or destruction of a
portion of nervous matter; and, thirdly, that the psychical
element of our nature must be material, or a quality, or a con-
dition, or a secretion of matter. Now, before " leaping in the
dark " to a conclusion upon so important a hypothesis, it would
be prudent for pathologists to attempt some solution of the
problems, or, as I might fancifully term them, the Conundrums,
involved in the following considerations :?

I. Mania Transitoria is, from the shortness of its duration,
perhaps from the rarity of its occurrence, seldom noticed except
when defined ira brevis est furor, or when accompanied or fol-
lowed by certain of those frightful tragedies which cast a doubt
upon the real nature of this affliction. It has, however, been
recognised and described as a distinct form of mental aberration,
by psychologists in America, France, and Germany, and upon
it the plea of insanity has been founded in criminal cases in
the United States.

Illustrations may be found in Esquirol, " Maladies Men-
tales," vol. ii. p. 99, who, in speaking of modifications of mania,
designates them as spontanee, momentanee, and says " There
are other monomaniacs who kill by instinctive impulse. They
act without consciousness, without delusion, without motives.
They destroy by a blind impulse, instantaneously, independent
of their volition." In Marc, De la Folie, vol. ii. p. 47 3, under the
title " Mania Transitoire ou Passagerein Dagonet," Traite des
Maladies Mentales," under the title " Monomanie Instinctive
sans Delire, Impulsive, Kestreinte-oligomanie," &c.; and in
Jarvis, American Journal of Insanity, 1869, vol. xxvi. p. 1,
who, under the title " Mania Transitoria," affords the most ample
and reliable account of the disease which we have met with.
From him, an Englishman in language, habits of thought,
everything but birth, I shall quote certain of the characteristics
of this psychose. It is described as a form of mental disorder
appearing in healthy persons suddenly, disappearing rapidly,
and leaving no trace behind. It has very often been connected
with violent and sanguinary deeds which would have con-
signed responsible agents to the scaffold. Its duration may be
for minutes, hours, days, but on recovery there is no recollec-
tion whatever of the events which have occurred during the
existence of the paroxysm. This gap in time and memory is
invariable, whether restoration to consciousness has been
effected by or independently of treatment, such as bleeding,
&c. The excitement or perversion sometimes eventuates in
epilepsy, and has been supposed by Dr Maudsley to be an
analogue or substitute for such a seizure. Eemorse may suc-
ceed the perpetration of crimes during this condition, but it
resembles the penitence of the inebriate, which concerns a fact
or facts narrated by others, but of which the actor has no cog-
nisance. Many cases, however, involve no offence against the
law or propriety, but are merely marked by extravagance, folly,
incoherence, or by a temporary revolution in the feelings and
faculties of the patient. These instantaneous changes may
recur frequently during life, or subside at once and leave no
indication or impression on the strength or stability of the
mind. In certain instances delusions have pre-existed, and in
others the individuals have belonged to families where the ten-
dencyto hereditarymentaldiseasehad been demonstrated. Though
rare?and many psychologists have treated thousands of lunatics
and have not met with a single example of Mania Transitoria?
yet the industry of Tuke has collected, from various chronicles
and countries, about 75 cases. Many years ago I met with two
striking illustrations in lads of 1-i and 17, of vivid imagina-
tion and nervous temperament, but who were at the time in
excellent bodily health, and have not manifested, either then
or since, any species of alienation. In one the attack ceased in
the course of twelve hours, in the other it continued several
days.

What then are the relations between our physical and
psychical nature under such circumstances ? If the cells in the
cortical substance be engorged, or in any way degenerated, in
what manner can the cause, or the removal, or the operation of
this fugacious state be explained ? Is the mental orgasm inde-
pendent of physical causes, concomitants, or other circum-
stances ?

II. General Paralysis of the Insane may be briefly described
as an affection of the cortical substance and of the sensori-motor
system, as characterised by paralysis gradually involving all the
muscles, and by mental perversion generally evinced by exaltation
of ideas, by delusions as to rank, riches, and power, although
sometimes ushered in by depression ; by modifications of aphasia,
as most frequently affecting the male sex and as incurable.
Its duration varies from months to many years, but, should death
occur during the first stages of development, no lesion has been
detectable, but in the second it has been asserted that " persistent
spasm of the blood-vessels leads to change in their component
elements, especially in the muscular substance." This is ob-
viously a secondary effect, and the primary origin must be
sought in that hypothetic nervous irritation which may be
either the cause or the consequence of the blood changes.
While the post-mortem appearances must differ in accordance
with the progress of the disease, and, it may be, in accordance
with the general mental condition, whether that be maniacal,
melancholic, &c., in conjunction with the special features of
ambitious delirium and the delusions which have been specified,
the following detail may be accepted as a fair exposition of
what has been observed in all the stages, even where death
was preceded or produced by convulsive attacks. " Serous
infiltration of the cortex of cerebral hemispheres, its state
of separation, of bloody injection, its mixture with granular
elements, either on the walls of the vessels or on the surface
of the large nerve-cells, the state of the injection of the
vessels of the white matter, the development of the corpora
striata, the presence of molecular granules and collections
of small cells in the midst of the grey matter in the same
bodies, the dilatation of the vessels of the cerebellum and of
the pons, the formation of granular products on the vessels,
or in the grey substance of these same regions; finally, the
dilatation of the vascular network of the pia mater, and its
infiltration, either serous or sero - sanguinolent, with the
formation of granular elements.1' These details have been
copied verbatim from Dr Edward Long Fox's work on " Patho-
logical Anatomy of the Nervous Centres" (pp. 203-211), as
affording a more complete view of the whole subject than could
be collected from the monographs from which they are drawn.
Calmeil, accredited the discoverer of this disease in the
aspect under which we now know it, regarded it as perien-
cephalitis, and gives a record of forty-five brains examined
microscopically, of which the following is an epitome :?" The
capillaries are diseased in various ways, abundant extravasations
of fibrine are often found ; many secondary products are met
with, especially in that form of the disease which is complicated
with phenomena of an apoplectic or convulsive form."

When the extensive and irremediable ravages here delineated
are considered, it is startling to find the following contrast to
this supposed continuous downward course of the malady
which they represent. Baillarger, the highest living authority
in France, is inclined to regard arrestment in the advance of
General Paralysis as rarely veritable. When the disease is
simple, the paralysis and dementia by which it is characterised
may disappear, but if maniacal, melancholic, monomaniacal,
these characteristics continue during the remission. He quotes
Marce as affirming that remissions occur when General Para-
lysis begins with mania, agitation passes into calm, embarrass-
ment of speech diminishes, and ambitious ideas fade away ;
from endless ideas of greatness, muscular infirmity, debility,
and maniacal vehemence, the patients pass as if by enchant-
ment to an almost normal state, renouncing their errors, lower-
ing their pretensions, and recovering their muscular force.
When the inevitable and fatal issue of General Paresis was less
known, I confess to have been guilty of discharging at least
two patients as recovered, in whom all symptoms of General
Paralysis and other diseases of the nervous system had entirely
disappeared, and who presented the features of robust and
rubicund health, but who ultimately succumbed under the
malady. It is not necessary to obtrude upon pathologists the
perplexities created by the remark of Baillarger in the article
above quoted, from the Annates Medico-Psychologiques, Mai,
187 6, that when General Paralytics die during mania, me] an cholia,
or in their absence, precisely the same structural changes in the
brain are found ; by Calmeil, that in the same encephalites the
morbid manifestations greatly vary; by Dickson that no one
would be justified in declaring any brain presented to him to be
that of a madman ; but I do conceive that they are called upon
to prepare answers to the following queries. 1. Are the
psychical excitement, exaltation, and delusion, to be regarded as
the factors or promoters of the physical degeneration? 2. Are
we entitled to hold that the physical degeneration was stayed,
disappeared during the cessation of mental disease, giving
place to healthy structure ? 3. Are we entitled to hold
that the resumption of apparently healthy mental action
was compatible and co-existent with persistent structural
degeneration ?

III. It is not my intention to insist here upon the origin or
nature of Lucid Intervals, which, according to Giuslain,
amounted to 60 per cent, in the patients which had passed
under his notice, as the subject is of too wide a com-
pass. There are, however, occasionally brief periods in the
history of Dements, chiefly connected with excitement, during
which the long dormant or dead faculties or feelings are
awakened, revivify and present a store of memories and a
. strength of reasoning altogether unexpected, and inconsistent
with long-established feebleness and fatuity, and which pass
away with the same inexplicable rapidity which mark their
development. Dr Pliny Earle presents the interesting picture
of a juvenile Dement, who, during one hour, but no longer, was
roused from his apathy and taciturnity, displayed such mar-
vellous humour and joyousness as to excite the fun and frolic of
his wondering companions, and then subsided into his former
silence and stupidity. Pain has produced a similar resuscita-
tion, and in Dements as well as other lunatics there is sometimes
a euthanasia, a wakening or lighting up before death, which it
is very difficult to reconcile with chronic disease, prostration,
and impending dissolution. With what cerebral condition then
can these sudden flashes of restored intellectual light, after a
darkness created and maintained for years by the presence of
brain-wasting, hypertrophy or consolidation of tissues, connec-
tive or otherwise, be identified, it is for the Pathologist to say.
IV. It is not proposed to enlarge upon the spontaneous
recoveries from various forms of madness, nor to advert to the
phenomena of recovery at all, except where such happens after
long periods of mental aberration. Many years ago a patient
of my own,who had passed 16years in deep melancholia,sometimes
disturbed by panphobia, and obviously merging into hebetude
and dementia, incapacitating her for all occupation, even
rational conversation, suddenly gave tokens of increased atten-
tion to what was passing around, greater amenity and repose of
manner, gradually resumed various feminine works going on
around her, and ultimately engaged with alacrity, happiness,
and success, in teaching the young ; as she had been, before the
incursion of depression, a governess. She survived her restora-
tion many years, but suffered from partial paraplegia, acute
neuralgia, and ultimately died of what would now be called
embolism. A lady was placed under my care labouring under
chronic mania, I think of one year's standing, haughty, vehe-
ment, irascible, and with manners so unsocial, and habits so
degraded, that her relatives had secluded her in a garret, and
pushed her food within the door without visiting her. The
usual medical means failed, but she was induced to listen one
evening to her national music, and when seen by me next
morning, about twelve hours after hearing the ballad, she was
perfectly well, and has, so far as I know, remained so since. Dr.
Mead mentions a cure as rapid. But there are narratives of
entire relief from mental disease after periods even longer than
that stated above. Dr Callender met with a case of recovery
after madness had continued 17 years, Pliny Earle relates
a similar event after the continuance of insanity for nine years,
Dr Kirkbride knew a cure after eight years' dementia. Dr.
Grreen had under his charge a Baptist minister for 12 years,
who, after his convalescence, performed his sacred functions ; and
a lady, who after 16 years of derangement, was restored to
sanity.*

The most recent contribution to this catalogue of memora-
bilia is contained in the annual report of the Glasgow Lunatic
Asylum, 1875, just published, where Dr Yellowlees relates that
a lady labouring under melancholia with delusions for eight
years, followed by feeble health and sedentariness, was prevailed
upon to take exercise and join the evening amusements, when
she gradually regained tranquillity and reason under the genial
influence of card playing. Let whist be for ever engrafted
upon the tree of moral therapeutics.

It seems fair to inquire from the pathologists where the
healthy mind was during the 8,12, 17 years of its obscuration ?
What, if psychical action depends upon physical conditions, was
that condition which suspended intellect, or embittered life, and
what constituted the key, natural or artificial, which opened the
prison-house and admitted the rays of light, which in minutes,
hours, days, &c., placed the sufferer in a healthy and responsible
condition ?

V. Every insane community may be divided into the idle,
the industrious, the intelligent. The idle are unable or unwilling
to engage in occupation. The industrious, though monarclis,
millionaires, destitute of a body or human capacities, according
to their own belief, and without object, reward, or interest,
engage in severe and servile labour. The intelligent, while har-
bouring grotesque delusions, while incapable of undertaking the
most trivial ordinary employments or responsibilities, and whose
liberty would be incompatible with social or domestic order and
harmony and with their personal safety, are found to manifest
the gentlest sympathies, the highest and most difficult acts of
intelligence, and to produce the most exquisite and perfect
efforts in art or literature. It is most difficult to conceive how
Mind in its unity can be at once healthy and diseased ; but it is
for the Pathologists to explain how a brain, or portions of it,
can subserve to the display of functions or faculties not merely
incompatible but contradictory; how an optic thalamus can
eliminate at the same time and in the same person, absurd hal-
lucinations and correct conceptions; how granular and fatty
degenerated cells can at once obscure conceptions of right and
wrong, identity, relation and responsibility, and yet retain the
acquirements and refinements of an earlier stage of conscious-
ness, and even contribute to creative acts in mathematics, paint-
ing, or poetry ?

VI. The majority of medical men engaged in the treatment
of the insane have witnessed rapid and inexplicable recoveries,
where the aid of medicine had not been sought for, or could not
be traced. Others have met with cures so sudden as to appear
miraculous. It is a well-worn adage among alienists, that the
most unpromising and intractable cases cast doubt and scorn upon
prognosis by immediate restoration to sanity. Paroxysmal and
intermittent forms of mental disease are not here alluded to;
although when the healthy interval extends to a year (" Bucknill
and Tuke's Psychological Medicine," p. 306), and where the
transition is abrupt, such instances seem to be worthy of a place
in the category of the wonderful. At present I have to deal
with cases in which the cessation of symptoms of all morbid
action is sharp, sudden, almost instantaneous. I have met with
examples of such an event in mania, dementia, and hysterical
mania. It is even better ascertained that if an attack of pyrexia,
fever, &c., supervene during mental disease, sanity is at least
temporarily restored. Again, the initiation of such affections
may take place without premonition or incubation, generally,
but not invariably, from moral causes. To cite the highest and
the most recent authority upon this latter point, Voisin, 1876,
in his "Lepons sur les Maladies Mentales," says: " Tout en ne
niant pas les folies instantanees." It would be satisfactory could
the pathologists determine whether the hyperemia, ancemia,
with empty canals, enlarged perivascular spaces, miliary
aneurisms and dilatations, degeneration of cells, cylindrical axes
and connective tissue, all such structural alterations being pre-
sent in the forms of mental disease indicated, can appear and
pass away as if by the wand of magic in a transformation
scene ?

VII. I do not here introduce the phenomena of double con-
sciousness, or their corresponding physical conditions ; as being
too rare and too fugacious for the solvent power of the micro-
scope. But instances do occur in which a total change,
catastrophe, cataclysm in the mental constitution, folluw
important crises which are worthy of consideration. About
thirty years ago there came to my knowledge the case of a
lady mentioned, I think, by Dr Abercombie, in his work on
the Brain, who at eighteen married the object of her affections,
with the approval of her family. She subsequently fell into a
state of stupor and inertion so grave and prolonged that it
became necessary to restore her to her original home. There
she remained for a long period in a state of complete lethargy
or trance-coma, mute and motionless, idealess, although all
the natural functions were healthily performed. After a time
she began to move her fingers, to open her eyes, to feel pain
when pinched, and so forth. Then she became susceptible of
and submitted to a re-education, acquiring a knowledge of
knitting, music, writing, &c., but exercising these acquisitions
in a manner totally dissimilar to that which had formerly
characterised her. The crucial point of the narrative, however,
is that she became perfectly sane, but that her former life, her
former self had been obliterated ; that she had lost all recollec-
tion and knowledge of her parents, home, husband, all ante-
cedents to the stupor; that she learned to love her surroundings
both animate and inanimate, but as a new creation, and
gathered up knowledge of language, arts, &c., with greater
celerity than a child could, but with no assistance, no point
of departure from what she had been in her earlier years. But
there is a more celebrated though less complete illustration of
such an entire revolution of the mental constitution, recorded
by Sir James Macintosh, in the words and on the authority of
the subject, the Eev. Robert Hall. In the earlier half of his
ministerial life this distinguished divine had been endowed with
the most powerful and poetic imagination, which shed over his
discourses a blaze of fervid and eloquent imagery. He was
seized with insanity, and after one or two paroxysms, his recovery
was marked, not merely by an incapacity to throw the light
yielded by elevated sympathies and sentiments, and by the
beauty of language, upon Scriptural truths, but by a> logical
coldness, precision, and prosaicism, which he could neither sub-
due nor soften. It would be well could pathologists ascertain
whether persons thus afflicted, or changed, continued to think
in their second stage of existence by the same brain as during
the first, or whether an entire structural renovation had taken
place, in which there was a preservation of personal identity,
but a loss of personal memory and of characteristic powers and
acquisitions? L. L. D.
