On the Education and Training of the Feeble in Mind
====================================================

:Author:  J. Langdon Down, M.D. Lond., Fellow of the Koyal College of
Physicians of London; Physician to and Lecturer on Clinical Medicine
at the London Hospital; Physician to the Normansfiekl Training
Institution, &c.; formerly Lecturer on Medicine, Materia Medica, and
Comparative Anatomy at the London Hospital, and Physician to the
Earlswood Asylum. London : Lewis, 136 Gower Street.

From this interesting pamphlet we learn that the largest proportion of
idiocy is to be found amongst the lower orders, where the struggle for
existence is frequently desperate, and the unhappy victims in conse-
quence almost entirely neglected. The first thing to be done must be
to rescue the child from a solitary life, and surround him or her by
influences calculated to render existence joyous. Great improvement
may be obtained by a happy combination of treatment?medical,
physical, moral and intellectual.

The medical should form the basis of all treatment having reference
to what is known of hygiene, physiology, chemistry, and therapeutics.
The highest possible health is the great desideratum. Many racial
types, such as Mongolian imbeciles, lose considerable intellectual energy
in the winter. Morbid anatomy tells us that, in addition to grave
defects in the cerebral mass, we may often find a symmetry of central
nervous ganglia and pallor of vesicular neurine. Our dietary, there-
fore, must contain a fair supply of nitrogenous elements, and at the
same time be rich in oleaginous and phosphatic substances. The daily
use of the sponge and other baths is of paramount importance, especially
Avhen wre bear in mind the peculiar exhalation so common from the
skin of imbeciles. The residence should be on gravel soil, surrounded
by well made walks, in order that no opportunity of daily outdoor
exercise should be lost.

As regards physical training, the attenuated muscles should be
carefully and fully exercised, to obviate the simple automatic move-
ment so common to the imbecile.

The moral education is of great moment. He must learn obedience ;
must understand that right is productive of pleasure, wrong followed
by the reverse. Corporal punishment should be strictly prohibited.
The tact of the teacher will be called into play. A study of the
peculiarities of the patients will in most cases reveal a ready access to
his moral control.

The intellectual training will have reference to a cultivation of the
senses. The qualities, form, and relation of objects should be taught
by the sense of touch ; colour, size, and shape by the sense of sight;
the varieties of sound by the ear. Nothing must be left to the
imagination. The patient must be taught habits of neatness. The
defective speech is best overcome by a well-arranged plan of tongue
gymnastics. Varied amusement should be furnished, especially
theatrical representations which are not only amusing but educational.
We quite concur in the opinions so aptly afforded by Dr Down,
and we think that were only the work of caring for the idiot poor
undertaken in the same way as it is for the lunatic poor a great step
would be taken in the right direction.
