The Physical Signs of Reasoning Madness
==========================================

317
Art. VIII.?1
(" FOLIE RAISONNANTE ").
(Translated, condensed, and slightly altered from the Report of Debates in the Society Medico-
Psychologiques, Paris, on a Paper by M. Jules Falret, in the numbers of the " Annales Medico-
Psychologiques," May and July 1876.)
:Author:  M. Legkand du Saulle.

A new question has been submitted to our society. Do there
exist physical signs of la Folie Raisonnante, and how can we
determine them ? Besides the intellectual peculiarities of this
psychose, can we, practically, rest upon a group of physical
signs as characteristic of the disease ? I reply in the affirmative.
I would in the first place inquire as to the order in which the
bodily signs present themselves; and I esteem this as indispen-
sable, in order to place psychology upon a legitimate scientific
basis, and to redeem it from the doubtful position in which it
has been placed by the Press, the Bar, and the Magistracy.
The necessity for adopting the precision which characterises
modern medicine is illustrated by observing what now occurs
in the dealings of an alienist in a court of law, where there is
no longer any discussion as to where reason ends and insanity
begins, where philosophical subtleties are dispensed with; where
psychology is ignored, and where counsel, judge, jury, and
physician confine themselves strictly within the bounds of
practical observation. Such is the advantage of experience over
speculation. Formerly we guillotined insane criminals under
the influence of a doubtful theory; to-day they are sent to an
asylum for observation and restoration. The dwelling and due
sphere of psychology ought not to be in our libraries and anti-
quarian museums, but in the wards of our hospitals and at the
bedside.

It is, then, essential in all inquiries as to mental conditions,
and especially into that of Folie Raisonnante, mania without
delirium, moral insanity, or derangement manifested in act,
to retrace the whole of the medical history and all previous
pathological conditions of the lunatic. In such a survey the
principal crises or constitutional changes are as follows : Puberty,
and the mental states associated with it; anomalies in the
development of the organs, and of the feelings connected with
virility; cerebral symptoms indicative of congestion and hseraor-
rhage?conditions which continue throughout and close the life
of the patient. Such are the grand categories or epochs con-
nected with the manifestations of the mental conditions of
which we treat; but to enter upon a more detailed exposition
of the characteristics of them.

1st. The cranium is very frequently malformed. Micro-
cephalism exists only in a few cases, but in many there is great
irregularity of the surface, prominences, depressions, ridges, on
various parts of the skull. Calmeil states that of thirteen Beason-
ing Lunatics twelve presented a marked flattening of the pos-
terior part of the head. The coincidence between the mental
infirmity and the physical deformity in this series is worthy of
serious consideration. My own experience would show that
this relation is met with in one-half the cases examined. All
malformations acquired subsequent to birth are excluded from
this calculation. The custom of bandaging the heads of infants
before the closure of the sutures and the ossification of the
bones leads to great cranial distortion and deformity. The
results from such interference are likewise omitted from our
estimate. Sometimes the face presents anomalies as great and
grotesque as the skull; such as absence of harmony, symmetry,
and proportion between the different features, so that the
individual is odd and ugly. Among the more important devia-
tions from natural conformation are squinting, nystagmus,
choreic contraction of particular muscles, enormous size of
mouth, thickening of the lower lip, defects or diseases of the
teeth, vaulted palate, malposition or imperfect development of
ears, imperfections of external senses, hyperesthesia, and neu-
ralgia, gastralgia, and many other indications of unhealthy,
nervous, or imperfect action. It may be noted in passing that
these defects or perversions are all of hereditary origin. One
or other of these indications may be detected in every patient
of this class, and it seems expedient that they should be associated
with the clinical and mental symptoms as highly significative
in framing a diagnosis.

2nd. Mental disturbance at puberty. This period is, in
accordance with the confessions of the sufferers, pregnant with
perils and disorder, and, in despite of all resources, may even-
tuate in delirium. The susceptibility is so great- that the least
emotion, contrariety, constitutional change, or common cold,
almost inevitably developes a paroxysm of delirium. Thus a
single glass of wine or a convivial party will, notwithstanding
habitual temperance, dethrone reason and simulate the first
stages of drunkenness. Chlorosis, amennorhoea, hysteria, ten-
dency to syncope, feeling of suffocation, lachrymoseness, catalepsy,
chorea, somnambulism, and all the signs of the minor neuroses
widening into abstinence, mysticism, and even into mild mania
or melancholy, are one or all encountered among females. Boys
of from 12 to 16, if removed from their native mountains,
become nostalgic, mischievous, kleptomaniac, and vagabond,
tempted to incendiarism or suicide; and may be found ultimately
under the charge of the police, labouring under diseases con-
tracted from the most degraded or abominable practices. The
close of such a morbid career is either the galleys or the guillo-
tine.

N.B.?In towns children of this type are choreic, somnam-
bulic, erotic, pietistic, or victims of persecution. If affluent they
are slaves to hypochondriasis and crime. I might quote a case of
a young lady so hypochondriacal as to be almost insane, who
was completely restored by the water cure, riding, travelling,
fishing, etc., and cod-liver oil; and of a youth labouring
under genuine hysteriform symptoms, hemiplegia, and anaesthesia
of the same side, whose restoration may be expected. These
odd beings will ultimately be urged by their intellectual
activity beyond or outside normal lines of conduct, and even
before the invasions of such morbid mental phenomena as are
patent to all. Their errors may be merely fantastic, eccentric,
irrepressible, querulous, conceited, violent, lazy, instinctively
wicked, and are likewise marked by cruelty, by habitual deceit,
by indisposition to regular employment, and by dishonest
habits. Undisciplined, they torment their family, defy their
teachers. Their pathological perversity-is incurable. Acute
and clever, they acquire and retain knowledge with a marvellous
facility. They may be prodigies in the arts of music, drawing,
calculation, poetry; or may become orators, improvisators, or
actors. But at the critical epoch of puberty their brilliant facul-
ties fade and die out; refuge is taken in the Navy or the Army,
where insubordination exposes to court-martial and punishment.
Marriage precipitates the catastrophe in girls. Sucn crises, ac-
cording to M. Fairet's just prognosis, may evolve into either in-
creased mental feebleness or la Kolie Raisonnante. We may meet
the distinguished companions of our college life, after passing
through a stage of sudden imbecility or the depths of scandalous
debauchery, wild adventure, and equivocal speculation, as
reasoning madmen in the prison or police office. Selfishness is
the aim and end of their being. They prove disobedient chil-
dren, inconstant lovers, unfaithful husbands, negligent fathers;
their heart is cold and hard. Cowardly, corrupt, jealous, vain,
ambitious of distinction without the power of obtaining any
eminence except that of extravagance and infamy, they combine
a group of pernicious qualities which constitute them the dis-
turbers and contaminators of all with whom they come into
contact. They are in fact the dangerous classes of society, the
material out of which waifs and strays, conspirators, criminals,
visionaries, and speculators are formed.

3rd. The absence of the organs and of the passions and
functions which constitute and characterise the respective sexes.
In this category there may either be absolute hermaphro-
ditism or partial, but marked, departures from the normal
structure and relations of parts. There may be beardless men,
who play the part of women, and bearded women, who become
soldiers, sailors, enter into plots or professions which permit of
the exercise of the sterner and masculine qualities of humanity.
With these characteristics are often associated symptoms of
actual insanity, or vices which claim such an origin. The non-
development or malformation of the organs under consideration
are often met with in the weak-minded and wickedly disposed;
but while such individuals are identified by certain observers
with the class under consideration, M. Pinel and his school
elevated Eeasoning Madmen to the highest rank of lunatics
in intelligence and in strength, though not in stability or sub-
ordination of mental powers. The prevalence of solitary vices,
erotic practices, and of sterility in conjunction with anatomical
defects, cannot be separated from the description of Folie Eai-
sonnante; but although science purifies all that it touches, a
narrator recoils from enlarging upon the darker and more re-
volting colours of the picture. The nature of such atrocitiek
may, however, be conjectured from the fact that in some cases
the only betrayal of morbidity in Eeasoning Madmen has been
cohabitation with the dead.

4th. Congestive attacks. An example of an approximation
to Folie Eaisonnante may be found in the temporary arrest-
ment of the mental symptoms in General Paralysis and by such
exceptional irregularity in their succession as to set diagnoses
at defiance. Eeasoning Madmen, and such as I have previously
represented as hereditarily so, are throughout their whole life
subject to attacks of congestion either with or without epilepsy
or hemiplegia. When it is recollected that such an attack,
however formidable, may pass away, that the embarrassment in
articulation may give place to the ordinary mode of utterance,
when the tremor and hyperesthesia of the limbs are followed by
the re-establishment of the natural amount of voluntary power
and sensibility, leaving no other trace than Eeasoning Alienation,
it will be understood that great difficulty and perplexity attends
diagnosis, and that extreme caution should be exercised in
speaking of the future or ultimate issue of the disease. The
divergence and absolute contrariety of opinion between medical
men may be understood and illustrated by supposing that they
have examined a patient during and subsequently to the presence
of congestion, a favourable opinion being countenanced by the
intermission of all affections of reason, speech, voluntary motions ;
the unfavourable prognosis being fulfilled in sudden death from
apoplexy or some other cerebral disease. A typical example of
such a result may suffice. A member of the Academy drowns
himself without motive. The biography of his son is as
follows: At twelve he is odd, ungovernable, unsettled, and a
source of deep disquietude to his mother. At school he is
clever, idle ; as a pupil at the Naval Depot, though brave, am-
bitious, and regarded as of good promise, he is dismissed for
insubordination. Once more in Paris, he yields to the attractions
of the theatre, prepares to go upon the stage; sells the furniture
of his home in order to obtain funds to carry out his design,
which merges in his association with itinerant exhibitions and
actors. As a clerk to the Minister of Public Instruction, he is
indocile, irregular, unconscientious, unsociable and useless.
Even while in this position he rushed into the provinces to join
some of his former doubtful and disreputable companions. Pro-
fuse, nomadic, disgraceful in his conduct, he, abandoning his
relatives and occupation, appears in California as a priest, where
it was rumoured that he might possibly be elevated to the epis-
copate. He returns to Paris accompanied by a young prosti-
tute, heir to property; now dividing his time and attention
between the theatre and the church, and wearing a hybrid garb
between that of a priest and a layman. Up to this point this
unfortunate has been regarded as a mauvais sujet, a foe to
himself and to his family; but a physician discovered that during
twenty years he had been subject to cerebral congestion, un-
attended with convulsion or loss of consciousness, but that, not-
withstanding the temporary suspension of consciousness, he could
not be treated or confined as insane.

N.B.?In 1874 his conversation became unconnected, incon-
sequent and paradoxical, embracing asseverations of his perfect
sanity, elevated genius, his achievements in California, his aban-
doned course in Paris; at the same conjuncture his expenditure be-
came excessive, and he was habitually intoxicated. In the winter of
1874-75 he had three cerebral seizures, attended with temporary
hemiplegia and tremor. After disappearance for several days
he became amnesic, unsteady in gait, more and more debauched
and shameless, squandering or being robbed of every farthing
extorted from his friends. Emancipating himself from the
trammels of his family, he resided with an old servant in the
suburbs, frequently visiting Paris, but forgetting to return.
Found insensible in the streets, he is taken to a public hospital,
and again taken home. His disease now assumed the form of
epilepsy, when he was placed in a private asylum, where, after
a partial restoration, he dies suddenly, apparently from apoplexy,
and it is inferred from hogmorrliage of the bulb.

The author concludes that, independently of mental signs,
there may be always detected physical symptoms in reasoning
madmen. 2ndly. A retrospect of the history of persons thus
affected demonstrates that at the period of puberty they are
affected with certain transitory disorders of the intellect. 3rd.
Anatomical peculiarities in the organs and abnormal manifesta-
tions of the animal propensities are observed in them. 4th.
That they are liable at various ages to suffer from congestive
conditions of the brain which have not been hitherto recognised.
M. Berthier declared this form of alienation to be frequent
among females belonging to the affluent classes; that it might
be regarded as the prelude of morbid activity, as the first germ
of other psychical affections; that it was the shadow of graver
symptoms, clouds portending a storm, and conditions falling
almost within the domain of physiology. Its victims are, from
their perverseness and morbid sensibility, plagues to themselves
and allaround. Among the physical signs may be signalised head-
ache, muscular pain, vertigo, disturbance of digestion, with capa-
ciousness of appetite, and a host of vagaries of sensation, such as
complaints of the tightness of dress ; of the weight of the atmo-
sphere ; of the pain inflicted by combing the hair; of the tight-
ness of corsets, and consequent incessant undressing; of the
weight of the shoes; of the denudation of the throat in swallow-
ing food, which is consequently refused; even of currents of air.
Such patients are restless, unsettled, incessantly crave change,
dislike home, repose, occupation; but, although displaying
innumerable manifestations of mental disorder and unhealth,
some of which are of great gravity, the malady never seems to
shorten life.

N.B.?Stachiomania, as it may be called, may occur at all
ages from youth to manhood, but is not infallibly hereditary, even
when accompanied by physical conditions ; yet remains doubtful
whether there be a set of bodily symptoms specially charac-
teristic of each malady; and whether, were such the case, a new
element would not be introduced into legal medicine. My
observation tends to show that the signs conceived to identify
reasoning madness as a distinct species are common to other
minor neuroses; and that these indications are compatible with
the aspect of health, longevity, and even with the preservation
of the logical faculty.

M. Delasiauve chiefly insisted that this class of diseases may
originate without any hereditary taint; that physical deformities
may suggest emotions which terminate in and are the causes of
insanity, and that many patients were perfectly conscious of the
mental confusion or perversion under which they laboured.

M. Billod preferred to designate the physical states
enumerated as signs in, but not of, Reasoning Madness ; a course
which would exclude the error of electing the disease into a
pathological Entity resembling Greneral Paralysis, as having
bodily and mental symptoms. He conceived that from the
physical signs observed during the life of Reasoning Madmen,
nothing could be concluded. Such exist and are observed, and
seem to claim a pathological signification in the disease under
consideration; but, for example, might not the traces of apo-
plectic cells discovered in the brain of D , previously men-
tioned in this discussion, and to which certain symptoms
observed during life were attributed, be as deceptive or as
erroneously interpreted as those found in the brains of Pinel
and Dupuytren. These lesions have no more special signification
than in the cases of Pinel and Dupuytren,and may in other cases
be accepted as indicating any form of mental alienation. There
may be a correlation, but not an exclusive connection between
such signs and Reasoning Madness ; so that the definition
" lesions " in the disease should be substituted for " signs " or
" characteristics" drawn from the somatic condition therein
observed. The latter designation may be preferable, as idiocy
and other forms of degeneration are included in the physical
symptomatology described.

M. Lunier conceived that the indications of hereditary pre-
disposition or degeneracy had been confounded with the signs
of Reasoning Madness.

[Note.?We conceive that among British alienists there would
be a general concurrence in the views expressed by M. Billod,
that the physical signs insisted upon should be ranked as coin-
cident and not as causative; and that grave suspicions will arise
as to whether many of the groups of symptoms, many of the
conditions, both physical and psychical, supposed to be charac-
teristic of Folie Raisonnante, might not be referred legitimately
to other universally recognised forms of insanity, such as de-
mentia, hypochondriasis, hysteria; to defective or injudicious
education; to uncontrolled original propensities; or even to
corrupt or criminal motives for which the individual is respon-
sible.? Tk.]
