On Pigmentary Deposits in the Brain resulting from Malarial Poisoning
======================================================================

By William A. Hammond, M.D., Professor of Diseases of
the Mind and IServous System in the University of the City of New
York, etc.

The object of the author is to call attention to a condition of the
brain resulting from malarial fevers. This is stated to be a deposition
of pigment in the organ, either in the form of emboli or thrombi, but
as a contradistinction to the form usually denominated under the name
of " embolism." After an elaborate discussion upon what was known of
the occurrence of pigment-cells in the blood, and their deposition in the
various organs, as the spleen, liver, and brain, until within the last fifteen
years, and in which the names of such distinguished pathologists as.

Yirchow, Bright, Frerichs, and Stietel conspicuously figure, our atten-
tion is called to a number of the most interesting cases taking place
within the author's own experience. Dr Hammond states that many
years ago he noticed that several persons residing in malarious districts,,
who had been the subjects of repeated attacks of endemic fever, and
were at the same time suffering from enlargement of the spleen, ex-
hibited evidences of cerebral disease?such as epileptic convulsions,
frequent attacks of vertigo, impairment of sight, and loss of mobility
in one or other side of the body; and, in many cases, upon ophthal-
moscopic examination, the existence of double optic neuritis with
pigmentary deposits was clearly established.

This highly instructive pamphlet, which is well worthy of a
careful perusal, terminates with the following conclusions:?
1st. That as a consequence of malarial poisoning, the pigment of
the blood undergoes a change in appearance and form, and that the
alteration is effected in the spleen, leading to hypertrophy of this
organ.

2nd. That this pigment may enter the general circulation
from the spleen, either in a free condition, or in picrment-holding cells,
and that it may be deposited in the cerebral bloodvessels, or pass
through their coats.

3rd. That these deposits may give rise to various symptoms, indica-
ting derangement of the nervous system.

4th. That arsenic appears to have the power of, in a way at present
unknown, so altering the character of the pigmentary deposits as to
facilitate their removal, and to cause the disappearance of the symptoms
to which they give rise.

5th. That we may have, during the life of the individual, ocular
demonstration of these facts by the presence of pigments in the
fundus of the eye, as revealed by the ophthalmoscope.
