About Institutions and Epilepsy
================================

:Author: Alan McDougall, M.D.

Director of the David Lewis Colony and of Colthurst House School.

A quarter of a century ago Manchester gave birth to four institutions, of
which three concern themselves with epilepsy and one with feeblemindedness.

This activity was roused by the separate enterprise of three Manchester citizens.

Miss Mary Dendy brought into existence the Lancashire and Cheshire Incorpor-
ated Society for the Permanent Care of the Feebleminded and its residential
schools at Great Warford within three miles of Alderley Edge station on the Crewe
to Manchester railway line. Alderman John Royle was the first cause of the
David Lewis Manchester Epileptic Colony that stands for the most part in Little
Warford and abuts on the land of the Incorporated Society : both Institutions
having erected their first buildings on ground (given to them by the David Lewis
Trust) that had been part of the Sandlebridge estate. Alderman Royle was the first
cause also of the Manchester Poor Lav/ Guardians' Epileptic Colony that is situa-
ted at Langho, a few miles distant from Blackburn. Mr. C. H. Wyatt, the then
Director of Education in Manchester brought about the establishment of the Man-
chester Education Committee's residential epileptic school at Sossmoss between
Alderley Edge and the two Warfords.

At the three epileptic institutions all the patients are voluntary boarders and
are free, if they choose, to leave at any time. This was so too, at first, at Miss
Dendy's institution, but since the passing of the Mental Deficiency Bill there has
been certification and power of detention there. In each of the four institutions
all the beds were soon filled : not indeed wholly by Manchester patients, applica-
tions for admission came in from all parts of the country. We at the David Lewis
Colony have admitted middle-class English patients from India, Japan, South
Africa and the Falkland Islands. Premises have been extended : the Incorporated
Society's institution that began as two houses and a school building is now a far-
spread colony, the David Lewis Colony that at the start had two hundred beds
has now four hundred : the Langho Colony has been extended to accommodate
five hundred colonists : and were Sossmoss to add a hundred beds to its original
hundred they would probably soon be filled.

It is neither desirable nor practicable to detain people against their will on
the sole grounds that they have epilepsy. Patriots exist who would make it com-
pulsory for parents to send their epileptic children to residential schools. The
long-time result of such legislation would probably be to diminish, not to increase,
the number of such children in such schools. Apparently the majority of English
doctors still believe that a child starting with epilepsy would if it saw others
having fits have more fits itself and so lessen its chance of cure. I think their
notion a mistaken one : but it is held honestly by them and on their evidence
magistrates would refuse to convict: and what is more serious, doctors would be
strengthened in their (I think mistaken) judgment that seeing fits increases the
frequency of fits.

For another reason we who are in charge of epileptic colonies do not desire
to have power to detain. We wish to be compelled so to manage our institutions
as will cause those under our care to prefer to remain with us than to leave us
while they are unable to hold their own in the world without. This compulsion
ensures a certain degree of good management that is not inevitable, though not
impossible, where people must remain whether they will or not. The degree is
not necessarily very high : for those who have epilepsy have little choice of con-
genial abiding-places. Said a new-comer to the colony " I take fits." Answered
him one who had been with us five weeks " Here that is not against the rules."
There are few spots in the world where having an epileptic fit is not for practical
purposes against the rules.

In a Utopia no one would be found living permanently in an institution at
financial cost to his friends or to the State, every man from reaching manhood to
reaching senility would be seen earning his living. But here in England few of
the people who have epilepsy can succeed long in earning a living : one sound
reason for this being that the constant expectation of their having a fit proves a
great strain to those who work beside them. For this and other reasons epilepsy
frequently leads to idleness. The idle?whether they be idle-rich or idle-poor?
easily degenerate. From that degeneration most of those who have epilepsy can
be saved by congregation in a place where they can find apparently useful occupa-
tion, and where they can live the life that is lived by those around them. It is
true that the financial value of their work does not equal the cost of their main-
tenance, but all over the world workers feel rather than question that they have
earned their pay. It is true too that the work done by colonists has no extra-
colony worth : but it is equally true that the work of civilised man has no extra-
civilisation value; there is nothing in psychology to hinder a colonist from being
as well satisfied with the work of his hands Js other civilised folks are with the
work of theirs. But to secure them that boon you must abstain from setting them
to manufacture articles that they see you cannot use, nor get rid of but by im-
ploring visitors to buy them for the love of God.

That work in an institution should be something more than pass-time is a
point often overlooked, and it is indeed one that may not be discovered even by an
investigator who is making a special study of institution life. Long years ago
there came to the Colony one morning a visitor who was commissioned to collect
evidence that embodied in a report might lead on to legislation. He had already
visited institutions in America and in Germany. He was a man of marked intelli-
gence, his manners were admirable (o rara avis in terris: most visitors put on their
zoo manners for the occasion), he chatted pleasantly and tactfully with various
colonists. Yet he said genially to one who was busy scrubbing the tiled floor of
a verandah, " It helps to pass the time, doesn't it." The colonist looked up in
amazement for he was under the full conviction that he was cleaning the floor
because it needed cleaning. If occupation be but pastime it is better found at
the billiard table than on the verandah floor.

It has been said that a ruler's inabilities are as necessary to success as his
abilities, for to ensure zeal in his officers he must let them be able to feel that he
needs the help of their gifts. If the head of an institution gets his satisfaction by
being the intelligent cause of effects he must be careful to keep in mind that all
the members of his staff and all the colonists under his care find satisfaction in
that same way he must allow to each one of them scope for a little judgment
and a little choice in the ultimate way of carrying out an allotted duty.

Colony life tends to raise rather than lower because it tends to increase self-
respect. With so much to be done there is opportunity for every individual. The
longer his stay the more likely each one is to have acquired some duty?it may be
to make such a score as will bring the billiard cup to his house, or to take wickets
fast enough for the Colony to win cricket matches played against visiting elevens
on summer evenings and Saturday afternoons, or to keep a certain grass border
trim and neat, or to keep a certain brass knob bright?that will make his absence
felt when he is away on holiday at his home. It is an easy matter to find for every-
one some special duty that will give him the feeling that at the Colony at any rate
he is a person of importance.

The cultivation of pride in personal appearance and of distinction in dress
helps to prevent loss of individuality. Our Saturday evening dance, that has not
failed summer or winter in twenty years, gives especially to the women but also
to the men scope for distinction in personal appearance. It arrives sometimes
that two women are admitted to the Colony at the same time from the same union
wearing dresses that look alike. So powerful is the crochet-hook, so potent a
bunch of ribbon, that before the first Saturday night comes the likeness has gone.
This diversification is furthered through our custom of giving to each colonist
a present of a few shillings value on Christmas morning. The matron somehow
knows what particular present each one of nearly four hundred colonists covets
most, and thus those of them who are not well furnished with brave vesture by
their families can still shine as the stars with pride on Saturday evenings.
Not only can institution life allow individuality, it can also develop sociabil-
ity. It is (or ought to be) known to psychologists that in human beings the urge
to be allied preponderates its colleague the urge to rival. (Co-operation is a
more fundamental property of protoplasm than rivalry is). Our colonists being
human are ungrudging in their applause of him who is bringing credit to the
house in which they live by helping to win the inter-house billiard cup or by
singing a song well on a Saturday night.

Before we invite those who have epilepsy to live in colonies we ought to have
faith that they themselves will benefit by colony life. Institutions institutionise
their inhabitants. Oxford oxfordises : the Church churchises. But to say that I
know harm in don or dean were to say more than I know : and to say that living
in an institution necessarily corrupts were to say more than I know also. I speak
this not without prejudice, having undergone the institutionising process here
and in hospitals for over thirty years. Surely the shape of our dwelling place
matters less than its tone?

If institutionising were necessarily deleterious to the institutionised we ought
to find that our colonists become from year to year more troublesome, or else
more demented. But that is what we do not find. Our troublesome people are as
a rule the newcomers. Many, but by no means all, of them come to us showing
some of what are disparagingly called " the characteristics of the epileptic."
Years, or months, or even only weeks, afterwards those characteristics have disap-
peared, for they were not characteristics of epilepsy but were the consequences
of unsuitable environment. If you were made to live for a year or two the life
that most epileptic people are made to live in the world without, you would
not get epilepsy, but you would show " the characteristics of the epileptic."
Why would you ? Because there is fundamental in every fragment of healthy
protoplasm an urge to be of service to something that is not its individual self.
Protoplasmic self-realisation is found only in self-sacrifice. Consequently if people
are forced to confine their serviceableness to the serving of themselves alone, they
degenerate, as judged from the points of view of nature and of nature's waste pro-
duct civilisation, and acquire features that make them a nuisance to their neigh-
bours. It is only in so far as it gives to its epileptic residents scope for service
that the world without must needs deny to them that an epileptic colony is q
success.

A success from the colonists' point of view, that is to say. It is held by some
people that a colony exists primarily as a place where epilepsy may be studied
and investigations made that, it is hoped, will lead ultimately (How long, O Lord,
how long?) to the finding of a cure for epilepsy. That notion has never yet
influenced the David Lewis Colony : there the welfare of the colonists actually
in residence has always been the overwhelming consideration.

Each house is supplied with newspapers daily, each of the men's houses has
its billiard table, most of them full size; a dozen of the men, a few of the women,
and several members of the staff have their own listening-in sets : every house
has its piano. Very many colonists visit their families periodically or have rela-
tions of theirs to stay a few days in the near neighbourhood and take them out for
the day. These things are necessary if dementia, the natural end of human life,
is to be staved off till body and brain have become senile by reason of years. Do
what one will, dementia supervenes in a few epileptic people at a very early age :
but early dementia is not an essential feature of epilepsy : a lady who was said
to have started with epilepsy at the age of seven and had during the half dozen
years she was at the colony half a dozen major epileptic fits a month, was bright
and cheerful to the last and died at the age of eighty-five showing much less
dementia than the average ordinary person of her years.

In writing and in talking it is convenient to use the expression "the epileptic."
But the practice is misleading and noxious. The mother-in-law convention of
the comic papers will seldom do harm, every reader meets numerous mothers-in-
law in actual life and forms his opinions of them from what he sees more than
from what he reads. But very few people meet many folks who have epilepsy, most
have to form their opinions from what they read, and are apt to arise from their
reading with the belief that " the epileptic " of literary convention exists actually.
That belief leads to much wrong-handling of epileptic patients. One person who
has epilepsy differs as much from another person who has epilepsy as one man
who plays golf differs from another person who plays golf. Name any " char-
acteristic of the epileptic," and we of the colonies will recall to mind the names
of a dozen colonists who have shown the characteristic, and of fifty who have not.
One must go to literature, not to life, to find the " epileptic nature." The nature
of those who have epilepsy is ordinary human nature : and to believe otherwise
is to run great risk of mis-handling the epileptic people confided to your care.

Mis-handled they (as you would do) become troublesome : treat them decently
and you will come to speak well of them. Of course, epilepsy does not associate
itself with saints alone, nor is it a cure for evil-doing; we have our troublesome
people as you have yours; you have your people also who are good-humoured,
honest, industrious and unselfish : we have ours. Proportionately our on-the-
whole-good people are I think as numerous as yours. Essentially bad people
are rare in either world, but a considerable number of epileptic people who gain
admission to the existing colonies prove to be, however innocently, a prevention
of the welfare of their fellow colonists. The English colonies do not solve com-
pletely the problem of housing congenially all the people who have epilepsy.
There are epileptic people who for one or more of a variety of reasons interfere
too much with the comfort of other colonists to be allowed to remain and yet are
not in need of certification and retention in a general mental hospital.

Most of the epileptic children I have lived with and known with some intim-
acy have seemed to me to be quite ordinary in their psychology. The uncom-
panionable child occurs frequently enough to test the rule, but with the advent
of mental puberty the peculiarity disappears and the noli-me-tangere child be-
comes a social man. Children similar to them in this respect are plentifully found
in the world without: epilepsy is not the explanation of the condition.
Is there a parental temperament that is a fore-runner of epilepsy in the off -
spring? We know well that there are many parents who add greatly to the
difficulty of treating their epileptic children. But is it only when treating epilepsy
that practitioners find that treatment of the child involves treatment of the par-
ents? Pastor von Bodelschwingh, whose experience was uniquely great, used to
say that the biggest difficulty in epileptic work is to find the right people to look
after those who have epilepsy. The explanation seems to be that they do not
exist wild, but are products of special training. We must bear in mind that
keeping the sick alive is congenial with civilisation but is contrary to nature. For
nature scraps the sickly. The wise treatment of the sick is not a gift of nature
but is an art that has to be learnt individually by everyone who undertakes the
duty, whether as doctor, nurse, parent or friend. Therefore, simply from the fact
that many parents treat their epileptic children unwisely, we are not justified
in making the inference that there is a temperament in parents that induces
epilepsy in their offspring. I used to have a tentative but somewhat confident
belief that I recognised a " mother-of-the-epileptic " type. But one fine specimen
proved to be the child's stepmother. And even if such a mother exist she is
exceptional, most of the women who have an epileptic child show no obvious
defect. We have no reason to believe that by following any practical line of birth
control we can stamp out epilepsy without at the same time stamping out the
nation. We must recognise that there will continue to be in our midst epileptic
people and that by the rules of civilisation their right to live is as good as ours.
The practical problem is that of preventing their being unhappy themselves and a
source of unhappiness to their neighbours. That can only be done by acting on
the theory that though they have epileptic fits their nature is human nature.
