Diseases of the Nervous System
================================

:Author:  Julius Altiiaus, M.D.,
M.R.C.P., Senior Physician to the Hospital for Epilepsy and
Paralysis, Regent's Park. London : Smith, Elder and Co.
This is a valuable treatise on the pathology and physiology
of the nervous system by a physician of large experience, who
has accumulated a great amount of information on the subject
of which he treats. In the first chapter he endeavours to settle
the question as to the prevalence and fatality of nervous diseases.
As statistics are notoriously untrustworthy, a consideration of
the deductions to be drawn from them could lead to no positive
conclusion.

Dr Althaus's observations on the functions of the spinal
cord will be read with interest. He gives a succinct account of
all that is yet known of the nervous centres of this organ ; but
his attempt to localise the cerebral faculties is a failure. He
lays too much stress on the results of recent experiments by
Fritsch, Hitzig, Ferrier, and other cerebral physiologists.
Brown-Sequard, whose opinion is of more importance than all
these put together, differs entirely from them, and is scarcely
likely to return to the principles he has abandoned, as I)r.
Althaus expects liim to do. If the centres of motion and sen-
sation cannot be determined, it is useless to talk of aphasia
being' the result of lesion of an especial portion of one side of
the brain. It has been supposed by Broca and Moxon that the
faculty of speech was in some way connected with the frequent
use of the right side of the body and the left side of the brain.
This is a most fanciful theory. If it be true, as Zarini, the
great authority on gymnastics, reports, that all his pupils, how-
ever one-sided when they came to him, became ambidextrous by
constant practice, the brains of his pupils must be strangely
twisted in the course of their exercises.

The chapters on epilepsy and paralysis will repay a careful
study.

We are glad to learn from the preface that Dr Althaus
intends to publish another volume, which will be devoted to
the treatment of nervous diseases.
