Lunacy In England
==================

284
Art. VI.?.

The twenty-second Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy lias
just appeared. From a perusal of it we are made aware of the
fact that there are 68,538 persons of unsound mind in England
and Wales on January 1, 1878.

The following summary shows the classification and distri-
bution of the registered number of patients :?
Where maintained
JI. F. T
Pauper
M.
Total
In county and borough asylums
In registered hospitals
In licensed houses:
Metropolitan.
Provincial
In naval and military hospitals
and Royal India Asylum
In Criminal Lunatic Asylum
(Broadmoor) .
In workhouses:
Ordinary workouses
Metropolitan district asylun
Private single patients
Out-door paupers
208
1,400
1,064
M
255
1,280
815
81!)
463
2,GS0
1,879
1,593
3G0
243
10,908
53
50
251
5,074
1,952
2,367
20,392
45
131
289
G,785
2,454
3,847
37,300
98
190
540
11,859
4,406
6,214
17,116
1,453
1,123
1,025
315
381
5,074
1,952
2,3G7
20,647
1,325
946
1,108
15
101
6,785
2,451
286
3 847
37,763
2,778
2,069
2,133
3G0
482
11,859
4,406
474
6,214
4,172
3,520
',692
26,85'J
33,994
60,846
37,514
There are 265 lunatics who have been found so by inqui-
sition residing in charge of committees who are not included
in this number. There is an increase of 1,902 on those
returned on January 1, 1877.

The average number of resident patients contained in
county and borough asylums throughout the year was 36,668 ;
the recoveries during the year were 30*07 per cent, below the
average of previous years ; but this is accounted for by the
large proportion of chronic cases admitted by transfer from
one asylum to the other and included in the total admissions.
If we exclude these transfers, the recoveries would bear to the
admissions the ratio of 37*29 per cent.

The total number under detention on January 1 as private
lunacy in England. 285
and single patients was 46,059 in licensed houses and under
single care. Out of this number 17,459 were male paupers,
and 20,908 were female paupers. With regard to the super-
vision of epileptic cases the Commissioners say:?
" So far back as 1859, in our thirteenth Report, and again in
1872, in our twenty-sixth Report, we adverted to the very
inadequate provision made in many of the large county asylums
for the nursing and care of the patients during the night. At
one time it was the practice in many asylums to employ the
day attendants in rotation on night duty; this very objection-
able arrangement is, however, now generally given up, and the
system of employing special attendants for night duty alone
is now the general rule in public asylums.

" Until recently, however, in many large asylums, the care
of the patients during the night has been left to one attendant
in each division, who was required to visit the different wards
every two hours. Visits at such intervals are so obviously
insufficient to afford proper protection to even the ordinary
inmates, that we have taken every opportunity of pointing out
to the Visitors the great importance of increasing the staff of
night attendants generally, and we are glad to report that
most asylums are now in a much more satisfactory state in this
respect. The frequent deaths which at one time took place
amongst the epileptics from suffocation in fits during the night,
and also the occurrence of suicides?due, in many instances,
to the want of careful watching?convinced us some years since
of the futility of entrusting patients of the above classes to
the irregular visits of the ordinary night attendants, and that
the only way by which accidents could be guarded against,
and fatal results in the majority of cases diminished, is by
placing these patients under the care, during the night, of
special attendants, with specific rules for their guidance, and
in wards so arranged as to admit of the patients, whether in
dormitories or single rooms, being under direct supervision.
We have again the satisfaction of stating that the result in
those asylums in which the arrangements have been fully
carried out has been most encouraging, Not only have
the accidental deaths in these classes of patients been very
much reduced in number, but the importance of the system
has been fully admitted, not only the medical officers of
the asylums, but especially by the attendants, who are relieved
of much anxiety during the night, and in many instances have
expressed to us their sense of the value of the special provision
for night watching.

At present the arrangements for this purpose are more or
less complete in 25 of the county and borough asylums. In

16 they have been partially carried out, hut are imperfect in
important particulars, chiefly in consequence of structural diffi-
culties in the original buildings. In 6 asylums special wards
are in progress, and in 12 no provision has as yet been made.
" Not only as respects the epileptic and 'suicidal patients do
we hope that ere long we shall be able to report that proper
arrangements, both structural and otherwise, have been made
in all asylums in England and Wales, but also that the night
nursing and care of the ordinary sick inmates is placed upon a
more satisfactory footing than at present. In many asylums
the sick and dying patients are still under the charge of the
ordinary night attendants, and are consequently left for long
periods without receiving that constant attention which their
cases require. Special night attendants should, we think, be
provided in the infirmaries or sick wards of all asylums.
" The Commissioners publish a table, being a return made to
the Office from the various asylums, hospitals, and licensed houses
of the inmates who are regarded as suicidal. The result is thus
summarised :?County and borough asylums, 4,908, out of a total
number of 35,863 ; hospitals, 632, out of a total number of
3,613; metropolitan licensed houses, 344, out of 2,735; pro-
vincial houses, 212, out of a number of 2,070. From this it
appears that out of the total number of inmates in these insti-
tutions 13-76 per cent, were regarded as suicidally inclined.
The actual number of deaths from suicide during the year was
18; this is somewhat less than 3 per 1,000 on the entire
number of suicidal patients."

In our present issue there are two papers on Suicide; and
we think it would be interesting to our readers to publish in
extenso the cases that have occurred in the county asylums
during the past year, as given in the Keport:?

" At the Cornwall Asylum a death by suicide occurred in
the following circumstances:?A private patient, J. Or., was ad-
mitted on November 1876 in a state of melancholia. Prior to
admission he had made an attempt on his own life by strang-
ling, had refused food, and had also endeavoured to strangle
an attendant.

" Being narrowly watched and carefully fed, his bodily and
mental condition had so far improved that he was placed in a
single room, though still watched. Up to the lltli of January,
1877, he had made no suicidal attempt. On the afternoon of that
day he contrived to secrete a knife from the table used by the
attendants in the billiard-room. He retired to rest, and was
visited hourly during the night and morning of the lltli and
12th of January by the night attendant. Soon after five in the
morning this officer found the patient lying dead at the foot
of liis bed witli his throat cut.

" Tlie results of the evidence at the coroner's inquest, and of
our subsequent inquiries?first, as to the evident negligence
through which J. Gr. had been able to obtain possession of the
knife with which he killed himself; and, secondly, as to the
apparent laxity of supervision, owing to which the fact of his
having the knife in his bedroom had not been found out?were
as follows:?

" As to the first point, it appeared that the attendant, whose
duty it was to count and put by the knives after the meals in
the billiard-room, was at the time invalided, and his place
supplied by any other attendant who could be spared, and that
the charge attendant must have tailed properly to supervise the
substitute.

" The medical superintendent, as regards the second point,
stated that when J. G. was admitted, although in the certi-
ficates his suicidal tendencies were only mentioned by one of
the medical men certifying, he was for a time under constant
supervision, and not allowed access to his room at all, except in
the presence of his attendant; latterly he had seemed better,
and the constant supervision insisted on at first was relaxed,
as he had shown no suicidal tendencies while in the asylum, and
the evidence on this point in the certificate was certainly not
strong.

" Since the death Mr. Adams learned, for the first time,
that the patient had, before admission, actually made more
than one suicidal attempt. Had these been made known to
him before he would have taken a more serious view of the
case, and would consequently have hesitated to relax the strict
precautions taken at first.

" At the Hants Asylum two deaths by suicide have occurred.
" The first case was that of a young man, J. S., who had
been an inmate of the asylum since February 187G. He was
known to be labouring under strongly-marked suicidal tenden-
cies. Written notice of this was given to the attendants in
the ward where he first was placed.

" At the time of his death he was in another ward, where
there were upwards of 40 patients. The full complement of
attendants to this ward was five, but at 11.10 in the morning
of Sunday, the, 28th of January, one was absent on leave;
two had accompanied. 12 of the patients to chapel; the fourth
had been called away (it was stated in somewhat exceptional
circumstances) for special duties elsewhere, so that one
attendant alone remained in charge of 32 patients, including
J. S. This man, soon after 11 oclock, unobserved by the single
attendant, gained access to a sink-room, where, having first
barricaded the door, he proceeded to hang himself by his
braces. The alarm was shortly after given by another patient,
but before assistance could be procured and access through the
window of the room could be obtained, by means of a ladder,
J. S. was dead.

"No evidence was forthcoming that the fact of the strongly
suicidal propensities of this patient had been formally com-
municated to the attendants in this ward, although, indeed,
we were assured by the medical superintendent that it was well
known to all of them. In these circumstances it was impossible
to fix the blame on the attendant left in charge.
" In consequence of a recommendation from the Board a
better system, that of filling up on admission, and causing to
be passed with the patient from ward to ward, a parchment
ticket indicating his suicidal or dangerous character, has been
introduced into the asylum. We also advised a modification
of the arrangements which had allowed so large a number of
patients to be left temporarily in charge of a single attendant.
" The second case of suicide at this asylum was of a male
patient, admitted in January 1877, and then known to be
suicidal. In May he had secreted a razor and cut his throat,
but not so as to produce a fatal injury. From that time he
was never left unwatclied, two persons, former attendants at
the asylum, being specially engaged to watch him, one by
night,"the other by day. In addition to this, an attendant
from the staff was always told off night and day to assist in
the supervision.

" This arrangement was continued until the wound had
entirely healed, and it was then thought sufficient to retain
the services of the two special attendants, one of whom, Gr. C.,
had the night watch, while John Fleet was on duty by day.
" On the 12th of July, Fleet took the patient into the male
infirmary airing-ground. Here the patient asked leave to go
to the closet, selecting a moment when the attendant, according
to his own statement, was engaged in the unseasonable occupa-
tion of paring his toenails, and hence failed to notice which
way the patient went.

" Fleet, in a minute or two, missing his patient, put on his
stocking and boot and proceeded to the closet in search of him.
The patient, however, had escaped through a door leading to a
garden through which he and Fleet earlier in the day had passed,
and'which he had contrived to stop from shutting perfectly.
Arrived here, he easily got over a wall, and after traversing
thirty yards of ground found himself on the railway. A train
soon came in sight, and the patient was seen by the engineer
deliberately to throw himself over the rails in front of it. The
train passed over him, and he was killed.

" The Committee of Visitors thought it their duty to mark
their seuse of Fleet's carelessness by proceeding summarily
against him under section 123 of the Act 16 & 17 Vict,
c. 97. He was convicted by the magistrates for wilful neglect
of his patient; but, in consideration of the high character he
had borne while in the asylum service, a penalty of ?2 only
was imposed.

" At the Barming Heath Asylum a female patient admitted
on 25th April was found dead. She was stated on her admission
papers to be suicidally disposed, but it was not till after her
death that the medical superintendent was made aware that she
had actually attempted self-destruction. Hence she was not, on
admission, placed in a special dormitory for suicidal patients,
of which there are now two in this asylum, but it was thought
sufficient to give the night attendants instructions to see her
frequently. She was placed in a single room to sleep, on
account of restlessness, and on the night of the 9th of May
was visited there (according to the nurses' statement) every
half-hour up to 5.15 in the morning. An hour afterwards
the day nurse coming on duty found her dead, suspended by
her night-dress to a small hook used to fasten the window of
the single room. She was quite dead.

" It was a matter of great regret that the full history had
not been disclosed to the medical superintendent; but inde-
pendently of this we could not avoid expressing doubt as to
the prudence of placing the patient in a single room without
constant supervision, and where the fastening of the window
afforded the means of suicide.

" A female patient at thePrestwich Asylum contrived on the
morning of Sunday, October the 21st, to slip uuperceived out
of the ward in which she was placed, during the passage out
of the ward of a number of her fellow-patients who were pro-
ceeding to divine service. This was a little before 10 a.m.
She was almost immediately missed, but in some way, which
a strict investigation has failed to discover, she had escaped
from the asylum premises.

" Her home was in Prestwicli, and she consequently was ac-
quainted with the locality. Between 10 and 11 she was found
in a pit of water, close to a footpath crossing a field near the
asylum. Assistance was procured, and she was taken out of
the water, but was dead.

" This woman was admitted on the 19th of September, 1877;
and being stated to be suicidal, proper notice was given to the
attendants in charge of her. Up to the time of her death
she had made no attempt on her own life. The officers of
the asylum were not informed, until the fact came out at the
inquest, that she had shortly before admission, on more than
one occasion, risen from bed at night and endeavoured to leave
the house, for the purpose of drowning herself. Neither the
coroner, jury, nor the medical superintendent considered the
attendants to blame for her escape.

" On the 6th of April, while in an airing court of this
asylum, a male patient, named H.'E., was struck on the head
with a chamber utensil by another patient, and received five
severe cuts. This utensil had, with others, been placed in a
yard separated from the airing court by a high paling, and it
was lifted over the paling by H. E., who was able to do so by
inserting his hand (said to have been a very small one) be-
tween the rails. It was snatched from him by the other patient,
who with it then made the assault on H. E. The wounds
were at once dressed, and H. E. was placed in bed; and
although the cuts healed quickly the general condition of the
patient rapidly deteriorated, and symptoms of inflammation of
the lungs developed themselves. No other injuries than those
on the head were for some time observed, but ultimately Mr.
Clunn, the assistant medical officer, discovered indications of
the fracture of three ribs on the right side. The patient be-
came worse, and died on the 13tli of May. A post-mortem
examination disclosed inflammation of the lungs and pleura,
with considerable effusion into the cavity of the chest, resulting
from the fracture of three ribs on the right side. It was found
that the ribs were exceedingly brittle. The patient was a
general paralytic. A coroner's inquest was held in the case,
and the verdict of the jury was that ' the deceased died from
pleuro-pneumonia induced by the fracture of three of his ribs,
but when, how, or by what means those injuries were caused
there is no evidence to show.' It appeared that there was an
attendant with about 15 patients in the airing court at the
time of the assault, which, however, was not witnessed by the
attendant. It did not appear to us that blame attached to any
of the staff of the asylum in connection with this case.
" A female patient of the Somerset and Bath Asylum, aged
G7, admitted in November 1872, committed suicide on the
2fith of August, 1877, by hanging herself to an iron fixture
of the window of the single room, where, on account of her
noisy and restless habits at night, she had been placed to
sleep. Neither upon her admission nor subsequently was she
stated or considered to be suicidally disposed. Her health
had been failing, and she suffered from disease of the heart.
The night nurse had seen her alive at 4 a.m., but on unlocking
the door of the bedroom, at about a quarter to six, found her
as above described and dead. No blame appeared to attach
to the attendants, but orders were at once given to protect
the windows of the single rooms by properly constructed
shutters.

"The first case of suicide (on the male side) since the
opening of the Sussex Asylum, at Hayward's Heath, in 1859,
occurred there on the 9th April, when a male patient, T. C.,
who was admitted on January the 1st, 187G, was found hanging
by the neck to a small tree or shrub in one of the airing
courts.

" Although not marked as suicidal on his admission papers,
J. C. had soon after shown some tendency in that direction,
and in consequence had for some time been watched by night
as well as by day. Towards the end of the year he had become
more lost, and he scarcely possessed, it was thought, sufficient
mind to plan or carry out any suicidal attempt. On the day
of his death, however, being in the airing court with 148 other
patients, and under the supervision of five attendants, he con-
trived to escape notice, and gaining the shelter of the shrubbery,
hung himself there. He was missed soon after, but when found
was dead.

" The coroner's jury attached no blame to the attendants,
but recommended that the shrubs should be thinned somewhat;
a recommendation which has since been attended to.
" A death by suicide occurred at the Worcester Asylum in
March 1877. A male patient, who had been an inmate of
the institution for nearly sixteen years, during no part ot which
time he was thought to be suicidally disposed, was missed
one afternoon, and was thought to have repeated an attempt
at escape which he had made in 1873. Several attendants
were at once ordered in pursuit of him, but very shortly after
he was accidentally discovered hanging by the neck to an
exposed gas-pipe in a beer-cellar seldom used, but to which
he had obtained access from the place where he had been
working, as his custom was, in charge of the engineer, lie was
a trusted patient, and had been allowed considerable liberty.
When found he was not quite dead, but the efforts of the
medical officers to restore animation, though persisted in for
nearly two hours, were ineffectual.

" This was not a case in which any blame could, in our
opinion, be fairly laid to the charge of anyone connected with
the administration of the asylum.

" A female patient of the Bethlehem Royal Hospital com-
mitted suicide in the following circumstances:?
" She was admitted in March 1876 suffering from melan-
cholia, and had shortly before made an attempt to cut her
throat. She gradually improved; and having for the three
months previous to her death, in January 1877, appeared con-
valescent, was placed in the convalescent ward. Here she
assisted in the household work, and was considered by the
nurses quite trustworthy.

" On the afternoon of Sunday, January 14, she was left in
charge of an experienced attendant, with other patients who
had not gone to chapel. This attendant noticed her at twenty
minutes past three, but at four o'clock she was missing, and on
a search being made she was found in a bath-room attached to
the ward suspended to the window by a cord. The medical
superintendent was immediately summoned, but he found life
to be extinct.

" The door of the bath-room, it was positively stated by the
attendant, had been locked, according to rule, at nine in the
morning, and at three the attendant passed the door, and
noticed that it was closed. Somewhat imprudently, as we
thought, even with allowance for the greatly improved state of
the patient, the nurse had sometimes lent her a key, and on
the day of the death the key had been entrusted to her for
a few minutes that she might fetch some beer. Probably
she had availed herself of this opportunity of unlocking the
bath-room door, in order to obtain access to the room later in
the day.

" The manner in which she had obtained the cord was not
clearly ascertained. Considerable liberty had been allowed her,
and it was thought possible that she might have got posses-
sion of it outside the ward. After a lengthened inquiry the
coroner's jury came to no conclusion attributing blame to the
officials of the hospital.

" A female patient, Miss H., a lady of about 50 years of
age, admitted into the Northampton Hospital in January 1877,
with distinct suicidal delusions, which had driven her to
attempt her own life, both by an overdose of a sedative and by
strangling, died on the 26th of August of exhaustion from
burns, caused by setting fire to her clothes on the 17th of that
month.

" After some months of constant supervision in a special
ward, she had appeared so much better and more cheerful, that
it was considered proper to remove her to the first division of
the first class. Strict injunctions were given to the attendants
there that she was never to be left alone. When the other ladies
were not in the drawing-room, where she usually sat, a nurse
was to be in the room, and at all times a nurse was to be close
at hand. There were four nurses to 16 patients, and the de-
ceased was the only one requiring special cnre. On the evening
of August the 17th the inmates of the ward were returning from
the dining-room to the drawing-room. One of the nurses
seated in the gallery close to the door of the ante-room leading
to the drawing-room saw Miss H. pass into the ante-room, and
then, against orders, left her post to light some gas. In two or
three minutes she heard screams, and on returning to the ante-
room found Miss H. with her clothes on fire. She threw her
down, enveloped her in a rug, and procured assistance. It ap-
peared that Miss H., availing herself of the momentary negligence
of the nurse, had turned into a small room opening into the
ante-room. Here gas was burning. She lit a twisted paper
which she had prepared, and so set light to her clothes, and, as
she admitted, with the intention of suicide. The burns did not
at first appear serious, but, as before stated, the patient died on
August the 26th.

" The nurse was severely reprimanded, and we did not press
for any further punishment.

" A suicide occurred at the York Lunatic Hospital in very
peculiar circumstances.

" A. A., a female private patient, aged G2, was admitted to
the hospital in February 1875, suffering from mania, and with
an intracapsular fracture of the left femur, owing to a then
recent accident.

" This injury had never been thoroughly repaired, and at
the time of her death, in June last, A. A. was supposed to be
unable to walk alone or even get out of bed by herself.
" Previously to admission she was stated to have made two
or more determined attempts at self-destruction by strangling.
She was very noisy and restless, especially at night, and on this
account had been placed in a single room, care being taken
every evening to remove all articles of a dangerous character.
" For about twelve months prior to her decease she had occu-
pied the same room, and under the same conditions. In conse-
quence of a complaint made to her friends of the darkness of
her room she had been allowed for some time to have the shutter
open, it being understood, as already stated, by all about her
that she was unable to leave her bed.

" Nevertheless, on the morning of June the 29tli, having be?en
seen alive and spoken to by one of the night attendants at a
quarter before six, she left her bed, and contriving to pass the
body of her night-dress over the hinge of the open shutter, had
strangled herself in a loop formed by the sleeve. A little
before seven she was found dead by the day under-nurse, who
came in to bring her clothes.

" During her residence in the asylum she had never been
known to the medical superintendent to have walked a yard
without assistance, and was thought to be quite safe when in
bed, especially when she was visited hourly at night.
" We concurred with the coroner's jury in attributing no blame
to anyone entrusted with her care.

" On December the 15th, 1876, a patient named H. 0. com-
mitted suicide at the Wonford House, Exeter. The circum-
stances were not fully before our Board until their first meeting
in January 1877, and in consequence of this the occurrence was
not noticed in our 31st Report.

" The patient was described as suicidal on his admission in
November 1876, and it appeared from the certificates that he
had threatened to destro}7 himself, justifying his intention by
insane reasoning, but he bad not made any actual attempt.
" The parchment ticket used in the Hospital was filled up
with a statement that he was ' suicidal,' but ' not actively so,'
and by some mismanagement this ticket was not shown to the
attendant who was in charge of the patient on the night of his
death.

" Early in the morning in question H. 0. was allowed to
leave the dormitory for a natural purpose. He was not very
strictly watched by the attendant, and a few minutes after
leaving the dormitory he made his way to the end of the corridor
and jumped through the window at the end. The attendant
followed him down the corridor and called him back, thinking
he was mistaking the way, and on finding he did not turn back
ran after him, but was too late to prevent his leap, the injuries
from which proved fatal.

" It was a matter of great regret that, considering the facts
disclosed in the certificates, the ticket had not more strongly
indicated the patient's tendency to suicide, and that it had not
been duly shown to the attendant in charge.

"In May 1875 a young man, A. H. F., was admitted as a
private patient to this hospital, labouring under melancholia,
and with delusions that he had committed some great crime
and was being pursued in consequence.
" Though not noted on his admission papers to be suicidal,
he showed at first a decided tendency in this direction.
" On June the 26th, through a want of proper supervision,
he made his escape, but was brought back to the hospital early
the next morning.
" On the 31st of July he again escaped from the airing
ground, with the assistance of another patient, the attendant
in charge having left him, as he stated, for about a minute.
He was not retaken for thirteen days, when he was found by
the police wandering at a considerable distance from the hos-
pital. It did not appear that during his absence he had made
any attempt on his life.

" On his return the medical superintendent thought it ad-
visable to change his associations, and placed him in ' the
second gallery.' Here he gave no trouble, occupied himself
with drawing and in other ways, and, in consequence of his
apparent improvement, was transferred at the end of a week
to 'the first ffallerv,' where he continued to occupv himself
rationally.

" About this time his mother, in business in Exeter, began
to press for his discharge on trial. Dr Lyle thought this pre-
mature, and would not recommend it. He allowed him to
pay several visits for the day to his mother's house, being
taken thither and brought back to the hospital under proper
care.

" On the 8th of September, the mother continuing to press
for a trial, leave of absence was given by the Committee of
the hospital, she having first written a letter to the medical
superintendent accepting the responsibility of his charge.
Mrs. F. was distinctly cautioned as to her son's suicidal
tendency, and of the consequent necessity for constant watch-
fulness.

" The next day he was found dead in a cellar belonging
to his mother's house, having hung himself by a cord to a beam
there.

" After full consideration we were unable to acquit the
medical superintendent of want of caution and judgment in
yielding to the pressure of the patient's friends and consent-
ing to the leave of absence. We also intimated our opinion
that the repeated success of the attempts at escape was not
creditable to the management of the institution."

Increased accommodation is required for asylums in
Glamorgan, Lancashire, Norfolk, and Salop.

There are 16 registered hospitals under the jurisdiction of
the Commissioners, which contained, on the 1st of January,
1878, 2,778 patients, being an increase of 40 on the numbers
of the previous year. The admissions were 898, and the
discharges 062, of whom 188 had recovered; and the deaths
were registered as 196.

On the 1st of January, 1878, there were 38 metropolitan
licensed houses; the total number of patients being 2,148
males, and 2,054 females. Of this number 310 were males,
and 420 females of the pauper class.

The inmates in workhouses considered to be of unsound
mind amounted to 16,038 on the 1st of January, 1878. The
Commissioners visited 208 of these institutions during the
year 1877. The condition of the inmates is reported as favour-
able on the whole. The Report contains an account of an
illegal reception of a patient into Elm House, Cliiswick, on an
order signed by a person who had not seen the patient within
the time required by the Act.

There is also an account of the illegal detention of an
insane lady in Manor House, Northfleet, Kent, and at a rectory-
house in Dorsetshire. The appended letter appears in Appen-
dix Q, and is of interest, showing the various inquiries made
by the Commissioners when visiting asylums.

The Report contains most valuable statistical records of the
various asylums in England and Wales, with a detailed account
of the visitation of .the county asylums, hospitals, and other public
institutions, including the Criminal Lunatic Ptospital, at Broad-
moor, the excellent management and arrangement of which
we had an opportunity of visiting during the past year, and
which reflects great credit upon Dr Orange and his assistants.
The Report before us is a faithful record of all that relates
to lunacy, and of itself bears evidence of the zeal and earnest-
ness with which the Commissioners perform their arduous but
most responsible duties :?

" Office of Commissioners in Lunacy,
19 Whitehall Place, S.W.:
October 1877.

" Sin,?The Commissioners in Lunacy having received the
statutory notice of your appointment at the last Quarter Ses-
sions as clerk to the Visitors of licensed houses in the county
of for the ensuing year, direct me to transmit
to you the enclosed copies of a summary of the principal heads
of inquiry which the Lunacy Acts prescribe on visitation of
these establishments.

" A similar summary has long been in use by the Commis-
sioners themselves, and they think that the Visitors, especially
such gentlemen as may have been now appointed for the first
time, may find the enclosed card of service in directing (though
not in limiting) those inquiries which experience has found
very valuable in the work of improving the condition and
treatment of insane patients.

" I am to ask you to take an early opportunity of placing
one of the cards in the hands of each of your Visitors. A
further supply can, if required, be had on application to me.

" I am, Sir,
" Your obedient servant,
" Charles Srencee Perceval,
" To ." " Secretary.
LUNACY IN ENGLAND. 297
"Visitation of Licensed Houses.

" (Acts 8 & 9 Vict. c. 100, s. 62; and 25 & 26 Vict. c. 111, s. 29.)
" Visits to be made by two at least of Visitors (medical
Visitor to be one), four times at least in every year.
" Two additional visits every year by any one or more of
tlie Visitors.
" Chief Statutory Heads of Inquiry at Visits. (8 & 9. Vict,
c. 100, ss. 62, 64, 65, 50, 66.)
" 1. Divine Service: When performed; to what number of
patients.
" 2. Occupations and amusements.
" 3. Restraint and seclusion : Amount of, and reasons for.
" 4. Classification of patients.
" 5. Pauper patients : Condition on admission ; dietary.
" 6. List of patients.
" 7. Orders and certificates of patients admitted since last
visit to be inspected ; license to be examined and signed at first
visit after grant or renewal.
" 8. Letters of private patients endorsed under Section 40,
Acts 25 & 26 Vict. c. 111.

" 9. Books to be inspected and signed, viz.:?
Book of admissions.
Register of discharges and deaths.
Medical visitation book.
Case book.

" 10. Entries to be made?
"In Visitors' book, as to condition of house and patients:
Number under restraint; irregularities in orders and
certificates: whether previous suggestions by Commis-
sioners or Visitors have been attended to or not; results
of statutory and other inquiries.
" [The proportion of patients to attendants, their
capacity and conduct, though not a statutory sub-
ject of inquiry, is very important.]
" In Patients' book : Observations as to state of mind or
body of any patient."
