Is Palaeolithic Man " a Reality of the Past, ok a Myth of the Present?
======================================================================

34
Art. III.?
:Author:  N. WHITLEY, C.E.

Eon. Secretary of the Royal Institution of Cornwall.
Tiib evidence which geological and antiquarian research has
furnished in support of the high antiquity of man is now said
to be so conclusive that it should be accepted on the testimony
of the scientific experts who have examined and confirmed the
facts on which it is founded. No doubt we should know but
little of the higher developments of science if we did not receive
our knowledge from those who have especially devoted their
time and talents to the inquiry; from such labours we are in
the enjoyment of the most beneficial results, and to such experts
our grateful acknowledgments are due.

But when this authority is pushed to an extreme, and where
the evidence adduced on the face of it does not appear to justify
the conclusion ; and further, when the subject is so simple that
the final court of appeal must be made to our common-sense
knowledge of common tilings, then this submission to authority
is clearly overlapped by the duty of endeavouring, within our
means, to test the authority by investigating the evidence, and
thus to supplant trust by knowledge.

Of the St. Aclieul "hatchets" Professor Ramsay says:
" There can be no doubt whatever that they were formed by the
hand of man; and I say tliig with authority."* This ex
cathedra utterance has been urged on our acceptance by Lyell,
by Sir John Lubbock, by Dr McCausland, and others ; and cer-
tainly, in the absence of proof, and in so simple a case, we
should decline to rely on authority, and trust only to the facts.
But when we ask for the evidence in support of such authority,
we are referred to some rough pieces of flint dignified by the
name of " manufactured implements," and to other relics,
doubtful both in their nature and in their age, found in nume-
? rous cavern deposits. The history of the origin of the opinion
founded on such evidence is curious and instructive.

The discovery of some fractured flints of a peculiar form in
the gravel beds of the Valley of the Somme, near Abbeville, led
an imaginative antiquary, M. Boucher de Perthes of that city
* Physical Geology, cfc., of Great Britain, p. 247. Third edition.
is " PALAEOLITHIC MAN " A REALITY OF T1IE PAST, ETC. 35
to assert that he had found the remains of antediluvial man ;
and in the year 1847 he published the first volume of his
Antiquitcs Celtiques, in which he endeavoured to show that the
broken flints which he had selected were human implements,
and that they were found in association with the remains of the
mammoth in the old river gravels of the Somme. The flints
Were so rough both in form and fracture, and were accompanied
with such fanciful suppositions as to their origin and use, that
the author was looked upon as an ignorant enthusiast and
almost a madman.

The further discovery of a new and intact hone cave at
Windmill Hill, Brixham, and its exploration by a committee
geologists in 1858, led them to the conclusion that flint
^pleinents had been found there mingled with the remains of
the extinct cave mammals. Impressed by this evidence, Dr.
falconer visited Abbeville, and after inspecting the relics, be-
came a convert to the opinion of Boucher de Perthes ; Mr.
^restwich followed, and inspected the gravel beds, and he also
came to the conclusion that these roughly chipped flints were
1mplements made by the hand of man. Elaborately written
Papers were laid before the Royal Society, and before several
meetings of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science, to show that these discoveries carried back the pre-
sence of man to a very remote period, and aided by other
discoveries of similar flints in similar deposits to those of the
S(>mme, it was urged in numerous publications with great ability
and in lecture halls before large audiences that the evidence
Undoubtedly carried back the origin of man to at least the
closing period of the Northern Drift.

The principal witnesses, however?the flints from Brixham
Cavern?had never been brought into court, never cross-exa-
mined. Exhumed in 1858, they were kept under lock, and not
placed in the Christy Museum for the inspection of the public
Until 1874, and during this long period of sixteen years they
AVere constantly referred to as affording undeniable evidence of
the high antiquity of man. Lyell says of them : " Neglecting
the less perfect specimens, about fifteen knives, recognised as
artificially formed by the most expeiienced antiquaries, were
taken from the bone earth."* Dawkins describes them as
" thirty-six rude flint implements, of indisputable human
Workmanship."f Evans, after examining them in detail, records
ms opinion " that most of the implements prove not only to
j'ave been made by man, but to have been actually in use before
^coming imbedded in the cave loamand adds, " That the
whole of the flints discovered present these signs (of use ?) of
human workmanship or use upon them."*

Thus the general acceptance of the opinion of the high
antiquity of man rests at present rather on the authority of
great names than on such a substratum of evidence as carries
conviction to the understanding. It is not too much to say
that not one believer in twenty in palasolithic man can give a
satisfactory proof for his belief; indeed, Dr Carpenter went far
beyond this (believer as he is in the high antiquity of man)
Avhen he stated from the presidential chair at the meeting of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science, " that no
logical proof can be adduced that the peculiar shapes of these
flints were given to them by human hands." It is now said to
be rather a question of opinion, in reference to which we
ought to accept and rely on the authority of experts. It
is now, however, certain that such reliance has been mis-
placed, that evidence which has been brought forward and
urged on our acceptance by so-called experts, has completely
broken down under a searching examination?notably that
from Brixham Cavern and from the Settle caves?and that the
time is come when the evidence in support of palaeolithic man
should be strictly examined from another point of view ; and
such is the object of our present inquiry.

The palaBolithic age, as defined by Sir John Lubbock, is
" that of the Drift, when man shared the possession of Europe
with the mammoth, the cave bear, the woolly-haired rhinoceros,
and other extinct animals. This we may call the palaeolithic
period."! How far back in past time this period extended is at
present an open question, but there is a general opinion that it
must have been intimately connected with the glacial age ;
that it was both pre-glacial and inter-glacial is advocated by
some of its supporters, while others affirm that the present state
of the evidence does not carry man back beyond the closing
period of the glacial age.

Sir Charles Lyell has given us a table showing the variations
in the exentricity of the earth's orbit for a million years before
a.d. 1800 and some of the climatal effects ot such variations,
from which lie infers that at a period 210,000 years back the
mean temperature of the coldest month in the latitude of
London would be as cold as 0?*7 F., and he says that " it would
not be difficult to imagine that this might have coincided with
those palieolithic times when man co-existed with a great many
species of mammalia now extinct." f
* Ancient Stone Implements, p. 471.
t Pre-historic Times, p. 2.
J Principles of Geology, p. 290, Vol. i. Tenth edition.

nie table* also shows that there is another similar period of
excessive cold 850,000 years previous to a.d. 1800; and Sir
Charles says that he "agrees with Mr. Croll that the date of the
most intense glacial cold would be more probably assigned to
t hat period." Thus if the first evidence of the existence of man
011 the earth is geologically found at the glacial age, then, in
the opinion of the most accomplished of modern philosophers,
!Us first appearance on our globe can be traced back at least
-10,000 years, or more probably to 850,000 years prior to
1800. If this be so we may be well excused from expressing
PUr surprise that the bones which we are told are those of
xgnoble palaeolithic man have not long ere this been reduced to
their native dust, and that the flesh of his more noble contem-
porary, the mammoth, should still be so well preserved as to
feed the wild dog's maw, and to furnish an unrelished morsel
*ur zealous French anthropologist.

The amount and clearness of the evidence for such extreme
antiquity should be of the strongest possible nature to induce us
to discard all that we know of the dates of the origin of nations
and of the beginnings of their early civilisations obtained from
Recognised historical records by the labours of the highest intel-
lectual men of our time.

Canon Rawlinson, Camden Professor of Ancient History,
Oxford, having examined this subject in great detail, gives us
the following tabular view of the chief chronological conclusions
at which he had arrived in this inquiry :

B.C. about
of the Deluge, according to the Septuagint . . . 3,200
E,ise of Monarchy in Egypt (probably) ..... 2,450
^ )> v in Babylon (probably) .... 2,300
Early traces of civilisation in Asia Minor (probably) . . 2,000
Kise of Phoenicia . ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 1,550
? of Assyria ......... 1,500
Earliest Iranic civilisation (Zendavesta) 1,500
7) Indie ? (Vedas) ..... 1,200
i, Hellenic ? (Homer) ..... 1,200
Phrygian and Lydian civilisations commence .... 900
Etruscan civilisation commences ...... G50
Eycian  600
Thus, if the high antiquity now claimed for man be correctly
stated, he must have lived at least during a period of 200,000
years as a bestial savage in the midst of ferocious animals, with
only rough almond-shaped flints as weapons of defence; when,
as Eyell phrases it, " the state of the arts remained stationary
* Principles of Geology, p. 293, Vol. i. Teuth edition.
t The Origin of Nations, p. 161.

for almost indefinite periods and his life,?" always in danger,
always on the watch ; he can depend on no one, and no one can
depend on him; he expects nothing from his neighbour, and
does unto others as he believes they would do unto him. Thus
his life is one prolonged scene of selfishness and fear." f If, as
we are now told, such a life as this was that of the early pro-
genitors of our race, and extending over a period of 200,000
years, we may fairly infer that it is highly improbable ; and
that reasonable men will hesitate to accept such a conclusion,
unless the evidence for it is well-nigh overwhelming.

AVliat, then, is the nature and force of this evidence on
which the so-called palaeolithic age is founded ? It mainly
rests on some roughly chipped flints, said to be human imple-
ments, found in ancient gravel beds in the Valley of the Somme,
and in other similar deposits, supplemented by more reliable
evidence of man's presence and workmanship obtained from
cavern explorations.

Restricting the present inquiry to the evidence of the
genuineness of the supposed implements from the gravel beds,
the question to be determined by a balance of the evidence is
this : Are these roughly-chipped flints implements made by
man ?

In the first place, there are many admissions which tend to
narrow the limits of this inquiry.

It is admitted that the implements are of a type unlike
any other known tools of the succeeding neolithic age.
Sir John Lubbock says of the flints from the gravel beds:
" These are all of types which differ considerably from those
which came subsequently into use, and they are none of them
polished."! Again : " It is not going too far to say that there
is not a single well-authenticated instance of a ' celt' being
found in the drift, or an implement of the drift type being
discovered, either in a tumulus, or associated with the remains
of the later stone age." ?

Dr Evans says: "But even granting that exceptional
instances of resemblance can be found, there is no one who can
deny that the general fades of a collection of implements from
the river drift, and one from the surface, is totally and entirely
distinct."

It is admitted that the implements are very rough in form
and fracture. Lyell says of them that " they are so irregular in
* Antiquity of Man, p. 377.

t 1're-historic Times, p. 484.
Introduction to Nilsson's Stone Age, p. 20.
? Pre historic Times, p. 280.
)j Ancient Stone Implements p. 560.
Oil A MYTH OF TIIE PRESENT ? 39
form as to cause the unpractised eye to doubt whether they afford
unmistakable evidence of design."* And again: "Between
the spear-head and oval shapes there are various intermediate
^nidations, and there are also a vast variety of very rude imple-
ments, many of which may have been rejected as failures, and
others struck off as chips in the course of manufacturing the
more perfect ones. Some of these chips can only be recognised
by an experienced eve as bearing marks of human workman-
ship."

Admission of Forgeries.?Of these Mr. Evans writes:
' The proofs I gave in my former letter were, I think, sufficient
to show that a regular system of imposition had been carried on
by the gravel diggers of Abbeville; that the majority of imple-
ments lately obtained at Moulin-Quignon are false; and, in-
ferentially, that the human jaw which was associated with them
is probably unauthentic." Mr. Evans afterwards secured the
services of Mr. Keeping to be with the gravel diggers during
t])e search for the implements, and he returned to England,
bringing a written report of the discovery of seven implements,
?f which he said: " I have every reason to believe that all the
specimens I have brought from Moulin-Quignon were placed
there on purpose for me to find." Mr. Evans examined the
specimens referred to in this report, and adds: " I have not the
slightest hesitation in pronouncing them all modern forgeries." J
These false implements are generally more perfect in form
than the rough authentic flints found in situ in the gravel, and
dignified by the name of implements. Of these Sir Charles
Lyell says, in his work 011 the " Antiquity of Man": " As much
doubt has been cast on the question whether the so-called flint
hatchets have really been shaped by the hand of man, it will
he desirable to begin by satisfying the readers mind 011 that
point." ?

But in the following pages this vital point is not discussed,
and 110 evidence whatever in reference to it is given; "the
genuineness of the implement" is inferred from the " vitreous
fi'loss"; the dendrit ic markings, which only indicate age, are
figured; and the subject is closed by a quotation from Professor
Ramsey, who had written : " For more than twenty years, like
others of my craft, I have daily handled stones, whether fashioned
by nature or art, and the flint hatchets of Amiens and Abbeville
seem to me as clearly works of art as any Sheffield whittle." I
vyill put ([notation against quotation. " \\ herever," says Hallam,
* Antiquity of Man, p. 379. First edition.

t Ibid, p. 118.
J Athenceum, July 4, 1863.
? Antiquity of Man, p. 112. First edition. '
" obsequious reverence is substituted for bold inquiry, truth, if
she is not already at hand, will never be attained."

The simple issue to be tried is, as Sir John Lubbock clearly
puts it, " Are the so-called flint implements of human workman-
ship ? "* And this proposition, which Sir John undertakes to
prove, he does not support by a tittle of evidence; but he does
prove convincingly that the flints are found in undisturbed
gravel; that they have marks of age on their surfaces, by which
the genuine implements can be known from forgeries. And
then Sir John assumes that he has proved his case, and says :
" On this point, therefore, no evidence can be more conclusive."
This is a mistake of the question. It is proved that the flint is
found deep in the gravel beds, which no one who has inspected
the beds can doubt; but it is not proved that the flint has been
formed into an implement by man.

Writing on another occasion, Sir John says : " That the flint
implements found in these gravels are implements it is unneces-
sary to argue. Their regularity, and the care with which they
have been worked to an edge, prove that they have been inten-
tionally chipped into their present forms, and are not the result
of accident.

The weight attached to such an opinion would greatly vary
with the character of the specimens examined. Some rare and
selected specimens of an oval form are as perfect in outline as
the flint pebble of which they once formed a nucleus; while the
great mass pass by insensible degrees into the forms of the rough,
shattered gravel in which they are found ; and these, as Lyell
tells us, " are a vast variety of very rude implements," and are
" so irregular in form as to cause the unpractised eye to doubt
whether they afford unmistakable evidence of design." X Sir John
Lubbock also gives us the benefit of his experience when he says:
" I have been several times to the Valley of the Somme, and have
examined all the principal pits; though I have never met with
a perfect hatchet, I have found two implements which were quite
unmistakable, though rude and fragmentary." ? This is the
inference of the " practised eye." " When," said an inquirer, " I
visited the museum of Boucher de Perthes, and was told that
the shattered flints exhibited there were human tools, I felt as if
I was hoaxed." But let the flints speak for themselves.
1. The " implements" have a geological and not an archaeo-
logical origin. An inspection of a section of the St. Acheul
gravel shows that the implements mostly lie at the lower part of
the bed, and that there is a general uniformity of size between

* Pro-historic Times, p. 276.
t Introduction to Nilsson on the Stone Age, p. 18.
{ Antiquity of Man, p. 379. First edition.
? 1're-historic Times, p. 274.
OR A MYTH OF THE PRESENT? 41

them and the broken flints with which they are mixed; the
whole of the gravel is stained, and of the same colour; and,
where waterworn, the angles of the implements are ronnded to
the same extent as the rougher gravel with which they are
associated.

2. There is a gradation in form from the most perfect
almond-shaped implement into the rough angular gravel of
the same stratum.

This is most obvious from an inspection of the gravel in
which the tools are found, where a search for implements
mainly resolves itself into the selection of the most symmetrical
specimens to the rejection of those which do not come up to the
preconceived standard of what constitutes an implement, and no
line of demarcation can be defined between what is supposed to
he the work of man and the work of nature. We have a good
illustration of this in a large number of specimens now in the
Museum of Practical Geology in Jermyn Street, collected by
Professor T. McKenny Hughes, M.A., for the purpose of showing
the gradation from the natural form into that which he con-
siders to be the artificially made implement; and from the
detailed description given of these flints, we find that this most
accomplished geologist is often at a loss to determine, from his
point of view, the implement made by man from the flint
chipped by nature; and he makes the surmise that natural
forms of broken flints may have suggested to the primitive
savage the forming of tools of the St. Acheul type.*
3. The general character of the chipping corresponds with
the nature of the flint. Where the flint is cross-grained, the
chipping is coarse ; where the structure of the flint is fine, the
chipping is fine, and the most perfect of the implements are
then produced. There are on those flints no marks of human
skill overcoming the intractableness of the rougher material,
the inference being that the work in both cases is that of nature
and not of man.

This is further confirmed by the fact that the sites from
whence the best and purest blocks of flint are at present
obtained for the manufacture of gun-flints and other purposes,
is where the so-called flint tools are most perfect and numerous,
as at Brandon and at Spiennes, near Mons.
4. The Drift implements exhibit no evidence of having been
used by man.

Sir C. Lyell says of the implements from Hoxne, that "they
are so much more perfect, and have their cutting edges so much
sharper than those from the Valley of the Somme, that they
seem neither to have been used by man nor to have heen rolled
in the bed of a river. The opinion of Mr. Frere, therefore, that
there may have been a manufactory of weapons on the spot,
appears probable." * This fancy involves an imaginary trade
or a system of barter among savages who have not left in the
gravel a single relic to indicate their presence except these rude
" implements." I obtained from the workmen in the gravel
pits at St. Aclieul thirty " implements," and not a single speci-
men bore any marks of having been used for any purpose
whatever; where the point was sharp from fracture, the edges
at the sides were equally sharp from the same cause, and some
of the specimens partly rounded, by being rolled in water, had
their edges worn precisely to the same extent as the points, and
the edges of all the split contiguous flints presented the same
appearance. I have inspected a large number of the Drift
"tools" in gravel pits and museums, probably a thousand, and
I say advisedly that I have not seen one bearing the same
indubitable marks of use as are stamped on the true stone tools
of the neolithic age.

5. Their Number.?Boucher de Perthes writes : " Anyone
visiting me may count them by thousands. From the beds
which I have called celtic I have seen them drawn in barrows
to metal the neighbouring roads ; one would have thought a
shower of them had fallen from the sky."f At the Little Ouse
hundreds have been obtained from a single gravel pit, and these
pits dot the valley for a distance of eight or ten miles. At St.
Aclieul, in about three acres of land, certainly more than 3,000
tools have been exhumed, which is equal to 640,000 in a square
mile, and as these beds are now known to extend more than
twenty square miles along the Valley of the Somme, if equally
productive, there must be 12,800,000 in this small area. The
present population of France is less than 200 to a square mile,
and these implements are assumed to have been lost by a race
of men living by the chase, when the country could have sus-
tained only a very sparse population. It has been estimated
that 800 acres of hunting-ground produce only as much food as
half an acre of arable land, and on this basis the ratio of the
lost axes of the Somme to the savage population would be as
six millions to one.

6. Their Geographical Distribution.?The home of the entire
flint nodule is in the upper chalk, and the home of the so-called
flint implement is in the angular flint gravel derived from the
denudation of the chalk ; thus their paternity is geological, and
this relationship is close and unbroken. The instructive
geological map of Europe by Sir Roderick Murcliison shows
that the Somme drains a large cretaceous district?that Hoxne,
Bury St. Edmunds, and Brandon are in the middle of a chalk
plateau; that Fimber is in the middle of the chalk district of
^ orkshire; that Fisherton is at the foot of the chalk plain of
W iltshire; and it is well known that all the valley gravels in which
the " implements" have been found, whether close to or drifted
from the chalk hills, are composed of flint detritus. On the
other hand, jar from the chalk, on the ancient rocks of Norway
and Sweden, there are no palaeolithic tools. In the museum at
Stockholm there are not fewer than 15,000 stone axes, but "the
palaeolithic types are absolutely unknown there."* The ancient
valley gravels of Cornwall have been thoroughly explored in
search of the valuable stream-tin which they contain, through a
period of at least 2,000 years, but not a single tool of the Drift
type has been discovered in them. We must therefore infer
that this intimate relationship of the geographical distribution
of the " implements " to the geological structure of the country
is an indication of their natural production.

7. No other relics of man leave been found in the Drift
with the so-called implements.

Wherever man has existed, even in his most degraded con-
dition, the evidences of his former occupation of the country
are multiform. We need only refer to the relics of the lake-
dwellers of Switzerland, of the remains of the Celtic tribes in
France, and of the Romans in England. But when we turn
from these abundant and conclusive evidences of the former
presence of man to the consideration of the evidence obtained
from the Drift gravels, we find no human bones, no pottery, no
works of art, or the slightest indication of the existence of a
constructive or an intellectual being: nothing, in fact, but
roughly chipjjed flints dignified by the name of axes, and unlike
in form and type any implements known to have been used by
man.

In conclusion, I put the physical evidence which I have
brought forward in support of the foregoing seven propositions
against the assumption that these flints are implements made
by man. The question whether palaeolithic man is a reality or
a myth must be decided by the evidence of the facts alone, and
I leave these to speak for themselves.
* Introduction to Nilsson's Stone Age, p. 24.
