Modern Pseudo-Philosophy
========================

THE JOUBNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL pathology.
Art. I.?
:Author:  J. M. WINN, M.D., M.R.C.P., &c.

After Professor Tyndall's utter failure to refute the arguments
of his opponents, in his reply which appeared in the Fortnightly
Revieiv for November 1875, it might have been hoped that we
had heard the last of the marvellous atom which was to do all
things?not, as St. Paul said, by the Grace of Grod?but by the
grace of Dr Tyndall. The revival, however, of the doctrine of
evolution in all its extravagance by Dr Allen Thomson at the
last meeting of the British Association, at Plymouth, seems to
have re-awakened his courage, and we find him again giving
utterance to his crude and mischievous speculations on the
platform of the Birmingham and Midland Institute, in October
last. It would have been better for the Professor's reputation
if he had confined himself to the legitimate field of experi-
mental science, in which he holds such a distinguished position.

Dr Tyndall makes the startling statement that the greater
'part of the world, including the clergy, firmly believe in the
truth of the Darwinian theory that?" man,
The heir of all the ages, in the foremost files of time,*
has arrived there through millions of stages, from lower to
higher forms of life." This is a sweeping assertion, which will
serve to show how apt the Professor is to jump to hasty con-
clusions, not bearing in mind what Tennyson also says, "Know-
ledge comes, but wisdom lingers."
In diametrical opposition to Dr Tyndall's statement we
would refer to eminent authorities in natural science and
geology, whose arguments are founded on original researches
and acknowledged facts. The following quotations are taken
from the address delivered at the opening of the session of the
Geologist's Association on November 5, 1875, by the President,
William Carruthers, Esq., F.R.S., F.L.S., F.Gr.S., &c., Keeper
of the Botanical Department of the British Museum : " The
plants portrayed on the ancient paintings and sculptures of
Egypt; the fruits placed in coffins with embalmed bodies, and
the fruits and seeds found in ancient lake dwellings, all belong
to existing species with which they agree in the most minute
and apparently accidental particulars. The existing order of
plants if it be due to genetic evolution supplies no proof of
it. . . The cellular algae preceded the vascular cryptogams,
or the gymnosperms of the newer palaeozoic rocks, and these
were speedily followed by monoctyledons, and at a much
later period by dicotyledons. But the earliest representatives
of those various sections of the vegetable kingdom were not
generalised forms, but as highly organised as recent forms, and
in many cases more highly organised; and the divisions were
as clearly bounded in their essential characters, and as decidedly
separated from each other as they are at the present day.

Is it possible from the record of organic life preserved in the
sedimentary deposits, to discover the method or agent through
the action of which the new forms appeared on the globe ?
The rocks record the existence of the plants and animal forms,
but as yet they have disclosed nothing whatever as to hoiv
these forms originated.

The testimony of Thomas Davidson, Esq., F.R.S.,
V.P.P.S., &c., derived from the animal kingdom, is equally
strong. Mr. Davidson is one of the most distinguished
palaeontologists of the age, few men having had more honours
bestowed on them from both British and foreign scientific
bodies. He stands unrivalled in his knowledge of the nature
and history of those small sea-shells called brachiopoda, of which
there are three thousand species. He is moreover the friend
of Darwin, and it was at the particular request of that great
naturalist that he undertook the task of minutely examining
the characteristics of the brachiopods, with a view of proving
whether or not they would support the truth of the Darwinian
theory. In the Geological Magazine for 1877 Mr. Davidson
says: "We have no positive evidence of those modifications
which the theory invokes, for types appear on the whole to be
permanent as long as they continue, and when a genus dis-
appears there is no modification that I can see of any of the
forms that continue beyond, as far as the brachiopoda appear
to be concerned; and why should a number of genera, such as
lingula, discina, crania, and rhynchonella have continued to
be represented with the same characters, and often with but
small modification in shape during the entire sequence of
geological strata ? Why did they not offer modifications or
alter during those incalculable ages ? Limiting myself to the
brachiopoda, let us see what further they will tell us on this
question. Taking the present state of our knowledge as a
guide, but admitting at the same time that any day our con-
clusions and inductions may require to be modified by fresh
discoveries, let us ascertain whether they reveal anything to
support Darwinian ideas. We find that the larger number of
genera made their first appearance during the palaeozoic periods,
and since they have been decreasing in number to the present
period. We will leave out of the question the species, for they
vary so little that it is often very difficult to trace really good
distinctive characters between them; it is different with the
genera, as they are, or should be, founded on much greater and
more permanent distinctions. Thus, for example, the family
Spiriferidae includes genera which are all characterised by a
calcified spiral lamina for the support of the drachial ap-
pendages ; and, however varied these may be, they always retain
the distinctive characters of the group from their first ap-
pearance to their extinction. . . . Now, although certain
genera, such as terebratala, rliynclionella, crania, and discina
have enjoyed a very considerable geological existence there are
genera, such as stringocephalus, uncites, porambonites, kon-
inckina, and several others, which made their appearance very
suddenly and without any warning; after a while they dis-
appeared in a similar abrupt manner, having enjoyed a
comparatively short existence. They are all possessed of such
marked and distinctive internal characters that we cannot trace
between them and associated or synchronous genera any evidence
of their being the result of descent with modification." It is
thus evident that the eminent brachiopodist, to whom Darwin
himself had referred for the confirmation of his theory, has
decided against him.

Dr Duncan, President of the Geological Society, in his
annual address, delivered on February 16th, 1877, makes the
following strong observations : " The mind is dissatisfied with
the belief that all the wonderful arts in nature, the limited
direction of variability, the parallelism of form, ornament, and
physiology in contemporaneous and successive groups of fossils
sometimes widely separated zoologically, are due to the action
of physical changes and heredity alone."

Virchow, the Professor of Pathology at Berlin, whose
researches on cellular pathology have given him a world-wide
reputation, can be added to the list of those who have not
subscribed to the dogma of evolution. In his address on "The
Freedom of Science in the Modern State," delivered at the fiftieth
conference of German naturalists and physicians at Munich on
the 22nd of September 1877, he makes this pertinent remark:
" Every attempt to form our problems into doctrines, to intro-
duce our hypotheses as the bases of instruction?especially the
attempt simply to dispossess the Church, and to supplant its
dogmas forthwith by a religion of evolution?be assured, gentle-
men? every such attempt will make shipwreck, and in its wreck
will also bring with it the greatest perils for the whole position
of science."*

Dr Lionel Beale, whose terrible microscope has put to flight
the phantom bathybius, and whose revelations have made sad
havoc with the materialistic theories of life, speaks thus strongly
on the subject of evolution : " We know that the life-history
of these several forms [of animal life] is very different, while
the results of their living are sufficient to prove that they must
have been diverse from the very first.

When authorities like those I have quoted, who are men of
the very highest scientific eminence, have entered their protests
against the pseudo-philosophy of Darwin, it is unnecessary to
enumerate the long list of those who follow in their track. I
have no statistical tables to guide me (as I presume Dr Tyndall
has when he says that the greater part of the world are
evolutionists), but I think some error must have crept into his
tables, for judging from the applause which followed the de-
nunciation of materialistic doctrines, when the Eev. J. Cook
delivered his Monday popular lectures at Boston, it does not
seem that Darwinism has taken deep root in America. In
"\xermany also?in spite of the demonstration of the socialists at
the great meeting of the so-called " Christian Social Society "
at Berlin, not long since, when they vociferously upheld the
doctrines of atheism and materialism?there is ground for hope
that the tide has turned, and that the leaders of philosophic
thought in all the universities, save one, are opposed to scientific
atheism. But it is not by mere authority that the question at
issue is to be decided; it must be tested by facts, and these are
so insurmountable that they cannot in our present state of
knowledge be set aside. The researches of Carruthers and
Davidson in the animal and vegetable kingdom, to which
reference has already been made, have failed to discover links
which are essential to the support of the Darwinian theory; and
when their absence is pressed inconveniently on the evolutionist,
the reply is that they will be found, or that they did once
exist, and have been destroyed in the course of ages by chemical
or mechanical action. But this is only conjecture. Even
granting that the links could be found, the periods required for
the evolution of one species into another are infinitely longer
than the time, as calculated by the physicists, which has elapsed
since life first appeared on the face of the earth. It has been
estimated that a period not much exceeding one hundred millions
of years must have passed since the earth was sufficiently cooled
down to support life. An approximate calculation will show
that this is not nearly long enough for the imaginary law of
evolution to produce all the species, living and extinct, that
have been discovered ; for the Danvinites are obliged to admit
that a time almost fabulous is required for the development of
even a single species by evolution.

Sir Charles Lyell estimated the now existing species of
vegetables and animals on the terraqueous globe at one and a-
half millions : this is exclusive of microscopic beings, whose
number is incalculable. A single drop of stagnant water,
according to Leeuwenhoeck, contains about 500,000,000 of
animalcules, a large number of which probably consists of
distinct species. Sir Charles Lyell says it is very difficult to
form a calculation of the number of extinct species. Each
stratum which contains fossils is marked by species which are
peculiar to it and to the epoch when they were deposited, and
myriads have no doubt been obliterated by the mechanical and
chemical forces to which they have been subjected. Mr.
Carruthers, to whom we have already referred, says: " As
regards the vegetable kingdom, the strata most abounding in
plant remains contain but a small proportion, as we shall
presently see, of the vegetation existing at the time of their
formation, while many deposits of great thickness, which
represent immense epochs in the earth's history, are, as far as
we at present know, completely destitute of all trace of plants.
The extent of this varying record largely depends on the con-
ditions under which the beds were formed. . . . We cannot
then expect to find cellular structures preserved among fossils,
and they are indeed rarely met with, even in specimens where
the general tissues are well preserved; while plants that were
entirely cellular in their structure have altogether perished."
It may be roughly calculated, from the observations of various
naturalists and geologists, that the number of extinct species,
including both animals and vegetables, amounts to not less
than 3,000,000. The addition of 1,500,000 of still existing
species makes a total of 4,500,000. \Ve find that the forms of
animals, as depicted on the Egyptian monuments, are the same
now as tliey were 3,000 years ago. If we grant for the sake of
argument, that one species could be evolved from another in so
short a space of time as 5,000 years, and multiply the
4,500,000 species, living and extinct, by 5,000, we shall find
the time required to produce all the number of species that
have ever appeared is 22,500,000,000. As, then, it is evidently
impossible to prove the truth of evolution, it is high time to
dismiss the hypothesis as an idle dream.
In spite, however, of all the unanswerable objections to
Darwinism, Huxley, Tyndall, and Hackel settled the truth of
it to their own satisfaction, and it only remained for Herbert
Spencer, Gr. H. Lewes, and other believers in the omnipotence
of the evolution power, to explain its modus operandi.
Herbert Spencer, therefore, " the apostle of the understanding,"
informed us, in the simple and pleasant language for which
he is so conspicuous, that evolution is a change from indefinite,
incoherent, homogeneity, to a definite, coherent, heterogeneity,
through continuous differentiations and integrations.', He
might have added, natural selectionations, survival-of-the-
fittestations, and mystifications. It will be a curious fact for
some future philosopher, writing the history of human error, to
record that in the nineteenth century a large section of edu-
cated men believed in the pseudo-philosophy of Herbert
Spencer.

Gr. H. Lewes, in his work on " The Physical Basis of Mind,"
has a long chapter on " The Nature of Life," in which he dis-
cusses the question of evolution. Although an admirer of the
doctrine he is compelled to admit that it is probable that there
were numerous starting points, instead of only one, from which
all species sprang. This is satisfactory. Like Herbert Spencer,
Gr. H. Lewes vitiates his style of writing by coining pedantic
and unnecessary words, which give an air of originality but at
the same time have a tendency to obscure instead of elucidating
the meaning of the writer; for example, he says that" Vegetality
has been developed into Animality." Again, he has perverted
Dr Lionel Beale's most expressive and appropriate term Bio-
plasm into the illogical word Psychoplasm.

Of all the various forms of Darwinism to which its dis-
crepancies have given rise, the Theistic is at the present time
the most dangerous. It has been adopted by many faint-
hearted clergymen, who hope by a sort of compromise to temper
materialism with faith. Nothing can be more unwise. They
naturally shrink from the doctrine in its entirety as advocated
by Tyndall, who is a greater Darwinite than Darwin himself,
but they think all may be made smooth, by admitting that the
original germ was created, not produced by spontaneous generation or the potentiality of atoms. They do not seem to be
aware that, in spite of this admission, if they hold that the germ
created millions of years ago was sufficient for the production
of all the endless and complicated forms of life upon the earth,
it must follow, that the necessity for a watchful and superintend-
ing Providence is done away with, and fatalism becomes the
inevitable consequence. Those who should be the champions
of the Faith must not surrender the outposts, seeking peace
at any price, and adopting a weak and conciliating policy
towards their active and uncompromising adversaries, but fight
manfully, not only against "the world, the flesh," but also
against materialism. It is a miserable policy for them to succumb
to their antagonists at this present moment, when the discoveries
of science are more than ever opposed to Darwinism in any form.
In addition to the facts opposed to evolution which have
already been enumerated, we must not forget those unanswerable
objections?the sterility of hybrids?the absence of any vestige
of a single link between the ape and man, though it has been
extensively looked for, and must have been discovered had it ever
existed?the fact that the fossil trilobite crops up abruptly, at
the close of the carboniferous epoch, with the eye perfectly
developed?that no breeding has yet been able to produce, by
selection, two species so distinct that they can generate hybrids
?and that there is a limit to the variability of species.
The scientific objections to the Darwinian hypothesis are
innumerable, and its advocates are constantly driven to fresh
concessions. It would be well if its supporters would be silent
for a while. A fixed law or a general principle gains by in-
vestigation, but this has not been the case with Darwinism.
Every year some fresh defect is revealed, and it is wonderful
that there should still remain any who believe it to be standing
on as firm a basis as the law of gravitation. Hackel goes so
far as to propose that it should be accepted as the basis of
education ! and " the protoplastic soul (die plastidul-seele) be
assumed as the foundation of all ideas concerning spiritual
being! " Can this extravagance be exceeded ? 

* Since writing the above, I have seen a paper in Good Words for March
1878, by Dr Andrew Wilson, in which he combats most successfully the objections
which have been raised by materialists and evolutionists to the evidence of
" Design in Nature." Tho whole of the paper deserves a careful perusal. I
have only space for one extract. " Even more interesting than the case of tho
primrose is that of the myosotis versicolor, a species of forget-me-not, the
arrangement for securing fertilisation of the seed exhibiting a perfect adaptation to
all possible exigencies which may arise in the life history of the flower. If we
examine tho myosotis just after the flower has opened, the pistil with its long
style is seen to project above the level of the flower itself. It thus presents a
most likely object for contact with the proboscis of an insect which has come from
another myosotis laden with pollen. But failing to obtain fertilisation of its
seeds by insect-carried pollen from a neighbour flower, the myosotis has yet

8 MODERN PSEUDO-PHILOSOPHY.

Of all the ephemeral pseudo-philosophic discoveries, the
one which a short time since most alarmed all sober thinking
people and delighted the scientific atheists was Huxley's?that
life sprang from deep sea mud. Huxley named his wonderful
discovery, out of compliment to Hackel, Bathybius Hackelii.
The joy of Strauss was without bounds. Here was the link
that was needed to join the organic with the inorganic world,
and the superstitious belief in a Creator had received its death-
blow. This is what he says, in " The Old Faith and the
New*;" " Huxley has discovered the bathybius, a shiny heap
of jelly on the sea bottom ; Hackel what he has called the
moneres, structureless clots of an albuminous carbon, which
although inorganic in their constitution, yet are capable of
nutrition and accretion. By these the chasm may be said to
be bridged, and the transition effected from the inorganic
to the organic." Since this was written Huxley himself has
abandoned the muddy notion of bathybius. There was no
help for him to do otherwise, as the far searching vision of Dr.
Lionel Beale had set the matter at rest. After most careful
investigations, Dr Beale gives in his work on Protoplasm the
following verdict: "Bathybius instead of being a widely extend-
ing sheet of living protoplasm, which grows at the expense of
inorganic elements, is rather to be considered as a complex mass
of slime, with many foreign bodies and the debris of living
organisms which have passed away."

As regards the theory of heterogenesis or spontaneous gene-
ration, the elaborate, accurate, and careful experiments which
Dr Tyndall has most patiently conducted for many years
have completely settled the question. No one can doubt the
accuracy of his observations of which he has published a faith-
ful report in the Nineteenth Century for January 1877. The
results of his experiments are conclusive and in direct oppo-
sition to those of Dr Bastian. Dr Tyndall as an experimenter
another resource in the pollen of its own stamens. The stamens at the opening
of the flower are placed far below the style, and hence it is impossible, so long as
the stamens remain below, for the pollen to be placed on the pistil and thus to
fertilise the seeds. But nature has been equal to such an emergency. As time
passes, we find the stamens to grow upwards with the petals, and as in time they
overtop the pistil, the flower is enabled to fertilise its own seeds. Not less
interesting or remarkable are the phases observed in the action of pollen itself,
in its work of fertilisation. Left to themselves and unapplied to their special
purpose, the little yellow grains of pollen wither and die. But, placed in its
appropriate and intended situation on the pistil, each pollen grain, as if guided
by some inherent instinct, projects from its surface a tube-like structure, which
passes through the style of the pistil, and brings the essential matters of the
pollen grain in contact with the seeds. Eegarded even in a cursory measure, the
foregoing phases of plant history are full of meaning to the scientist. Every-
where he sees order and contrivance, blind chance seems to have no part in the
ordering of nature's affairs."

lias few equals, and we are indebted to him for so candidly
exposing the fallacies of a theory that offered so much support
to the materialistic views which he unfortunately upholds.
Dr Bastian's reply to Dr Tyndall, in the Nineteenth Century
for February 1878, is most unsatisfactory ; he cannot contravene
the accuracy and completeness of Tyndall's experiments, and his
answer is but a lame apology for the inconclusiveness of his
own. He falls back on Herbert Spencer, G. H. Lewes, Huxley,
and others for support, calling them the profoundest thinkers
and foremost men of science. We have shown how unworthy
Herbert Spencer and G. H. Lewes are to be looked up to as
shining lights, and he is unfortunate in naming Huxley, who
although an unmitigated materialist, has long been known to
be a strenuous opponent of the theory of spontaneous genera-
tion. If Dr Bastian gives up the field of experiment, and
thinks the question may be decided by authority, his opponents
can mention names that throw Herbert Spencer and Gr. H. Lewes
completely into the shade. He must be aware that Herman
Lotze, Pasteur, Virchow, and Lionel Beale have expressed their
decided disbelief in lieterogenesis. Herman Lotze is now
looked up to as the leading philosopher in Germany. Lionel
Beale, Pasteur, and Virchow have earned their spurs as physio-
logists and microscopists; but what discoveries in science have
been made by Herbert Spencer and G. H. Lewes, who are
merely theorists, and litterateurs ??simply none.
As regards Virchow, to whom Dr Bastian has specially
referred in support of his views, anyone who will read without
prejudice the context to that part of the address which he has
quoted will perceive that he has entirely mistaken Virchow's
meaning. I will quote the passage with the context in italics.
"Moreover the generatio equivoca which has been so often
contested and so often contradicted is nevertheless ahvays
meeting us afresh. To be sure, we know not a single positive
fact to prove that a generatio equivoca has ever been made?
that there ever has been procreation in this way; that in-
organic masses, such as the firm of Carbon & Co. have ever
spontaneously developed themselves into organic masses.
Nevertheless I grant that if anyone is determined to form for
himself an idea of how the first organic being could come into
existence of itself, nothing further is left than to go back to
spontaneous generation. This much is evident. If I do not
choose to accept a theory of creation ; if I refuse to believe that
there was a special Creator who took the clod of earth and
breathed into it the breath of life ; if I prefer to make for
myself a verse after my own fashion (in the place of the verse
in Genesis), then I must make it in the sense of generatio
equivoca. Tertium non datur. No alternative remains
when once we say ' I do not accept the creation, but I will
have an explanation.' Whoever takes up that first position
must go on to the second position and say: i Ergo, 1 assume
the generatio equivoca.'' But of this wc do not possess any
actual proof. JVo one has ever seen a generatio equivoca
really effected, and whoever supposes that it has occurred is
contradicted by the naturalist, and not merely by the theo-
logian."* Virchow's meaning is not to be mistaken. He
distinctly says that lieterogenesis had not been proved. Dr.
Bastian lays great stress on Virchow's words, that, if a creative
power is not accepted, we must fall back on spontaneous gene-
ration ; but it so happens that the greatest philosophers who
ever lived have believed in a God, and we are not likely to
give up that faith because modern pseudo-philosophy chooses to
ignore Him.

One of Dr Bastian's weakest points is his conjecture that
living organisms are produced by a sort of crystallisation, and
he is driven for support to Huxley who has been one of the
strongest opponents of spontaneous generation. He says, it has
been asked " what warrant there is for supposing that living
particles ever could come into being by an independent birth from
fluids, somewhat after the fashion of incipient crystals. I would
reply that the general kinship between living and not living
matter is freely admitted by men of science at the present day,
as the following quotation may suffice to indicate. Professor
Huxley says: ' It is not probable that there is any real
difference in the nature of the molecular forces which compel
the carbonate of lime to assume and retain the crystalline form,
and those which cause the albuminoid matter to move and
grow, select and form, and maintain its particles in a state of
incessant motion. The property of crystallising, is to crystal-
lisible matter, what the vital property is to albuminoid matter
(protoplasm). The crystalline form corresponds to the organic
form and its internal structure to tissue structure?crystalline
force being a property of matter, vital force is but a property
of matter.' "

All this implies nothing more than that Professors Huxley
and Bastian think it probable that a crystal and a living struc-
ture are both produced by mechanical forces. Is this induc-
tive reasoning from facts ? If anyone will take the trouble to
compare the properties of living structures and inert crystals he
must admit it to be most improbable that they are analogous.

* As regards this quotation, I have copied it from the Times, "whereas Dr.
Bastian haG taken his extract from Nature. There is no essential difference
between the two translations.
MODERN PSEUDO-PIIILOSOPIIY. 11

If vital power is the same as physical force, as materialists wish
us to believe, why does Huxley talk of a vital property, for
according to his hypothesis there is no such thing as vitality
distinct from physical force. A chemist can produce a crystal
by various combinations ; he can dissolve it, and afterwards re-
produce it by evaporation. Has Dr Bastian succeeded in
producing a living being, and if so can he reproduce it after
it has been dissolved ? What resemblance is there between the
minutest living being and a lump of salt ? A crystal as much
resembles a life cell as an icicle does a warm, living, palpitating
animal. If Dr Bastian has any new positive facts to announce,
?r if he can show that any statements that have been made in
opposition to his theory are erroneous, no one, unless he were a
fool or a bigot, would attempt to contradict him. It is in this
candid spirit we would meet our opponents, and we look for a
like fairness from them. Nevertheless, visionary speculations
like bathybius, evolution, heterogenesis, &c. might be left to
the sobering influence of time if they were only visionary, but
their mischievous tendency and influence on the moral condition
of society make it imperative that they should be promptly and
sharply criticised.

I will now turn to another, perhaps the most subtle and,
therefore, most dangerous form of false philosophy. I have called
attention to it before in an address which I delivered before the
Victoria Institute, and afterwards published in the Journal of
Psychological Medicine for April 1877. I refer to Physio-
logical Psychology, which is much the same sort of thing as
the exploded system of phrenology. It is a revival of that
pseudo-science under a new name. Its object is to materialise
mind, by giving a local habitation to each of the moral and
intellectual faculties in different parts of the brain. The scheme
is an old one, and has been defeated over and over again;
nevertheless, as time goes on, it is revived in some fresh shape,
either by those who think, by the adaptation of a new phraseo-
logy to an old idea, they can gain reputation and fame, or by
Well-meaning but too enthusiastic men, whose imaginations are
unfortunately stronger than their reason ; men who, however
distinguished in some special department of natural science,
are evidently incapacitated by their mental constitution from
clearly comprehending the fundamental truths of psychology.
It is the confident boast of this psycho-physiological school
that the physiological method is the only means of arriving at
a right interpretation of mental phenomena; that it is by
experiments on the brain, combined with a careful study of
the functions of the nervous system, that it will be ultimately
proved that mind is only a function of the brain, and that all
the great metaphysical truths which have been believed and
taught for thousands of years are to be regarded as idle tales.
In spite of the sanguine expectations of the physiological psy-
chologists they cannot deny the statement I made three years ago,
that no great discovery regarding the functions of the nervous
system lias been made since Sir Charles Bell demonstrated that
the motor and sensory tracks were distinct from each other;
and Marshall Hall established the theory of reflex action. A
year ago I challenged them to contradict this statement, and
their silence implies that they cannot; and with reference to
localisation of the faculties of the mind in the brain they have
not been more successful than Gall and Spurzheim.

We have heard a great deal lately of Dr Ferrier's experi-
ments, and numerous medical journals appear to have vied with
each other in lauding his work on " The Functions of the Brain "
on very insufficient grounds. It cannot be said that the con-
clusions from his experiments, conducted with the view of
determining the centres of motion and sensation, are of much
value, as it is very possible that in electrifying different parts
of the cerebral substance the currents do not excite the cells,
but the contiguous nervous fibres. His experiment to determine
the seat of hunger cannot be considered very conclusive ; he tells
us that after removing the whole of the occipital lobes of a
monkey's brain the animal's appetite was impaired! These
strictures on Ferrier's work, I published in a notice which appeared
in the April number of the Journal of Psychological Medi-
cine 1877. Since then I have found a corroboration of them in
the Medical Times for November 3rd, 1877, by Eugene Dupuy,
M.D. (Pau), of New York. He says: "First I must state
that it has not yet been proved by any means that the cortex
cerebri iD any portion of its extent can be irritated by any means
?mechanical, physical, or chemical?and that even if we were
to suppose that the electricity used by experimenters excites the
fibres which are in communication with the cortical cells, and
which unite them with lower centres, we could gain no know-
ledge as to the nature of the function of those cortical cells,
because a nerve-fibre will conduct in either sense afferently or
efferently.

" Second, an experiment which shows that when both centres
for the two anterior legs are destroyed, the animal very soon
uses its limbs as well as before the experiment, suggests the
idea that the transient paresis, which resulted immediately
after the experiment, instead of being a withdrawal of influence
of a centre, is, on the contrary, an irritative influence, exerted
by the lesion. The subsequent disappearance of all paresis, and
the cicatrisation of the brain tissue show that fact plainly."
If I)r. Ferrier cannot determine the centres of the mere
bodily functions of sensation and motion, all that he has said in
his chapter on "The hemispheres considered psychologically " is
so much waste paper.

With the unphilosophic haste so conspicuous in the ma-
terialistic school, it was most confidently asserted that the
faculty of speech was located in the anterior lobes of the brain,
but this opinion has been proved to be incorrect by pathological
facts. In my article on " Materialistic Physiology" in the
Journal of Psychological Medicine, 1 referred to a case that
occurred at the Middlesex Hospital, in which speech and
memory remained after extensive softening of both anterior
lobes of the brain. Dr Bateman, so well known as a leading
authority on the subject of aphasia, in his recent interesting
work, " Darwinism tested by Language,"* makes the following
observations: " Such was M. Bouillaud's confidence in his
theory [the localisation of language] that he offered a prize of
500 francs for any well authenticated case in which the two
anterior lobes were destroyed without speech being affected.
This challenge remained unaccepted for many years, till the
occurrence of a celebrated discussion on the seat of language at
the Academy of Medicine of Paris, when M. Velpeau said he
should claim the prize on the faith of the following case observed
by himself: 'In the month of March 1843, a barber, sixty
years of age, came under M. Velpeau's care for disease of the
prostate gland. With the exception of his prostatic disorder,
he seemed to be in excellent health, was very lively, cheerful,
full of repartee, and evidently in possession of all his faculties;
one remarkable symptom in his case being his intolerable lo-
quacity. A greater chatterer never existed, and on more than
one occasion complaints were made by the other patients of this
talkative neighbour, who allowed them rest neither night nor
day. A few days after admission this man died suddenly, and
a careful autopsy was made. On opening the cranium a
cancerous tumour was found, which had taken the place of the
two anterior lobes!' . . . M. Peter has recorded the case of
a man who fractured his skull by a fall from a horse; after
recovery from the initial stupor there succeeded a remarkable
loquacity, although after death it was found that the two frontal
lobes of the brain were reduced to a pulp. Again, Professor
Trousseau relates that in the 3rear 1825 two officers quartered
at Tours quarrelled, and satisfied their honour by a duel, as a
result of which one of them received a ball which entered at
one temple and made its exit at the other. The patient
* Darwinism Tested by Language, by Frederick I'ateman, M.D. Rivingtons,
?London. 1S77.

survived six months without any sign of lesion of articulation,
nor was there the least hesitation in "the expression of his
thoughts till the supervention of inflammation of the central
substance, which occurred shortly before his death, when it was
ascertained that the ball had traversed the two anterior lobes
at their centre." Such strong facts as these need no comment.
Dr Brown-Sequard?and there is no higher modern autho-
rity on cerebral physiology?believes that the brain acts as a
whole, and not in separate parts or organs; and Dr Daniel
Hack Tuke?a careful and impartial writer?in his work on
" The Influence of the Mind upon the Body," observes : " It is
more than probable that no amount of scientific knowledge
will ever displace the time-honoured phrases of 6 mind' and
' body.'"

Another pseudo-philosophic notion of the day which has
been gravely discussed by scientific men, is whether thought is
a vibration of the brain, as if it were quite a settled matter
that mind must be, in some way or other, a mechanical process.
M. Taine, in the Revue Philosophique for January 1877,
has an article entitled " Les Vibrations cerebrales et la Pensee,"
in which he takes an infinite deal of pains to discuss all the
pros and cons of the matter. He argues with much ingenuity,
but with a great entanglement of words. He believes that he
has made a few steps towards the solution of the mysterious
connexion between mental and cerebral phenomena; inasmuch,
however, as his arguments are for the most part speculative, it
must be admitted that the question in reality remains in statu
quo. The following passage, however, with which he concludes
his paper, we are glad to find favours the metaphysical view of
the subject: " Pour les sens et l'imagination, la sensation, la
perception, bref, la pensee, n'est qu'une vibration des cellules
cerebrales, une danse de molecules; mais la pensee n'est telle
que pour les sens et l'imagination ; en elle-meme elle est autre
chose, elle ne se definit que par ses elemens propres, et si elle
revet l'apparence physiologique, c'est qu'on la traduit dans une
langue etrangere, ou forcement, elle revet un caractere qui n'est
pas le sien."

We must not forget to include in our category of the won-
derful revelations of modern science?palaeolithic man?that
wild Orson of the caves discovered in Devon, by Mr. Pengelley,
whose announcement of the supposed discovery was received
with rapturous applause by many of his credulous audience at
the last meeting of the British Association. Although Mr.
Pengelley's assumption had only a few rubble flints to support
it, the press took it up, and it was widely circulated as an un-
doubted truth, whereas our best geologists still consider the
question unsettled.

Having thus passed in review some of the most popular
scientific hypotheses of the day, and mentioned the arguments
against them, it must, we think, he apparent to any unbiassed
enquirer, or to anyone whose intellect is not enclosed in a
pachydermatous " environment," that these theories are still in
nubibus. The supposed immutable law of evolution is so full
of flaws that it will probably soon fall into oblivion. Batliybius
has been smothered untimely in its own slime. Spontaneous
generation lias exploded; it sprang from a decayed turnip, and
l^as vanished into thin air. Palaeolithic man must still be in
a very embryotic state, as the womb of mother earth has not
yet shown, by any throes, that we are speedily to expect his
advent; and as to that extravagant notion of discerning in
matter "the promise and potency of all terrestrial life," the
faculties of man are not yet sufficiently evolved to comprehend
Jts meaning. Irrefragable arguments avail but little to check
the wild, dangerous speculations so popular at the present time.
Alas! we want a Swift, a Sydney Smith, or a Butler, to hold up
to ridicule the pseudo-philosopliy now so rife.

The new popular serials?such as the Nineteenth Century,
the Contemporary, and the Fortnightly Review?are doing a
vast deal of mischief by giving a wide circulation to per-
nicious doctrines which must necessarily lead to fatalism. It is
unworthy of journals of a high class to admit articles, for the
sake of popularity, which are opposed to religion, although the
Writers may hold a high position as men of science or learn-
ing. Surely we have heard enough of Comte and Spinoza, and
Writers of that class; and there can be no necessity to revive
their exploded systems to gratify the taste of those who have
not leisure for the stud}' necessary to discover the hollowness of
the arguments by which they are supported. It is curious to
notice the shifts to which the disciples of these schools are
driven in defence of their leaders. J. Pollock, in the February
number of the Nineteenth Century, speaking of Spinoza,
admits that " it is difficult to name anyone who ever formally
accepted his system as a whole;" he adds: " The worth of a
philosopher is to be measured by the life and strength of the
ideas he sets stirring in men's minds." Mr. Pollock has by his
own words unwittingly condemned that which it was his object
to defend. An exploded philosophy which had but few fol-
lowers cannot be said to have had ideas possessing much vitality,
though they might have had an ephemeral strength like that
wbicli produced the terrible energy of the encyclopedists.
Another article in the Nineteenth Century, from which neither
pleasure nor profit can be derived, was from the pen of Professor
Clifford, on " Cosmic Emotion," and is one of the most in-
comprehensible specimens of pseudo-philosophy that has ever
come under our notice.

There is another periodical, entitled Mind, especially
devoted to the discussion of philosophical subjects, the greater
part of them having a materialistic bias. The title is singularly
anomalous, as the object of the publication is evidently to
ignore mind, and exalt matter; fortunately for the public it is
so full of learned dulness that it can attract but few readers.
The arrogance and daring presumption of some scientific men
is almost beyond belief. This is what Helmholtz, professor of
physiology at Heidelberg, says respecting the human eye:?
" Now, it is not too much to say that if an optician wanted
to sell me an instrument which had all these defects, I should
think myself quite justified in blaming his carelessness in the
strongest terms, and giving him back his instrument."* It is
doubly unfortunate that so accomplished a physiologist as
Helmholtz, who has in his lectures described the wonderful
functions of the eye in glowing terms, should have made the
above unqualified remarks, as they have been used by sceptics
as arguments in favour of infidelity.

John Stuart Mill deemed it possible that science might
one day accomplish the making of a man.f A writer in
the Standard, some time since, in commenting on this im-
possibility, observes: " Mr. Mill, indeed, goes so far as
to suggest that science may in time discover how to make men.
As that happy consummation would realise the aspiration of
Euripides, and dispense with the necessity for women, we
will not undertake to say what might happen in such a case.
Men, we suppose, in that event would be made to order, and
there would be no necessity for the influence of religion in the
world." The formula would probably be after this fashion.
Take of sea slime and infusion of turnips equal parts, evaporate
the mixture at a proper temperature until it is reduced to the
requisite consistence. Mould it into the shape of a man, and
imbue him with sufficient physical force to produce sensation,
perception, consciousness, and thought.

In the Journal of Psychological Medicine for April 1877,
I asked, with reference to Herbert Spencer, Gr. II. Lewes, and
other writers of this class, " What have these writers done,
morally or intellectually for the cause of truth ? " A leading
article in the Medical Press for December 26, 1877, referring
to Darwin, Hackel, Huxley, Herbert Spencer, and Dr.
Maudsley, says, in my very words, it has been asked, " What

* Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects, by H. Helmholtz. Translated by E.
Atkinson, with an introduction by Professor Tyndall. London, Longmans, 1873.
f Vide Nature &c., by John Stuart Mill. London, Longman & Co., 1874.
Page 182.

have these writers done, morally or intellectually, for the cause
of truth ? " The writer's answer is : " They have discovered
to the human intellect a new vista of philosophic thought.
They have discovered the wonderful simplicity of those forces
which have eventuated in the building up of the animal world."
This yet remains to be proved. We will tell him what some of
them have discovered. Huxley discovered Bathybius; Dr.
Bastian, spontaneous generation ; Tyndall, atomism ; and Her-
bert Spencer invented a novel and charming phraseology for
explaining the theory of evolution. We were for some time
at a loss to discover what great moral or intellectual boon Dr.
Maudsley(a confessed materialist and evolutionist) had conferred
on mankind, until we recollected the extraordinary suggestion
which he made in his address as President, at the Annual
Meeting of the Medico-Pyschological Association, August 3,
J871, when he spoke of the advantage of a man's marrying
into an insane family, on the ground that great wits to mad-
ness often are allied. These are his words: " If, then, one
man of genius were produced at the cost of one thousand?nay,
at the cost of fifty thousand insane persons, the result might
be a sufficient compensation for the terrible cost. Are we not
apt to think too much of the numbers, and too little of the
value of individuals ? " Much has been said of late respecting
the supposed increase of insanity. The cause is now clear.
People have been carrying out Dr Maudsley's theory, and have
been marrying into insane families in the hope of begetting a
genius.

The writer of the leader in the Medical Press, from whom
We have already quoted, after holding up to admiration the
believers in Darwin, concludes oddly enough with the following
apology for the theory itself: " If, on the other hand, the
views of Darwin and his followers are still regarded by many as
questionable and visionary, it is because of the difficulty of
putting them to the test of experiment and inductive reason-
ing, and of obtaining sufficient evidence to refute the more
serious objections that have been raised against them. Ex-
actly so. This is what we have contended for, and if evolu-
tionists have no better advocates than this, they may well say
deliver us from our friends.
