The St. Clement's Asylum at Venice
===================================

113
\/ '
Art x.?.

We have received from the Medical Director of the " Frenocomio
Centrale Femminile di S. Clemente" (the Central Lunatic
Asylum for Women of St. Clement), near Venice, some inte-
resting statistical accounts of the progress of this excellent
institution during the three years 1874 to 1876. Our space
does not permit us here to reproduce the details of these
valuable accounts; suffice it to say, that in this Asylum the
usual number of patients is about GOO, and that, upon an
average in the course of a year, some 100 or 120 patients are
discharged cured. We think, however, that the following short
description of the Asylum will interest our readers:?

The Asylum of St. Clement is situated upon one of the
islands in the " laguna viva," about a mile and a half distant
from the Piazzetta by the Ducal Palace. The colossal buildings
of which it is formed were purchased by the authorities of the
Venetian Province for the sum of 3,000,000 francs (?120,000).
For the interior arrangement of the Asylum the celebrated Lunatic
Asylum at Vienna served as a pattern. Altogether there are five
different divisions in the building. Four of these are deter-
mined by the nature of the insanity from which the patients
suffer, and occupy the main buildings; they are the following,
viz.: one for epileptics, one for excited patients, one for noisy
but otherwise harmless patients, and one for so-called " dirty"
cases. The inmates of all these divisions are indigent, and
differ in this from the fifth division, which contains patients
better situated in a pecuniary sense. The bedrooms, dining
halls, drawing and sitting rooms of the entire establishment are
extremely well furnished, spacious, well lighted, and provided
with every comfort. The sanitary arrangements are perfect,
and the Medical Director, Cav. Dr Cesare Vigna, spares no
trouble in making all the most modern improvements recom-
mended by progressive science. In the last few years he has
added several new apartments, as a special apartment for
patients convalescent from somatic diseases, a new central sur-
gery, a special building for servants and keepers; there is also
in course of construction a bath house for hydrotherapeutical
treatment, which will contain 19 douches of different kinds,
10 large general baths, 6 separate bath rooms, a steam bath, &c.
Dr Vigna also intends to establish a branch Asylum for the
occasional transfer of patients, and an anatomical hall for dis-
sections and microscopical observations.

Most of the patients originating from the poorer classes,
and those whose mental state permits them to work, are
regularly employed in their former occupations. These working
patients are divided into a number of classes according to the
nature of their work, and this forms a source of some income
to the Asylum (about ?200 net profit per annum). More than
half the number of workers are needlewomen, others assist in
the kitchens of the Asylum, while again others are laundresses,
weavers, artificial flower makers, plaster statuette makers, &c.;
some 20 are charwomen, and a similar number find work in
the poultry yard and garden belonging to the establishment.
I)r. Vigna, in his treatment of the various forms of mental
disease, has, we are glad to say, almost entirely abolished the
use of restraint, and only recurs to it in cases of the utmost
necessity, where patients can by no other means be prevented
from doing bodily harm to themselves or others. This is all
the more commendable since only a few years ago the frequent
use of the " strait waistcoat " and " force chair " was common
all over Italy?indeed, over the whole of the South of Europe?
and is, we believe, still the order of the day in the Asylums of
Spain, Portugal, and the Ottoman Empire. Most of the
attendants and keepers at St. Clement's Asylum are Sisters of
Mercy, and the quiet and unassuming way in which they perform
their often unenviable duties, the patience they show to even
the most trying patients, and the conscientiousness with which
they execute all orders given to them by the medical officers,
are spoken of in the highest terms of praise by Dr Vigna.
The Asylum of St. Clement's has one particular advantage over
other establishments of the kind, which it obtains from its
peculiar local position, i.e. the almost total absence of all
chances for the escape of the patients. The site it occupies is,
as previously stated, an island, about a quarter of a mile in cir-
cumference, with only one point of approach for barques and
gondolas. The whole of the island is surrounded by a wall
8 feet in height, and for additional safety the 900 large windows
of the establishment are all provided with iron railings, which,
however, by their elegant shape, preclude all ideas of imprison-
ment or seclusion. The views from most of these windows are
particularly charming, comprising the fine marine scenery round
Venice, the glorious panorama ot the city itself, with its fine
palaces, domes, and steeples, the pleasant "Public Park," and
the well-known sea-bathing village called " 11 Lido "; while in
the other direction an extensive view of the lagoons is obtained,
with the steeples of Malamocco, Pellestrina, and Chioggia, and
the Euganeian Mountains (near Padua) in the distance. These
views can also be enjoyed from the gardens of the establishment,
numerous stone steps in the enclosing wall permitting the
patients to look over it. Altogether the Asylum of St.

Clement is one of the best establishments of the kind, not
only on the whole continent, but in the world, with regard to
its interior sanitary and administrative arrangements as well as
with regard to its pleasant and healthy situation, and, most
important of all, the general efficiency of its Medical Director,
officers, and attendants, from whom we received the greatest
courtesy and attention during our visit.
