Mental Welfare and the Endocrine Organs
========================================

:Author: Ivo Geikie Cobb, M.D., M.R.C.S.
Author of " The Organs of Internal Secretion" Aids to Organotherapy," etc.
Introduction.

It is only in recent years that our knowledge of those small bodies which
are known as the Endocrine glands has been sufficient to be of any real practical
value to the physician. We are still, moreover, only on the threshold of ^the
secrets which these bodies contain; but so fascinating is the study of the ductiess
glands and their role in the psycho-physical mechanism of the individual, that
We may be forgiven for discussing' in some detail their functions and structure.
The gaps in our knowledge are still so wide that we have perforce often to
content ourselves with speculation where exactitude should be possible. But
it is daily becoming easier to fit fresh pieces in the puzzle, and it gradually
becomes plainer that the part played by these organs is of the first importance
to bodily health and mental efficiency. Furthermore, it behoves us all to realise
that the future holds out hope that the treatment of many disorders of mind and
body will be materially helped by the use of preparations manufactured from the
glands of animals.

Historical.
-----------
Interest was aroused among physiologists as early as the middle of the last
century in those organs of the body, which, while of definite glandular structure,
yet appeared to possess no ducts through which to deliver their secretions. 1 his
was the period in which scientific interest was aroused in this subject. But if
We go back to less enlightened days, we can trace the administration of
Preparations of animal organs down to very early times. Shakespeare's " eye
of newt and toe of frog " reminds the reader of an empericism both nasty and
Meaningless.

In 1859, a physiologist named Schiff discovered that the removal of the
thyroid led to death. Kocher's work subsequently confirmed and enlarged this
knowledge; while the work of Vassale in Italy, Gley in France, and G. R.
Murray in England, turned the attention of the scientific world to the importance
of the thyroid gland and the possibility of feeding individuals deficient in the
secretion of this gland with the thyroid of the sheep. This was the first positive
proof that a deficient thyroid could be replaced per os, and was, in fact, the
dawn of modern scientific organotherapy.

Previous to this, a physician named Brown-S?quard had published the
results of administering organic substances, more especially in senility, and
had claimed that their use warded off the onset of old age and neutralised the
decay which accompanied senility. His experiments were not generally accepted,
and to some extent, perhaps, his claims were exaggerated. Nevertheless, he is
known as the " Father of Organotherapy," and it must be conceded that he
Was the first to draw attention to the possibility of treating disease by means oi
Preparations manufactured from animals.

Many other names stand out as pioneers in this field, both as to the role
?f the ductless glands and as to their efficacy in treatment. Enough has been
said, however, to indicate in general terms how the comparatively recent develop-
ment of this subject has revolutionised medicine and has placed in the hands of
the clinician fresh weapons with which to fight disease.

General Considerations.
------------------------

There are several glands in the body which are unprovided with ducts and
which pour their secretions directly into the blood-stream. The chief among
these are the thyroid, parathyroids, pituitary, and adrenals.

Other organs are provided with ducts through which the juice they
manufacture can reach its destination. While some?possibly many more than is
at present believed?produce both an internal secretion which is absorbed directly
into the blood-stream and an external secretion which leaves the gland by its
duct. An example of an ordinary gland is the parotid, one of the salivary
glands, which manufacture saliva which is poured into the mouth through its
duct. Whether all glands possess an internal as well as an external secretion
is a point not yet settled. Certain glands, however, are known to be so
constructed, and perhaps the best example is the pancreas, commonly known as
the " sweetbread." This gland furnishes its external digestive juice and also
possesses an internal secretion, whose function is to regulate sugar metabolism.

Any damage to the cells in the pancreas which manufacture this secretion results
in the appearance of increased amounts of sugar in the blood and sugar in the
urine?in other words, diabetes.

The production of insulin (the substance obtained from the pancreas of
animals) and its use in the treatment of diabetes, is one of the most brilliant
and epoch-making achievements in the history of the subject we are now
considering. Prior to this discovery, diabetes could be treated only by diet and
symptomatic drugs.

Other glands possessing both internal and external secretions are to be
found among the sexual organs, and probably many of the glands, such as the
liver, spleen, etc., whose work is concerned primarily with metabolism. The
presence of an internal secretion in both the male and female sexual glands is
shown by the mental and physical changes which accompany puberty, the change
of life, and extreme old age. When the boy merges into the man, the so-called
secondary sex characters " are produced by an internal secretion. The mental
development which takes place at such times is due to the sensitising or the reverse
of these secretions upon the central and sympathetic nervous systems.

Many so-called metastatic effects, i.e., changes in distant organs dependent
upon the development of some change in a disordered gland, were thought
formally to be dependent upon reflex causes. They are now known to be the
result of chemical messages, initiated by the secretions of the endocrine glands.

Individual Glands.
-------------------

The corner-stone of the Endocrine system is the thyroid. This gland is
situated across the larynx and can be felt at either side of the " Adam's apple."
It is composed of two lobes connected with each other by a central lobe or
isthmus. The secretion which this gland furnishes to the blood is of the greatest
importance to the animal economy; any disturbance of its function is followed
by changes in the general metabolism. It is as if one man at the end of a line
of soldiers is pushed on by his neighbour, who, in turn, bumps against the next
man, and so on down the line. Excess or deficiency of the thyroid hormone leads
to changes in the adrenals, to disturbance of the pituitary, parathyroids, and,
it may be, several other of the endocrine system.

Speaking in general terms, the function of the thyroid is to nourish the
skin, nails and hair; to regulate the circulation; to act (in conjunction with the
adrenals and pituitary) in the sympathetic control of the body; and (in virtue of
*ts relation with the sympathetic) to play an important r61e in the formation of
the emotional life of the body.

As we shall see in a later page, excess of thyroid secretion is
always associated with undue emotionalism. The disease variously known as
exophalmic goitre, Graves's disease, or hyperthyroidism, changes the personality
?f the sufferer to a painful degree. From a normal person, the patient becomes
excitable, irritable, and unreliable. That it is not solely due to over-action of
the thyroid will appear later in this paper; but that it is partly due to this factor
now abundantly clear.

In close anatomical proximity to the thyroid gland, there are found two
Pairs of small neighbours called the parathyroids. Originally believed to be
part of the thyroid and to consist of thyroid tissue which had become separated
from the main gland, it is now known that they are independent structures, and,
indeed, in many ways antagonistic to the thyroid secretion. Some of the early
experiments carried out on the thyroid led to conflicting results, because some
observers had removed the parathyroids, while others had left these glands
tn situ.. The results varied according to whether the entire thyro-parathyroid
had been removed, or solely the thyroid.

Removal of the parathyroids is always fatal if complete; if part only is
removed, marked changes take place in the nervous system of the animal, and
a condition known as " tetany " ensues. In some way, the parathyroids are
concerned in the calcium metabolism, and excessive loss of lime from the body
leads to the nervous symptoms encountered in tetany. It is not possible as yet
to say that a condition such as Anxiety Neurosis can be attributed to parathyroid
deficiency; or that it is relieved by the administration of extract of the parathyroids.
There are, however, instances on record in which thyroid extract has done harm
to such a case, while parathyroid extract has been beneficial.

The clinical pictures of over-action of the thyroid and under-action of the
Parathyroids have certain points in common. This would suggest an antagonism
between the two secretions, and this view is now generally he'd.

Situated at the base of the brain, enclosed in a small bony box, is a gland
known as the Pituitary. It consists of an anterior and posterior lobe and a
stalk, and its structure is partly glandular, partly nervous. Our knowledge of
this gland and its functions is of even more recent acquisition than is ^ our
acquaintance with the thyroid and the interstitial tissue of the ovary and testis.
The functions of the pituitary may be regarded from two angles, according
to whether we are considering the anterior or posterior parts.^ The anterior or
glandular portion is largely concerned with metabolism ; and it is believed that
failure of this part of the gland results in a disease characterised by obesity and
deficient development, although doubt has been cast upon this view y one
school which believes it is the posterior portion which is responsible tor pituitary
obesity.

With the space at our disposal it is impossible to do more than take a general
survey of the main glandular secretions and their functions, and we must be
excused for apparent dogmatism if we state the position briefly in order to show
that the mentality of the normal and the abnormal is dependent respectively
upon glandular efficiency or failure.

It is at least likely that the pituitary gland should be regarded as one_organ
rather than from the angle of two parts, possibly antagonistic or wide y dif ering
in their functions. The gland is one of the dynamic structures of the body. It
works in conjunction with the thyroid, gonads, and adrenals; and we shall refer
in a later section to the type which is believed to result when its secretion is
the dominant one in the endocrine hierarchy.

A few words about the thymus. This gland, which is situated in the thorax,
is active principally during- infancy and childhood, and diminishes in importance
as the sexual activities develop. In some instances it continues its activities into
adolescence and causes delay in normal development or produces a general
disturbance of the glandular balance.

The adrenal glands are two small structures found above the upper part of
each kidney. They consist of two parts, a cortex and a medulla, the functions
of which are strictly differentiated. The former is much larger than the latter
and is different histologically. It bears a close and intimate relation with the
sexual glands, and tumours of this part of the gland have been shown to be
associated with the premature development of sex.

The medulla, on the other hand, is the part of the adrenals which secretes
adrenalin. This substance, the isolation of which was carried out by Takamine,
is a remarkable and vitally important secretion; its introduction into medicine
and surgery has marked an epoch in the practical application of the internal
secretions in treatment.

What is of greater interest to us in this connection is the relation of the
adrenal glands and their functions to the nervous system, and particularly to
that part known as the sympathetic. It must be remembered that the most
primitive form in which stimuli were originated and conducted was by chemical
messengers. Nervous structures were differentiated later in the evolutionary
scale, and were evolved as the organism became more complex and its need for
rapid communication became more essential. The central nervous system furnishes
this means; the sympathetic, more closely allied in time and function to the
endocrine glands, developed pari passu with them.

The adrenal system, with its secretions, is very similar in its work to the
sympathetic nervous system. It controls the involuntary muscular system, and
in conjunction with the thyroid and pituitary, is responsible largely for the
metabolism and circulatory tone of the body. In addition to this, its activities
colour, if they do not determine, the mental type of the individual. Further, we
now know that changes in the mental outlook?the temporary states known as
" moods "?can be correlated with the undue activity or quiescence of the
sympathetic nervous system and its colleagues.

Enough has now been said to indicate that the mental life of the individual
owes much to the glands of internal secretion. Not only in the determination
of the type to which he will belong, but to the changes which will take place
from time to time in the endocrine balance, will he owe alterations in his emotional
life and in his relations to his environment.

Inter-Relation of the Ductless Glands.

There is a definite balance recognised in the endocrine hierarchy; that is to
say, one set of glands may be regarded as dynamic or positive; the opposing
glands are inhibitory or negative. Excess of thyroid secretion may be associated
with excess of the adrenals. The small neighbours of the thyroid, the para-
thyroids, are even now somewhat of an unknown quantity. That they play a
very important part in mental and bodily health, there is no doubt; but it
cannot be said that changes in the health due to these glands can be recognised
definitely, except perhaps in a very limited manner. Many attempts have been
made to neutralise the excess of one gland by the administration of an extract
Of one which may be regarded as antagonistic. One of the early examples of
these was to endeavour to neutralise excessive thyroid secretion by extracts of
the adrenal glands. It is now believed, however, that the symptoms of nervous
excitability which are seen in over-action of the thyroid are probably due more
to the adrenals than to the thyroid. All the endocrine glands are to some extent
concerned in the metabolism of the body. Laboratory tests can tell us whether
the thyroid is over-active or whether the pituitary is not doing its share of work.
The administration of an extract of the thyroid or pituitary in a suitable case
"will often work wonders. The various glands concerned in sex have been studied
with great care from the point of view of the internal secretions; and it is known
that the thyroid and pituitary, to mention two, are undoubtedly related with the
internal secretions of the gonads. The pancreas is equally in inter-relation with
these glands, and the mechanism that controls sugar utilisation in the body
varies according to the activity of both the thyroid and the pituitary. The
changes which may be seen after middle-life in both sexes have their basis in
the endocrine supplies. Equally the inter-relation of the various glands depends
upon the balance set up by their working adequately and in harmony. What
used to be called the mental faculties are unquestionably closely dependent upon
the smooth working of the endocrines. A violent mental shock is capable of
so upsetting this balance that the emotions may become disturbed for a lengthy
Period. Thus Trousseau describes a lady who was suffering great grief on the
death of her father and she suddenly felt her eyes swell and lift up her eyelids,
which was accompanied by violent palpitations and throbbing and enlargement
of the thyroid.

The Endocrines and the Emotiohs.
--------------------------------

Many such cases were seen during the war where sudden or prolonged strain
Produced a disturbance in the endocrine balance. Anyone who observed such
cases in the battle areas will agree that the group of disorders variously called
neurasthenia, shell shock, and anxiety neurosis, were very largely dependent on
this cause. The instincts which were predominant under shell fire resulted in
increase in the adrenal activity; and this gland has therefore been called the
gland of "fight or flight," because it is the gland which is called upon to activate
the reserves of the body in an emergency or crisis. The sympathetic nervous system
is the messenger of emotions. Morphologically it is in close relationship with
the adrenals, so that undue emotion is likely to produce hyperadrenia. This, in
its turn, will produce thyroid changes. One observer has shown that the adrenals
have a definite effect upon the thyroid, for it is possible to pioduce marked
histological changes in the cells of the thyroid by repeated injections of adrenalin.
Again, adrenalin will alter the metabolism of the body, and a more or less
constant disturbance of the adrenal system may lead to such changes as we may
group under the generic name of debility.

Personality and the Ductless Glands.
-------------------------------------

Dr Louis Berman published a fascinating book in 1922 entitled The
Elands Regulating Personality." His object was to show, from the purely
Physical standpoint, how the mind and its attributes depended upon the action
and inter-action of the ductless glands. The pattern of the personality, so to
speak, depends upon w'hat may be called the relative proportion of the different
?nternal secretions. Many of Dr Berman's types of personality are definitely
recognisable, and the interest of the reader is kept up by a chapter describing
some historic personages. As an example of his contentions, we may quote
from chapter nine of his book, which is called the " Backgrounds of Personality."
There is a brief review here of the methods of approach which have been adopted
towards " nerves " and nervous disorders, and the evolution of the present
knowledge on these subjects. Dr Berman describes the physical basis of the
unconscious and says : *" Another vastly important law that governs the content
of the conscious and the unconscious, and resultant behaviour is the fact that
the nerves and nerve cells of the vegetative apparatus, the nerves leading to the
viscera and the endocrine glands, like the solar plexus, are affected by stimuli
of lower value than those which arouse the brain cells. In the metaphorical
language of the old psychology, the threshold value, that is the strength or
loudness of stimulus sufficient to make itself felt or heard, is less for the vegetative
apparatus than for the brain. So we begin to glimpse why an emotion seems
to be experienced before the visceral changes that really preceded it, but pressed
their way into consciousness later. This gives us a clue to the unconscious
as the more sensitive and deeper part of the mind.

" More than that, it supplies us with a physical basis for the unconscious,
which will explain much of the observed laws of its workings. It provides a
reason for the apparent swiftness, spontaneity and unreasonableness of what is
called intuition. And it may show us a source for a good deal of the material
of dreams and dream states.

"We have said that we think and we remember, not alone with the brain,
but with the muscles, the viscera and the endocrines. So do we forget, not alone
with the brain, but with the muscles, the viscera, the endocrines and their
nerves. The utmost importance of muscle attitudes in remembering has been
established in the experimental laboratory."

In marked disorders of the endocrines it can often be said which gland is
mainly disturbed. Let us consider for a moment one or two of the types seen
and recognised as due to a disordered endocrine balance. Most people are
familiar with the cretin; this is a child suffering from dimunition or absence of
the thyroid secretion. Such a child is small, wizened, prematurely senile, and
in the complete type an idiot. The analagous picture seen when thyroid deficiency
occurs in later life produces a type known as myzoedema. Such people are fat,
slow, dull, with a dry skin, sunken eyes and other symptoms dependent upon
absence of the dynamic effect of the thyroid secretion. The type is easily
recognisable by medical men; the restoration to normal of such an individual
when thyroid extract is administered is one of the miracles of modern science.
At the opposite pole personalities are encountered, the most striking feature
of which is an excess of thyroid secretion ; perhaps it would be more accurate
to say in excess of the needs of the body. Such a type is the exact opposite of
the myxedematous subject; instead of being heavy, fat and lethargic, such an
individual will be lively, emotional and unreasonable. The French have spoken
of this type as " the syndrome of persistent juvenilityIn between these two
extremes there is a range of almost indefinite nature in which the thyroid may
be slightly in excess or slightly deficient.

It is interesting to try and estimate what part the thyroid is playing in the
personality of any one individual. There are now certain laboratory tests
depending upon the rate of wear and tear in the body, and these indicate, although
not necessarily arbitrarily, the condition of the thyroid apparatus.
I think it may be said that the thyroid stands out pre-eminently in considering
personality and the endocrines. It may be that as our knowledge progresses
and we know more about the part which others of the endocrine hierarchy play,
* pp, 194-195.

that the thyroid will sink to a lower level in this scheme. At present, however,
we can be more definite in regard to this gland than we can to any other ol the
endocrine organs. The following are a few brief points in connection with the
influence of other glands on the personality.

Ihe adrenal personality is a type of individual dominated by his adrenal
gland. According to Dr Berman, these types are normal individuals, enjoying
good health and comfortably adapted to their environment. The skin is always
more or less pigmented, and areas of darker nature than the surrounding skin
are said to be related to past illnesses.

In Addison's disease, where there is deficiency of the adrenal secretion, the
general bronzing of the skin is found in like manner. It is presumed that the
dark areas seen in the adrenal type point to past deficiencies. The adienal
personality is a dark-skinned type with thick, coarse and dry hair, the canine
teeth are well marked, the line of the hair on the forehead is low, and such
People do not, as a rule, run to fat. Mentally, it is believed that an individual
whose adrenals are pre-eminent, is a good fig'hter, persevering, impeiious,
stubborn, and a highly intelligent being. 1 he two pituitary types can^ be
summarised as follows : When the gland is adequate and dominant, there is a
large spare frame, eyes wide apart, broad face, large teeth, square-featured
jaws, an aggressive, calculating, able character. When the gland is not
dominant, small delicate skeleton, adipose and weak muscles, dry, flabby but
smooth skin, mentally sluggish, dull and apathetic.

Much that we have written here is, of course, hypothetical, but it is becoming
increasingly clear that the types of personality can be correlated to what has
been called the endocrine pattern. In any case, it is interesting to try and
estimate (even though at present we lack the necessary data to be dogmatic)
how our minds depend upon the physical strata. Before leaving this subject,
we might just mention how interesting it is to trace the effect of past illnesses
uPon the individual's endocrine glands. The thyroid deficiency, for example, may
commence after an acute childish infection such as measles, scarlet fever, and
influenza. On the other hand, it is believed that over-action of this gland is
always due to the presence of irritating poisons somewhere or other in the body,
and medical science has laid it down in the treatment of such cases that all
septic or toxic sources must be eradicated.

The Theory of Organotherapy.
-----------------------------

The brilliant results which followed tne administration of thyroid substance
to cretins and the subjects of myxoedema led to the attempt to supply to the
?rganism any secretion presumed to be missing. Ihus, in a case showing
symptoms of a failing supply of the adrenal hormone, adrenal substance was
administered; to a patient suffering from hypo-pituitarism, extract oi the pituitary
was given; and to an individual deficient in the internal secretion of the sexual
glands, the appropriate remedy was prescribed. In many cases, however, the
brilliant results anticipated failed to materialise, possibly because the extiact
Was destroyed in the stomach or otherwise interfered with by the process of
digestion. In some instances there can be no doubt that preparations manu-
actured from endocrine organs other than the thyroid, are active and have a
definite effect on the individual.

This use of organotherapy?the substitutive?is not the only method
employed. Some of the secretions are employed for their pharmacological effect,
lust as drugs are so utilised. Chief among these are adrenalin and pituitrin.
?th of these substances have found a very definite place in surgery, a place,
moreover, that could scarcely be filled by any other substance.

Still another approach to the therapeutic side of the endocrines is afforded
by the attempt to balance the over-action of one g-land by the administration of
an antagonistic secretion. This has already been referred to by quoting- the
prescription of adrenal substance in pver-action of the thyroid. Attempts have
likewise been made to balance over-action of the adrenals by the exhibition of
pancreatic substance.

There is not much to be said in favour of either of these examples, but they
are quoted to show the lines along which experiments have been made.
Combinations of glandular substances have been very popular of late years,
and have been dubbed " shot-gun preparations." At first sight these may
appear unscientific and illegitimate. But it must be remembered that it is very
difficult to diagnose accurately in practice the actual gland which must be
indicted, whatever it may be in theory. It is better to use a " mitrailleuse "
than attempt no alleviation.

Finally, we must realise that we are only on the fringe of this subject. As
far as we have got, the achievements are considerable. The future seems to
promise well; and it may be that to endocrinology?and its therapeutic companion,
organotherapy?we shall look for the rectifying of many of the disorders met
with in civilised life, and for the neutralising of many of the abnormal states,
both of mind and body.
