Fatherless Children
=====================

A Contribution to the Understanding 01 their Needs. New Lducation bellowship Monograph, No. 2. Obtainable from N.E.F.,
50 Gloucester Place, London, W.l. Is. 6d.

Here in a collection of three essays (Fatherless Children
by Susan Isaacs, The Bereaved Wife, by Joan Riviere,
What the Father means to a Child, by Ella Freeman
Sharpe), is a beautiful refutation of the common indictment that psychologists think only in terms of mother
functions and not of father functions when they consider
the problem of bringing up children. Having read the
pamphlet once it should be re-read but with the
essays in reverse order. For in spite of its title (which is
no misnomer) this is much more than an essay on Fatherless Children. It is primarily an account of what a
man means to his children and to his wife, and it will be
of great help to all those still fortunate enough to have
a complete family and who are concerned about its
upbringing.

Miss Sharpe's contribution is a beautifully lucid and
complete account of the father's influence in encouraging
and consolidating the masculine qualities of his son, and
she shows also how in becoming the focus of his daughter's
early feminine impulses his is the basic influence in her
development towards successful wifehood and motherhood. This essay alone, should be of great value to
all parents.

Mrs. Riviere deals with the effect on a woman of being
deprived of her husband, the economic and social
anxieties she faces and above all, the deep anxiety of
loss of personal worth. The frequent fear which may
beset her, of being responsible for her loss or of having .
deserved it, and the bitterness of deprivation which may
result in her giving either too little or too much feeling
to her children is also described, and the attention is
called to the possibility that she may seek consolation
and support by handing herself over to a mother or
mother-in-law or by excessive activity outside the home.
Mrs. Isaacs' essay is best read with the two others
clearly in mind. The orphaned child's problem involves
the facing both of his own loss with the pain and anxiety
involved, and of the effect on his mother which arouses
strong childish endeavours to compensate her. There
are excellent sections on how the mother can help her
children in their common grief without usurping or
denying their right to proper feeling, and on the role of
the school in understanding and directing the child's
special needs at this time.

In these days families are being deprived of their menfolk for many reasons including death, divorce and
enforced separation, and this monograph is an excellent
and helpful one in all such situations. But above all,
it should be recommended to parents eager for a clear
account of the father's role in family life. After reading
it no doubt can be left as to the far reaching effects of
the parents' relations to each other on the child's view
of life and of the many and subtle ways in which children
respond to this relationship and later absorb their
attitudes into their own adult problems.
R.T.
