Aviation Neuropsychiatry
===========================

:Author:  R. N. Ironside, M.B->
F.R.C.P., and I. R. C. Batchelor, M.B. Livingstone.
8s. 6d.

The authors have attempted to give a picture of the
more common problems met with in R.A.F. Neuropsychiatry. The contents of this book are divided into
three parts. Part I is concerned with flying and the
normal individual ; Part II with the neuropsychiatry
examination of patients who have broken down ; and
Part III with neuropsychiatric disorders in Aviators.
The latter is the longest section of the book and includes
chapters on the etiology of neurotic reactions in relation
to flying ; the various psychological reaction types ;
sickness in the air ; disturbances of consciousness in
the air ; neurotic visual disorders ; migraine and other
types of headache ; unclassified nervous disorders ;
head injuries and prognosis for flying after injuries and
diseases of the nervous system.

It is obvious that the authors have attempted to cover
a very wide field and some of the possible criticisms may
be considered to result from the attempt to compress the
extensive subject matter into the confines of 155 pages.
For example, their brief remarks on special aptitude
tests in relation to selection may be misleading. The
authors, furthermore, were handicapped by the fact
that the book was written during overseas service and
they had no access to current literature ; consequently
they were unable to make use of the considerable amount
of research which has been carried out on these problems
during the recent war.

Despite the self-imposed and unavoidable handicaps,
the authors have written a very readable and interesting
book. They show very clearly that although no mental
illness is peculiar to flying personnel, a knowledge on
the part of the psychiatrist of flying conditions is essential;
and many of their case records bring out how the
technical conditions have affected psychological reactions.
The 43 Case Records are of great interest although in
some instances the obvious necessity for curtailment
must make the reader regret more than ever the paper
shortage which necessitated it.

The book is, to a great extent, concerned with
psychological illness in response to operational flying
in war and the authors, having been in an operational
area, were specially well situated to make their observations. Their brief account about psycho-somatic
disorders in such a setting could well have been
elaborated, if circumstances had permitted. The
chapter on neurotic visual disorders is specially valuable.
This book could hardly have been written earlier in the
war ; it has, however, owing to the cessation of hostilities, necessarily lost some of its topical interest.
J.F.
