Psychology of Women
=====================

Vol. I. Girlhood. 
:Author:Helene
Deutsch, M.D. William Heinemann Ltd. Medical
Books. 21s.

Throughout her career as a psycho-analyst, Helene
Deutsch has been interested in the specific factors of
female psychology and has written various papers
on the subject. In this book the author makes the
attempt to give a full picture of the emotional development of girls from prepuberty onwards. She illustrates
her contentions by a rich case material, gained in part
by the psycho-analytical method, in part taken from
case histories of social agencies or out-patient departments; in addition to this she uses the analysis of works
of fiction to prove her views.

In contradiction to the usual meaning of the term
prepuberty, the author describes this phase of development as occurring between the ages of 10-12, before the
influence of adolescence makes itself felt. During this
phase the girl's ego becomes active in an attempt to
master reality. There is a thrust away from the dependence on the mother, tomboyishness in some girls, exaggerated feminity in others ; identifications with girl
friends are formed which lead to very intensive, but not
always lasting friendships. Sex activities confine themselves as a rule to curiosity, often shared with the gir'
friend. The author maintains that the motive force
in this phase is the inherent urge to the ego to mature.
Marked bi-sexual tendencies are characteristic of early
puberty, owing to a revival of the childhood phase in
which there is a wavering in the choice between the two
Parents. Strong hetero-sexual tendencies arise in
Puberty and adolescence and are expressed very early in
three cornered relationships, the brother of a friend
being the love object. Very often the contact with
the beloved person who fills the girl's day dreams is
strictly avoided, as the realization of sexual urges seems
still too dangerous. There is an increase of defence
Mechanisms against sexual urges and a tendency to
sublimation much greater than in the adolescent boy.
The author describes the unconscious motivation of
attitudes in puberty, laying stress on the great ease with
which identifications are being formed. This factor
Plays a role in the greater " intuition " of women as
c?mpared with men.

. In the chapter on menstruation, the author stresses the
importance of the subjective events connected with the
hrst menstruation as they have the tendency to recur
?t every other menstruation. The fears and irrational
ideas connected with this physiological onset of puberty
are discussed and also the tendency to falsify later on,
?vents relating to the first menstruation. Tn the following chapters, what the author calls the " feminine core "
ls closely investigated. Strong narcissistic tendencies
aevelop as a result of a conflict between sexual instincts
and the self-preservation power of the Ego. Woman's
Passivity is understood in the light of biology and the
act that in early childhood the organ of receptivity is
n?t known to the little girl; she can therefore not gratify
thf ^*citement, and this leads to what the author calls
jle "genital trauma" in the girl. The development
masochistic tendencies is thought to be connected
^th the impossibility for the girl to live out her aggres'Ve tendencies, which therefore are turned against
ne self. All these factors lead to one of the main
j "aracteristics of female psychology?to an elaboration
n Phantasy of erotic tendencies and a preparedness for
sublimation.

'n the chapter on the masculinity complex, it is shown
t^^ngst other things that active tendencies may lead
the best type of motherliness and only in some specific
especially of intellectual women, are envy and
Citation of men in the foreground.

Homosexuality seems often to be due not to a primary
t ^.n8th of masculine tendencies but to a deep fear of
s, . Ing over the feminine role in a hetero-sexual relation'P; and a subsequent regression to the early dependence
?nthe mother.

in the last chapter the author discusses social trends
relationship to her views oh female psychology.
s u is difficult to do justice to the book in a short
^ftimary ; its most positive aspect is certainly the
sterly description and intuitive perception of clinical
f0 e/"ial, which will prove to be valuable and instructive
the psychiatrist as well as social workers and teachers.
CqAs far as the author's theoretical deductions are
jt ncerned, one would wish for greater clarity even if
reff^61"6 at the cost of intuitive powers. Very little
otuerence is made throughout the book to the work of
betCr auth?rs> ar"d very rarely is there a clear distinction
and nfn ?enera"y accepted psycho-analytical theory
* those ideas which the author considers to be her own.
the excePtion to this is the author's controversy with
Su accePted theory of penis envy. Although the author
fact tS 'nterest'ng alternatives in explaining certain
are ?rS ^emale psychology, her theoretical assumptions
stanr0t Very convincing and would have to be sub?p ^ated much more systematically, including factors
acce y childhood development, before they could be
Pted as an alternative theoretical possibility.
Kate Friedlander.
