Child Victims of the War An International Conference
=====================================================

MENTAL HEALTH It

:Author:  Robina S. Addis
Regional Representative [Region 12~\ Provisional National Council for Mental Health
The Zurich international conference on the
care of child victims of the war held in September,
iy45, a few months after the cessation of hostilities,
jyas at once an opportunity and a challenge. Beside
he creature sufferings of those deprived of the
?are means of existence?hungry, without shelter,
'^adequately clothed?there were known to be
nousands of children whose framework of life had
Deen shattered.

At last such a conference would give the opportunity for expressing the needs of the children in
each country. It would also challenge every nation
0 strain its energies towards recovery within its own
rentiers and to give what assistance it could elsewhere. Even the countries devastated by fighting
?r paralysed by enemy occupation might have
?mething to offer. Only by co-operation would
?.e Possible to alleviate the mass of suffering.

The care of the homeless, restoration of family
"e> education in its widest sense,?these problems
j^ust be tackled after immediate first-aid remedies
nave been given. Plans must be made now, or it
be too late.

Organization by the Swiss
--------------------------
Since 1940 the Swiss have received each year,
some 40,000 child victims of the War within their
?rders. As neutrals, they have been able to
Preserve contact with other countries, and so are
j^ell aware of the miseries throughout Europe.
T^nowledge ?f these appalling conditions, combined
j lth gratitude for having escaped a similar fate,
impels them to offer help. Accordingly, a
S^jnmittee of specialists connected with work for
of .en' was f?rmed, with Professor Hanselmann
j Zurich University as President. Dr Forel and
other psychiatrists, psychologists, educationalists
nd representatives of social work organizations
ere also members. Piaget gave his name, but
fortunately was in London at the time.

This Committee tried to make contact with key
Persons in the different countries to select suitable
epresentatives, and these were offered three weeks'
ospitality in Switzerland for the duration of the
onference. Funds were raised for this by gifts
nd many free billets were provided. Sessions
ere held in the Zurich Polytechnic and the delegates
ere divided into 5 sections :?Social, Medicosychological, Legal, Care of Homeless Children,
ultural and Educational. We met daily for
PaPers and discussion and each evening there was
Public lecture.

The third week was spent visiting institutions
onnected with child care. Interest lay chiefly in
e manner of running these, rather than in any
striking new principle, but Observation Centres in
connection with child psychiatric clinics, and a
Training Home for delinquent young men, ages
18-30 years, appeared to offer fresh ideas. Everywhere emphasis on long hours of work, both
manual and mental, seemed "perhaps a national
characteristic rather than a special theory applied
to the training of the maladjusted. (The Zurich
Gymnasium with its 800 girls, ages 12-19 years,
starts work daily at 7.15 a.m.)

Emotional Background
----------------------
An international meeting so soon after a world
war must have a profound effect on each of the
participants. 200 delegates from 20 nations met
together for the first time in free intercourse after
6 years of isolation from such contacts. They
felt as if they had burst their bonds and could join
in planning for the future. A freeing of the spirit
released new energy and new hope.

The Swiss, who had planned the Conference with
great courage and great hope, and were our
generous hosts in every detail as well as in broad
hospitality, have suffered in spirit during the War.
Not only was there the constant strain of standing
at defence on their frontiers, but inability to follow
their sympathies and act against the evil they saw,
had for them its own anguish. Zurich is in German
Switzerland with many links over the frontier,
and yet the atmosphere here is overwhelmingly
pro-British. They were anxious about the attitude
of the Allies towards themselves.

To travel on the continent again was, for most
of us, an experience of acute emotions. Seeing
for ourselves, meeting the people whose history we
had followed, and whose fate was bound up with
ours, had its poignant moments. Everywhere
there were gaps in knowledge of the domestic life
of other nations. We could not know the dayto-day existence in an occupied country, and there
seemed little understanding of the still effective
privations in Britain. On journeys, over meals,
by chance words, we gradually learned some of the
personal drama.

Perhaps most striking, was to discover that the
Resistance Movements had led to a new order of
chivalry. Ideals of dedication and service have
not only raised its members to incredible heights
of courage, persistence and brotherhood, but have
to some extent, made them an order apart. This
fact must be faced in any scheme for re-organizing
a nation, and in particular for using the services
of emigres, however devoted has been their work
in exile.

Delegates from occupied countries had come
through much tribulation. The Poles arrived
after a journey lasting eight days, and their
appearance aroused much pity. They looked worn
and strained and had had to borrow clothing to
fit themselves out for the visit. One young woman
had, tattooed on her arm, her number in the
concentration camp. For all the people from
devastated countries, balance seemed precarious.
A slight upset or reference to some difficulty would
cause a complete change of expression and a sudden
emotional violence. It seemed as if their belief in
the general stability of the society had been destroyed
and a momentary check appeared to them, the end
of all security.

A typical example can be given from the reactions of some of the delegates to the " cordon
sanitaire " measures at the frontier. We had been
able to submit with amused interest to the long
delays in filling up forms and finally spraying with
D.D.T. Not so some of the visitors from countries
where they had suffered most. One delegate
refused with violence and declared he would rather
return to a concentration camp than endure this
insult to his person. The refugees from all countries
also presented this emotional instability and the
Jews in particular seemed to feel there was no more
security.

The Resolutions
---------------
There could be no dispute of the urgent necessity
for' first-aid measures to preserve life and restore
health, and the most the Conference could hope
to do was to mobilize voluntary aid and goodwill
towards renewed efforts and particularly towards
co-operation and to stimulate action by governments. Our object, then was to work out a long
term policy, the principles on which the real
welfare of the child could be built. It was wisely
decided that this could best be done by strengthening
existing machinery and above all, by exchange of
ideas, material and workers, and by helping each
other.

The Resolutions sum up the general discussion
and opinion, and were agreed without dispute of
principle, except on the question of naturalization
of refugees, in which a majority vote threw out the
suggestion that it should be compulsory for governments to offer citizenship to children in their care.
(The Legal Section, however, expressed a hope
that States would take this step.) The suggestion
of state responsibility for all children deprived
of their families seemed to me, to need further
definition and safe-guards.

Besides protecting the legal position of the
stateless and abandoned child, it is clearly expressed
that provision should be made on a family pattern.
It was realized that different forms of care would
have to be used to meet the vast numbers involved,
but decision as to placement should be based on
the needs of the individual child. Where necessary,
a full medico-psychological and social investigation
should be made, to decide on particular needs, each
child was to be treated as an individual. Such
principles are in accordance with informed opinions
in this country and we are still trying to arrange
that it can be carried into practice. When it is
realized that these ideas were unanimously accepted
by representatives from 20 different countries, our
own efforts may be stimulated.

Such recommendations as " The improvement
of the legal status of all illegitimate children " stand
out against a dark background. The problem of
the illegitimate child of German paternity looms
large in the occupied countries and amongst
deported peoples. Emotions run high and a
decision of repudiation might be made in the first
revulsion of feeling. But a broader humanity?
which sees the future of the world in the new
generation and knows that education is more than
teaching, and derives its force from a whole cultural
background, may hesitate to condemn thousands
to ostracism. We know what comes of sewing
dragon's teeth.

International Co-operation
--------------------------
Besides begging those who had to share with
those who had not, suggestions were made for
improved mutual aid between countries. Some of
the occupied countries still had trained staff, though
they were bereft of material for carrying out their
teaching or treatment. Other nations might
provide books (a prime need) or other goods.

Improved transport and exchange could work
wonders, were resources pooled. It was felt that
the various organizations for welfare and education
only needed to draw together again. The existing
international bodies concerned with child psychiatry,
children's courts, youth movements and education
should be given every facility for co-operation.
In addition the exchange of ideas and of workers
in the social work field should be promoted, and
" an academy of thinkers " founded, to raise the
standards of education.

A Central Registry for the tracing of children
and their relatives should be formed and Switzerland
might well provide the necessary clearing-house.
All these measures would strengthen the links
between countries and help persons of goodwill to
unite their efforts, which unaided, cannot be
effective. On such co-operation between individuals
alone can satisfactory government policy be based.

It was re-assuring to learn how much of the
machinery for education and child welfare work
remains intact. Even in occupied countries, some
trained staff were miraculously able to carry on
their work, and are now eager to continue and to
extend their usefulness. Even the present acute
shortage of materials of all kinds need not daunt
us, as this might be speedily remedied, whereas
trained experts, as we know to our cost, require
long preparation.

At the final congress, Dr Bovet (Lausanne), the
stimulating chairman of our Medico-Psychological
Section, made a moving speech on what we should
take away from the Conference. Resolutions,
papers, even memories of discussion and friendly
contacts would avail nothing for the cause which
1 had brought us together, unless we were inspired
by the ideal of the child itself. It might be some
Particular loved child which stood for each of us as
a symbol, or indeed the image of our own lost
childhood. The difficulties and dangers of the
World could be overcome only by the spirit.

Whether it was Professor Wallon (Paris) speaking
with the broadest humanity on the development of
Personality, or Minna Specht, a small and tragic
figure, calling for the re-education of the youth of
her native Germany, or Col. Wasburne (U.S.A.)
telling of the miracles of improvisation which have
started a new education in Italy, there seemed a
belief rising above the horrors of War which
restored to man, the powers of the spirit.

The Swiss stated that they had offered a platform
for this Conference and " remained our servants ".
They had no wish to perpetuate the Committee
but would keep open a clearing house for comments
and suggestions arising from the Conference, and
Would welcome practical plans to which they could
subscribe. It was felt that they would like to share
*n the experience of reconstruction, and would be
disappointed if merely material aid, which they
have already given generously, were demanded.

Official Representations
------------------------
Many delegates, such as the Belgians, came
officially representing their governments. The
Italian Minister of Education himself attended
and the French Government is said to have sent a
telegram accepting in principle the Resolutions
Passed by the Conference. We British delegates
had no official mandate and came as individual
^embers, each representing different interests.*
Not all stayed the course, and some were able to
attend for only a few days. We had had no opportunity for discussion beforehand, and so did not
Present a common policy as did, for instance, the
^elgians. M. le Juge Berthelot definitely spoke for
his Government and he and his compatriots voted
en bloc. At the final passing of the Resolutions,
We were grouped in nations and, for the first time,
had a difficult meeting.

Conference Policy
------------------
Though nationalization of policy seems unsuitable
a Conference of our type, it would have been
better had the British had discussion before coming
and worked out their special contributions. So
frequently were we asked what Britain thought or
^as doing about some subject, that we needed to
have our minds clear, and to direct our energies
aniongst all the many claims for attention. Where
every nation, especially the Swiss, looked to us for
opinion, if not a lead, it was a heavy responsibility. French members were particularly touching
in their eagerness to know our attitudes about many
things, and to thank our country.

Dr Dicks in his talk on re-education in Germany,
spoke of the apparent disappearance of Nazism
and substitution of admiration for the conquerors.
He based this on the psychological need of the people
for a father?identification which led to such
disastrous results under the Nazis. He pointed
out its dangers, unless a change is affected in the
cultural background as well as in education. But
this present reaction gives us a potent opportunity
for wise leadership, and this moment, once lost,
might never be recaptured. All were agreed that
for the peace of the world, there must be a change
of heart in Germany. If we can understand and
seize the opportunity, we may yet help to save
humanity.

A profound effect was caused by the speech of
Major Daily, U.S.A., in the first week, when the
devastated nations were still pouring out their stories
(and we had to let them work through this phase
with noticeably better results in the next week).
He gave a brief statement on his work as public
health doctor in Vienna where, though food is now
adequate, sanitary conditions are still so appalling
that, in July 1945, 27 per cent, of all the children
died. Unless we could give immediate physical
help in Austria and Germany, there would be no
children there for whom to plan the future.
Not much was said at the time, but the whole
congress as it warmed and became more infused
with broad ideals beyond the frontiers, which had
limited us so long, accepted implicitly, that all
children, without distinction of nationality, were
the victims of War for whom we planned.

Resolutions
-----------
The following are some of the points of special
interest dealt with in the Resolutions passed at the
Conference.

Family Units:
-------------
The family is the natural setting for the child. Where
this is lacking, individual environment together with close
personal relationships must be provided. For this
reason, units should be kept small (15-30) and camps
should be used only temporarily. Foster-home placement is advocated or Homes arranged on a family
pattern.

Child Guidance Principles :
Each child should be treated as an individual and his
needs studied. A team of specialists should be available
for investigation of his needs and where necessary, for
his re-education.
Training of Staffs:
All those who have charge of children, or educate or
treat them require special understanding of child development. Teachers should be carefully selected and have
? Britain was represented by the following delegates : Lady Allen of Hurtwood (Nursery Schools Association), Dr.
(B rlWrence (National Froebel Foundation), Miss M. Payne (St. Christopher's Nursery Training School), Col. Dicks
0flpSh Army, Psychiatrist) Prof. Oeser, Kenneth Lindsay, M.P., Dr J. A. Lauwerys (Conference of Allied Ministers
J Education), Miss R. S. Addis (Provisional National Council).
appropriate training. Each member of the staff of a
Medico-Psychological Clinic needs " special paedagogical training, appropriate to his function in addition
to his basic training

Practical courses for staffs of Children's Homes are
advocated and it is suggested that workers with practical
experience should be given facilities to complete their
theoretical training to obtain a diploma, qualifying for
professional work. Students might be accepted for
training from abroad and Exchange of staff and ideas
between countries be encouraged.

Children's Courts :

Special Magistrates and procedure should deal with
the cases of children and juveniles and there should be an
international Children's Code. Corrective measures
should be educational and variable according to the
child's progress.

Stateless Children :

All countries should accept a proportion of stateless
children and it is hoped that when they obtain their
majority, they will be allowed a free choice of nationalityInternational Co-operation :

Existing machinery should be strengthened and
utilized rather than new organization set up. A Central
Registry for tracing missing persons, and " Carnets
Medico-Psychologiques " to record results of special
investigation (with proper safeguards to preserve them
as confidential) would help to co-ordinate efforts towards
rehabilitation.

The existing international bodies for Child Psychiatry,
Children's Magistrates, Education and Social Work
should be stimulated to meet and extend their work.
The exchange of books should be given priority as a
means of promoting international understanding and
co-operation.
