Introduction to Present Day Psychology
=======================================

:Author: Curt tsoenneim. staples, izs. oa.
Any writer of an introduction to psychology is now
faced with something of a dilemma. He can discuss
fairly intensively certain basic problems and discoveries
so as to make their nature clear to the ordinary reader,
or he can make an all-embracing survey of the extensive
field of modern psychology with illustrative reference
to a landmark here and a signpost there. Dr Boenheim
has chosen the latter course. The book is based on a
sessional course of 24 lectures he delivered to the W.E.A.
at Reading University. In these lectures there was
hardly a topic that was not touched upon?an Historical
Survey, Animal Psychology, Kretchmer's Theory of
Physique and Character, Child Guidance, and Industrial
Psychology are only a few of the contents.

Further, these lectures have not been extended into a
book; rather does one feel on reading, that the book is a
collection of notes for the lectures, slightly embellished
and put into literary form.

One would imagine then that this little book would
read more like a syllabus for further reading than a
self-contained outline of the subject. This is true up
to a point. It is indeed a valuable blue-print, and I
could think of no better reference to have by one's side
when preparing a course of talks to the W.E.A. or any
other body of students. But this is not the limitation
of its merits. The material is expressed clearly, simply
and yet accurately so that an intelligent reader can get
an idea of what contribution psychology is making to
modern knowledge and social progress.

For example, in a little less than a page Dr Boenheim
discusses the meaning and inter-relation of the Freudian
concepts of the Ego, Super-Ego and the Id. This 1
would have believed an impossible task, but nevertheless
the essentials are there expressed in the simplest
language.

The whole of the various sections dealing with psychopathology and related subjects is praiseworthy. The
matter is well illustrated with apt examples and there
is much in the way of practical, sensible advice. Sometimes, however, a little unwarranted dogmatism occursOf bedtime stories one reads, " It is not a good practice
to tell children stories before they go to bed; the imaging
tion is stimulated and nightmares may result." This
surely depends on the nature of the story. It is most
important that a child should feel " good " before he
goes to bed, and one of the ways of achieving this
is the attention of mother with a restful story during
those last precious minutes. .

It is a little unfortunate that the very fundamental
problems of Instinct and Intelligence are compresse<j
into a small chapter which is entitled " Psychologies
Terms The section on " Intelligence and Tests
is excellent as far as it goes. However, I feel that tn
reader has to take just a little too much on trust and eve*1
?n a book of this brevity a little more might have been
said about the nature of an Intelligence Test. The
section on " Reflexes and Instincts " is less satisfactory.
J* is essential even to the beginner to distinguish between
instinct as inherited behaviour mechanism, and the
drive which initiates and sustains it. American psychologists have dropped the word instinct in its second
connotation using " drive " or " unlearned motive
1 think this should be mentioned, otherwise the elementary student tends to get involved in much lamentable
c?nfusion as he reads more widely.

. Again it is confusing to regard a reflex as something
'?wer in the scale of development than an instinct,
't tends to create the view that an instinctive pattern of
behaviour is synthetically produced from a series of
reilexes, whereas in fact a reflex is probably a highly
specialized reaction which has become differentiated out
r?m simpler forms of purposive behaviour. How
0 Put this over in simple language is somewhat of a
Puzzle, but either an attempt should be made or the
whole subject is better left untouched.

The small chapter on " History " is interesting, but
1 ls a pity that the man who did more than anybody
0 make psychology come alive for the intelligent
William James, is not mentioned; "great
Philosopher, great psychologist, great man", as
tpouga'l described him.

th ?.Wever these are small matters and there is so much
nat is excellent in the book. Mention must be made
the first-rate bibliography. Not only is it compreensive, but it has most helpful explanatory notes.
Jp e is one small but extraordinary slip?Erich Fromm's
fear of Freedom " has attained the new and surH !Slng nomenclature of " Freedom from Fear ". If
anis is one of those intentional mistakes that conceal
^ish, I am very sure it is one we all desire to make at
ls juncture of the world's history.
J.L.G.
