Board of Control Circular
==========================

News and Notes
Education Act, 1944

An important Circular (No. 965) was issued by the
Board of Control in September, 1945, drawing the attention of Local Authorities to changes in the Mental
Deficiency Acts brought about by certain provisions of
the Education Act, 1944.

Section 2(l)(b)(v) of the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913,
has been amended, Section 2(2) and Section 31 have
been repealed by the 8th and 9th Schedules of the
Education Act, and a child between two and sixteen
(previously the age group was seven to sixteen), is now
subject to be dealt with if he is a person
" with respect to whom a report has been issued
under the enactments relating to education that he
has been found incapable of receiving education
at school, or that by reason of a disability of mind
he may require supervision after leaving school
Section 57 of the Education Act imposes upon Local
Education Authorities the duty of reporting to the Local
Authorities under the Mental Deficiency Acts :?
(a) Any child, between 2 and 16, who is suffering from
a disability of mind of such a nature or to such
an extent as to make him incapable of receiving
education at school, or to make it inexpedient
that he should be educated with other children
either in his own interests or in theirs.
(b) Any child who will by reason of a disability of
mind require supervision after leaving school.
Note :?This provision is no longer restricted to
children leaving Special Schools.

Hitherto, it will be remembered, Local Authorities
under the M.D. Act were unable to deal with defective
children between 14 and 16 unless they had been notified
by the Education Authority as about to leave a Special
School. With the repeal of Section 30 (Proviso iv) of
the Mental Deficiency Act this embargo no longer
exists, and although it is contemplated that normally
such children will have been ascertained by Education
Authorities and reported under Section 57, it is now
possible for them to be dealt with under the provisions
of the M.D. Act applicable to adults. (This position
arises out of the definition given in Section 114 of the
Education Act, defining a "child " as "a person not
over compulsory school age Pupils registered as in
attendance at special schools continue to be " children '
until they reach the special school leaving age of 16,
but those leaving ordinary schools on attaining the
school leaving age are, for the purposes of the Act,
no longer "children ".)

Children between the ages of 2 and 5, should, the
Circular points out, be ascertained normally by the
Education Authorities even though they may not be in
attendance at a Nursery School, although co-operation
between that Authority and the Mental Deficiency
Committee is obviously desirable in the case of low
grade children.

Defectives in Certified Institutions or under Guardianship together with those reported under Section 57(3)
of the Education Act as being incapable of receiving
education at school, are excluded from the provisions
under Section 116 for Further Education. Defectives,
however, who are under Statutory supervision under
Section 30(b) of the Mental Deficiency Act, are not
exempted and will be required to attend County Colleges
under Section 44 of the Education Act, when these are
opened. This provision should be of great value in
helping the high grade defective on leaving school to
make a satisfactory social adjustment, and in equipping
him for work.

Handicapped Pupils (Certificate) Regulations*
Section 34(5) of the Education Act, dealing with the
ascertainment of children requiring special educational
treatment lays it down that if, on receiving the advice ot
a medical officer after the examination of a child, either
the parent or the authority wish'for a certificate on the
nature and extent of the disability diagnosed, one shall
be given in the prescribed form.

This form (to be known as I.H.P.) has now been
prescribed on the followi g lines:?
1. Name, date of birth, and address of child.
2. Nature and extent of disability of mind or body
from which the child is suffering. .
3. Category of pupils requiring special educational
treatment into which the child is considered to fa"'
Reports to Local Authorities
Section 57(6) enacts that when an Education Authority
reports a child to a local authority under the Mental
* Statutory Rules and Orders, 1945. No. 1302. H.M. Stationery Office, Kingsway, W.C.2. Price Id.
Deficiency Act, 1913, the report shall be accompanied
by " such records and other information relating to the
child as may be prescribed
Draft Regulations under this section were issued
recently, consisting of two Schedules.
Schedule I, gives the Form of Report to be used on a
child examined for a disability of mind, (replacing the
former Form 306 M. used under Part V of the Education
Act, 19211.

Schedule II, gives the Form of Report to be used by a
Head Teacher on an educationally sub-normal child.
In addition to these two documents, it is prescribed
that there shall also accompany every Report under
Section 57(6) of the Act, a medical record and an educational record, and a report by an educational psychologist is also required unless " in any particular case it
appears to the Authority to be unreasonable to obtain
such a report ".

With the publication of these Regulations, the Mental
Deficiency (Notification of Children) Regulations,
1928, will be repealed.

Registration of Disabled Persons
---------------------------------
The Registration of Disabled Persons under the
Disabled Persons (Employment) Act 1944 is now proceeding, and applications are being invited by the Local
Labour Exchanges from any person over statutory
school-leaving age whether in work or seeking it who
" on account of injury, disease or congenital deformity
is substantially handicapped" in finding or keeping
suitable employment. In the case of school leavers a
special form must be filled up by the School Medical
Officer, and the consent of the parent must be obtained.
It is through the Register that the machinery set up
under the Act is put into operation, and therefore until
a substantial part of it has been compiled, little progress
can be made. Hence every effort is being made by the
Ministry concerned, to draw attention to its institution.
For Disabled Persons, registered as such, certain types
?f " designated " employment will be reserved. Moreover, the Act requires every employer with 20 or more
Workers to employ a quota (a specified percentage of
the total number of employees) of persons suffering from
disablement of a type which makes them suitable for the
work that can be offered, and an employer below his
quota will only be allowed to engage a non-handicapped
Worker if there is no one on the Register willing to fill
the vacancy in question. The Act provides for priority
to be given to ex-service candidates when inviting
aPplications.

For persons too seriously disabled to stand up to the
conditions of ordinary competitive employment, sheltered workshops may be provided, and for those who
need training, special Vocational Training Courses are
to be organized.

. At every Local Office of the Ministry of Labour there
ls now a Disablement Rehabilitation Officer whose
services are available for any disabled person seeking
advice and help about suitable employment. He also
^isits Hospitals in the area to discuss the problem with
disabled patients before discharge.
Disablement Advisory Committees are being set up
throughout the country, composed of an equal number
employers' and workers' representatives together
^th one or more doctors and other persons with a
special knowledge of, or interest in, the problem of
disablement. As a rule, Registration questions will be
dealt with by the Committees through a Panel before
which the person concerned will be entitled to appear.
It should be noted that under the Act, the expression
" disease " is to be construed as " including a physical
or mental condition arising from imperfect development
of any organ This brings within it, those who are
handicapped by reason of mental defect, and defectives
in the community who find difficulty in securing suitable
employment should therefore be encouraged to register.
This category includes defectives under Statutory
Supervision and those who are On Licence from
Certified Institutions.*

Delinquent Defectives
-----------------------
In a paper read at the Annual General Meeting of the
Mental Hospitals Association in July last, Dr R. G.
Blake Marsh, Medical Superintendent of Bromham
House Colony, Bedfordshire, drew attention to the
increasingly urgent problem presented by high-grade
defectives sent to Certified Institutions by the Courts
under Section 8 and Section 9 of the M.D. Act, 1913.
For defectives in this group who are " dangerous or
violent " special provision is made by the Board of
Control at the Rampton and Moss-side State Institutions,
but in the vast majority of cases it is the ordinary Certified Institutions who are called upon to deal with them?
and their number is steadily growing owing to an extended use by magistrates of their powers under the
Act.

The problems involved in the training of such a
defective are made apparent by the description which
Dr Marsh gives of his characteristics, viz.:
" He is really more a Mental Inefficient rather
than a Mental Defective, and he merges into a very
large group of persons who form the lower fringes
of our social scale. He is a person endowed with
much cunning, his offences show evidence of planning and foresight, he realizes the possible
consequences if detected, but punishment and fear
of punishment has little or no effect on him.
He commits crimes because he gains prestige,
notoriety and publicity from them, and he often
has sufficient powers of leadership to induce others
of equivalent or lower mentality to commit
them on his behalf."

He arrives at the Institution often having been told
it is only for a period of one year, and when he discovers
that the chances of his being discharged in so short a
time are small, he feels that he has been " let down "
and becomes acutely resentful. His parents, themselves frequently subnormal, share his resentment,
are completely unco-operative and often incite him to
defiance ; he quickly joins with other patients of the
same type as himself and they form a closed coterie
which defies authority, evades rules, is abusive and
truculent and, does all it can to spoil the pleasure of
others. The behaviour of this group is so different
from that of the vast majority of non-delinquent patients,
who are childish, docile, friendly and amenable, that
the Colony becomes divided into two sections with all
the resulting difficulties of smooth administration.
Earlier ascertainment, increased accommodation in
Special Schools, more effective supervision, a greater
use of Social Workers able to give advise on the treatment of delinquent, difficult and defective children^
would all help to reduce the size of this problem, and it
* For further details, see Disabled Persons (Registration) Regulations. Statutory Rules and Orders, 1945. No. 938.
Disabled Persons (District Advisory Committees and Panels Procedure) Regulations. Statutory Rules and Orders
l9*5. No. 939.

could be dealt with more effectively in the Colonies
themselves if the standard of skill on the part of nursing
staff could be raised. But Dr Marsh considers that the
real solution is along the lines of more specialized
Institutions for such cases, provided possibly?under
the new Mental Health Service?on a Regional basis.

Mental Defectives in Industry
-----------------------------
Hostels from which defective girls go out to daily
domestic work have for many years been provided by
progressive Local Authorities and Certified Institutions,
and the C.A.M.W.'s wartime Agricultural Hostels are
also well-known.

An enterprise which has had less publicity is that
carried on by the West Riding County Council in connection with a small certified institution for 54 medium
to high grade women at Wakefield, opened in 1940.
From the Institution a number of the girls were
placed in domestic service, often with very satisfactory
results. It was found, however, that some girls though
industrious and reliable in the Institution, failed in this
type of work, and it seemed likely that they would do
better in group employment of a different kind. Within
a reasonable distance of the Institution, at the time the
problem was being considered, a Biscuit Factory was
advertising for staff, and the Manager agreed to give
some of the girls a trial. This proved so successful that
ever since, from 8 to 16 girls at a time have worked
there, at wages beginning at 25s. a week and rising,
after 12 months service, to 36s. Other patients work
at a Commercial Laundry, and others again in the
packing department of a firm of wholesale grocers, in
each case being paid the usual Trade Union rate of wages.
A prefect system has been instituted whereby certain
selected girls are made responsible to the Matron for the
conduct and supervision of the others, whilst at work
on their way there and back, and on parole, This has
helped to develop in them a sense of responsibility, and
girls who were inclined to be refractory have been
found to make excellent prefects, gaining in poise and
stability.

Every effort has been made to free them from any
disability as compared with their fellow workers, and
they have been given facilities for choosing their own
clothes, paid for out of their earnings.

The experience gained by this experiment goes to
show that defectives in industry are able to make wider
social contacts than is possible for those in domestic
service, leading in turn, to a broadening in outlook and
the development of a social sense.

A Danish Institution under German Occupation
Readers of Mental Health who know something of
the splendid work done by Dr Wildenskov at the Keller
Institution for Mental Defectives, Denmark, may be
interested to know that a letter was received from him
(dated August 12th) in which he tells something of his
wartime experiences. He writes :?

" In May 1940, the Germans took possession of our
branch on the island of Sprogo. We had to take all the
women away in 48 hours in an easterly gale. We also
took all the furniture, food and cattle at the same time.
When the Germans arrived at the island, they were very
angry. They had to live on gulls' eggs for a week, and
they had expected to come to comfortable and well
furnished quarters. They did not behave well and
spoiled a lot, but by now we have returned and got the
whole colony repaired and painted. But the agricultural part of it is still a jungle, and gives the women a
lot of work to do."

" In February 1944, the Germans occupied our branch
institution, ' Solund We resisted the occupation,
but they said they needed the Institution with all its
furniture and equipment and had been ordered to take
it. We told them in that case they must keep the
patients, as we could not remove them if we were not
allowed to remove the equipment too. The discussion
continued for 3 days, and we used the respite to prepare
for evacuation. Seven small bombs, placed by the
Danish Free Movement, exploded in the Institution
one night which infuriated the Germans who threatened
us with the Gestapo. Then we evacuated, taking all
our things with us, leaving the patients to the last as
hostages for furniture and food. The Germans did
not really want them to be left, and they were rather
afraid of the idiots. I myself was the last of all to
leave, taking with me two hams which had been
forgotten."

" The Germans converted Solund into a fortress for
their Air Force stationed in Denmark. Later they
tried to take away our Inspector Botker, but we managed
to get him off by boat and to conceal him in North
Jutland. But they took his wife as hostage and she was
detained for 5 weeks. I myself had then to take precautions to avoid arrest, as I was on the Gestapo's
black list and might have been murdered by them . .

Members of the Association of Mental Health
Workers who in 1938 had the privilege of meeting Dr.
Wildenskov and of visiting the Keller Institute will be
relieved to know that the ordeal through which he and
his staff have passed, is now over and that none of them
has come to any serious harm.

Lasker Award in Mental Hygiene, 1945
This Award, instituted last year to be given annually
through the National Committee for Mental Hygiene,
New York, for outstanding service in the mental hygiene
field, has this year been awarded jointly to . Major
General G. Brock Chisholm, Deputy Minister of Health
for Canada and to Dr J. R. Rees, Medical Director of
the Tavistock Clinic, London and lately Consulting
Psychiatrist to the British Army.

In the Citation accompanying the Award, reference
is made to Dr Rees' " aggressive and shrewd leadership
and genial encouragement " of the group of " brilliant,
energetic and resourceful " psychiatrists working under
him during the War, to the effectiveness with which the
group functioned in applying scientific knowledge to
help the Army in its use of man power, and to the
enlightenment spread by his Salmon lectures in November, 1944, subsequently published as a book under
the title The Shaping of Psychiatry by War.

Readers of this journal will join us in congratulating
Dr Rees on being the recipient of this Award, and in
expressing pleasure at this token of American appreciation of British Army psychiatrists.

Mental Health in Northern Ireland
-----------------------------------
The Northern Ireland Minister of Health and Local
Government has appointed a Mental Health Services
Committee, under the Chairmanship of Lieut-Col.
A. R. G. Gordon, D.S.O., D.L., M.P., to advise on
questions of a specialized nature in connection with
Mental Health Services.

The Committee is representative of Mental Health
Services throughout Northern Ireland and will work in
close co-operation with the Health Advisory Council.
Any recommendations made by the Committee will
be considered by the Council in the first instance so
that they can be fitted into the general plan now being
worked out for Health Services of Northern Ireland as
a whole.

In particular, the Committee will be asked to give
its views on the steps to be taken to make provision for
the care and supervision of mental defectives, especially
children.

Report of Committee on the Juvenile Employment Service
This Committee, appointed in January, 1945, under
the Chairmanship of Sir Godfrey Ince, to consider the
establishment of a comprehensive Juvenile Employment
Service, has made a strong recommendation in favour of
a system of Vocational Guidance for every school
leaver, in whatever type of school he has been educated.

The term is used in a wide sense to cover:

1. The keeping of a School Record throughout the
whole of a child's life, to be made available to officers of
the Juvenile Employment Service. In connection with
this it is the teacher who is chiefly concerned and upon
his or her " skill in methods of assessment of intelligence
and aptitude and in estimating general qualities and
character ", its value will depend. It is therefore urged
that the teaching staff responsible for making the records
and the Juvenile Employment staff using them, should
be fully instructed in their preparation and purpose.
Suggestions as to the data required are given in detail.
2. The possession on the part of the Service of full
and adequate information on industries and professions
both locally and nationally, their conditions of work,
and the individual qualities required for the various types
of employment they offer.

The setting up by every major industry of a National
Joint Council to deal with the recruitment and training
of young persons is urged in this connection.
3. The preparation of the child's mind for the
change from school to work, first indirectly, then by
School Talks, to be given preferably by a Juvenile
Employment Officer with special training for the purpose.
Films and pamphlets are also valuable at this stage.
4. The School-Leaver's Interview, to be conducted
by the guidance officer in the presence of the parent and
the teacher but of no one else. This, it should be
recognized is work for an expert and the practice of the
Perfunctory methods sometimes used is deplored.
Throughout the Report the highly skilled nature of the
Work of placing children in employment is stressed, and
it is considered that for senior posts in the Service,
candidates should have (a) Knowledge of industrial
requirements of jobs and of industry generally, (b)
Interest, experience and knowledge of social service,
Particularly in relation to youth, (c) Experience and
training in public speaking, particularly to young
People, (d) Knowledge and experience of all other
Matters involved in an adequate vocational guidance
service.

The Report contains a most useful historical summary
?f the activities of the State in regard to Juvenile Employment, beginning with the setting up of Juvenile Departments in Labour Exchanges in 1909 and the empowering
?f Local Education Authorities (under the Education
(Choice of Employment) Act, 1910) to provide bureaux
f?r children under 17.

It recommends that the dual system then started
should continue and that Education Authorities should
oe required, within 6 months of the relevant legislation,
to decide whether or not they will exercise their powers.
It is proposed, however, to ensure greater uniformity,
that Schemes submitted by them must be approved by a
Central Juvenile Employment Executive, staffed by
officers of the Ministry of Labour and National Service,
|he Ministry of Education and the Scottish Education
department. It is further suggested that the present
National Advisory Councils appointed in 1928 by the
Minister of Labour should be replaced by a National
Advisory Council on Juvenile Employment with Advisory
Committees for Scotland and Wales.

This Report is throughout of great interest and some
of its recommendations have an obvious bearing on
Child Guidance and Mental Health problems.

Speech Therapists
------------------
In a Circular recently issued to Local Education
Authorities*, the Ministry of Education deals with the
position of Speech Therapists which has recently been
reviewed.

In the past, their work has been regarded as primarily
educational and the majority employed by Local Education Authorities have been recognized or approved as
specialist teachers under Schedule I (6) or II (5) of the
Code of Regulations for Public Elementary Schools.
Recently, however, there has been a change both in the
training provided and in the work itself. The four
Training Schools are maintained by or conducted in
close association with hospitals, and the instruction
given comprising anatomy, physiology, neurology,
pathology of the ear, nose and throat, phonetics and
speech therapy?does not include training in the teaching
of children in classes. Consequently, the work of
Speech Therapists is becoming more curative and less
educational and is carried out, in part at least, under
medical supervision, whilst the condition of employment
is approved by the Minister of Health for admission to
the Register of Medical Auxiliaries.

It is therefore proposed that as from November 1st,
1945, Speech Therapists employed by Education Authorities shall be treated as members of the staff of the School
Health Service and shall not be regarded as teachers
except in special circumstances.

The Circular deals further with Superannuation
arrangements, and salary scales, and concludes with the
suggestion that Education Authorities in whose areas
there are Ministry of Pensions and Emergency Medical
Services Hospitals, should release their Speech Therapists
for part-time service at such Hospitals in order to help
to relieve the present shortage of supply.

French Guests of English School-girls
Through the enterprise of the Allies Wing of the
British War Relief Society of the United States, 50
selected French children were recently invited to spend
three months in this country to recuperate after painful
experiences in occupied France.

On arrival the children were placed in Hostels or
Convents and as family billets could not be secured for
them all, it was decided to try to find hospitality for 15
of them, between the ages of 12 and 16, in a country
town able to provide good educational facilities and
where the services of a Psychiatric Social Worker to
select billets and give subsequent supervision and help,
were available. The town chosen was Tunbridge
Wells, (though three of the children were placed in
Ashford), and the girls attending the County School
were asked for offers of hospitality so that the French
guests could share the education of their hosts. There
was an enthusiastic response. The girls received
settled down quickly and in their visit of 5 weeks put
on weight and became gay and affectionate. They left,
with the sound of the School's cheers in their ears, and
having forged links with English families which may be
of long duration. Further offers have been received
should another batch of children be brought over by
the Allies Wing and it should be possible again to
organize, with the School's co-operation, an equally
successful scheme.

(26.10.45).
18 MENTAL HEALTH
The Regional Representative of the Provisional
Council in the area (Miss R. S. Addis) had the privilege
of helping in this enterprise and her skilled services, as
a Psychiatric Social Worker, were appreciatively
received.

The Problem of Spastic Paralysis
--------------------------------
We are glad to record the appointment?made jointly
by the Ministry of Education and the Foundation for
Educational Research (University of London)?of Miss
M. E. Dunsdon, M.A. (Educational Psychologist,
Bristol Education Committee), as Director of Research
into the problem of educating children suffering from
spastic paralysis and allied conditions.

The research is planned to cover at least 5 years, and
will include a visit to the United States where pioneer
work in the subject investigated was initiated a number
of years ago by Dr Winthrop Morgan Phelps of
Baltimore.

Readers of this journal will be interested to know that
in our next issue we hope to publish an article contributed
by Mrs. Collis and Dr Buck on the work of a small
experimental Unit in this country, which has been
working on the subject since 1943.

The Psychology of Tuberculosis
-------------------------------
The National Association for the Prevention of
Tuberculosis has appointed Major Eric Wittkower,
R.A.M.C., to conduct a research investigation into the
psychology of tuberculosis on his release from military
service.

Before the war, Major Wittkower was a Halley
Stewart Research Fellow and Physician at the Tavistock
Clinic, London, and for the last five years has been
engaged as a Psychiatric Specialist in the R.A.M.C.
He has also been responsible for inquiries into the
Psychological Aspect of Severe Physical Disablements,
and has published a number of papers during the last
ten years.

The present research will be begun by investigating
case histories and making personality studies on a
number of tuberculous patients.

Provisional National Council for Mental Health
Two important appointments to the Council's staff
have been made recently:?

Medical Director. Col. K. Soddy, M.D., D.P.M.,
at present serving overseas as Deputy Director of
Selection of Personnel and Chief Technical Officer,
India Command, has been appointed as Medical
Director on his release from the Army early in the New
Year. Col. Soddy held in 1939 one of the Fellowships
in Child Psychiatry awarded by the Child Guidance
Council, and has also had Mental Hospital experience.
General Secretary. Mr. Conrad Ormond, formerly
Administrative Secretary of the Tavistock Clinic and
during the War on the staff of the Air Ministry, took up,
in September, his duties as General Secretary of the
Council.

Amalgamation. Legal formalities in connection
with amalgamation are now nearing completion, and it
is expected that the Licence from the Board of Trade
for the new incorporated body to be known as the
National Association for Mental Health, will be received
during the next few weeks.

Child Guidance News
-------------------
Since the new system of Committees was established
in June the Child Guidance work of the Provisional
Council has been divided between the Child Guidance
Interclinic Committee whose members are actually
engaged in clinical work, and the Child Guidance
Services Committee which will consider wider problems
connected with Child Guidance. It was agreed that
someone representing, so to speak, the "consumers "
of Child Guidance should be co-opted to the latter
Committee and it was suggested that a member of the
Women's Co-operative Guild might fulfil this function.
The Committee is delighted that Mrs. Bamber who is
President of the Guild has accepted an invitation to
serve. The Interclinic Committee has been trying to
obtain an assessment of the cost of Child Guidance
treatment. A detailed and careful calculation was
prepared by the Child Guidance Training Centre and
other Clinics were asked to submit estimates. It was
not an easy task, particularly for some of the Clinics
maintained by Local Authorities where premises are
shared with other departments of the School Medical
Service which made it difficult to assess overheads.
Miss Fildes is now analysing the reports received.
Dr Winnicott was invited to one of the Meetings of
the Interclinic Committee to initiate a discussion on the
working of the Clinic team. This proved both valuable
and interesting and the Committee agreed that time
should be set aside at future meetings for professional
discussion of particular topics.

A systematic introductory course of lectures for
Child Guidance Fellows has been asked for and discussed
for some time. Such a course has now been planned
and is to begin in January. It is to take three weeks and
is to consist of lecture-discussions and visits of observation to a number of institutions concerned with children.
Fellows who have completed their training are being
invited to attend either the whole course or any particular
lectures which interest them.

We are glad to welcome back Dr William Moodie
who has resumed the Medical Directorship of the Child
Guidance Training Centre. It is most satisfactory to
have him, and also Dr Emanuel Miller and Dr Mildred
Creak serving on our committees once more.
In August the Tavistock Clinic moved from Westfield
College to new quarters in Beaumont Street, W.l>
which is more central and conveniently close to the
office of the Provisional Council. Two new Clinics
have been officially recognized during the quarter, the
Nuneaton and the Bangor Child Guidance Clinics.
There is no doubt that this number would have been
larger if there had been more trained staff available.
" Lord " Memorial Competition

The National Council for Mental Hygiene announce
that the subject chosen by their Selection Committee
for the 1945 Essay is " What are the essential personal
qualities required for success in Mental Nursing ? '
The competition, which is administered by the Council
on behalf of the Society of the Crown of Our Lord, is
open to all certificated mental nurses, of the rank ot
staff, charge or chief charge employed in Mental Hospitals
of the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland. Essays
should be of approximately 2,000 words in length, and
the following prizes are offered : First Prize, ?3 3s. and
a medal ; Second Prize, ?1 Is. The latest date for the
reception of essays is February 28th, 1946. Further
particulars may be obtained from the Secretary, National
Council for Mental Hygiene, 39 Queen Anne Street,
London, W.l.
