The Barns Experiment
=====================

:Author:  W. David Wills. Allen <x
Unwin. Price 8s. 6d.

No one who is interested in the bringing up of children
in groups and, in particular, in the reclamation of
problem boys, should miss this book. This tale of the
running of an Evacuation Hostel for 30 boys, selected
because they were difficult, describes more than a
wartime experiment, it is an important contribution to
. our knowledge. The basis of the method used was the
conviction that satisfactory development depends on
security in affection. Where parents had failed to supply
this and the boy was in consequence openly or indirectly
up against the world, it was all the more necessary for
the staff to give him unfailing affectionate understanding,
however unlovable his exterior. This good relationship
as the desirable background for the recovery of children
who have become rebels or shirkers against social duties
and are failing in individual achievement, will be accepted,
though perhaps in other terms, by most students of
Psychology. Not all, however, of the author's theories
can be passed without question. In particular, what he
Writes about punishment and of the child's relationship
\to Authority arouses some comment. Indeed, his
practice seems at variance with his theories, for though
"shared responsibility " is the rule, and the boys through
the " Ministers " they have elected and their own
Assembly, exact penalties from their members, he does
not hesitate to exert his personal authority where necessary and to enforce certain rules.

On reflection one sees that punishment is not limited
to beatings or fines, but where there is affectionate
response, disapproval may be punishment enough. The
Weak have to set up rules and penalties to enforce their
orders, a strong man can dispense with these, but he
cannot help chastising (even if only metaphoricall}') those
whom he loves. Children in virtue of their childish
dependence, receive reward and punishment in some form
or other from those whose functions it is to guide them.
% all means let us learn to abandon punishment which
vaunts itself as an instrument for education. But we
cannot escape from the negative side of bringing up the
young, and we must ask how far they can accept freedom
from guidance and take responsibility.

With the frankness which characterizes the whole
book, the author admits that some boys could not stand
the lack of fixed discipline and penalties. Was this
because there are certain cases where the trouble is of
'Such a nature that more security from an ordered routine
's required ? A few such failures are found in every
tree hostel or school, however long-suffering and patient
ls the application of the theory. Such evidence does not
condemn the method, but suggests it may not be suitable
for every type of difficult boy.

A wealth of material from the vivid life of the place
as well as references to other work and books, show us
something of the keen and active mind of the author,
"is integrity stands firm through the tests given him at
every turn by the boys?and their parents. A happy
relationship with his staff speaks for itself. Satisfactory
Working of such an experiment under the direction of
Local Authorities gives fresh hope in a period when
their powers are increasing and some have fears of
stereotyped education.

In hoping other similar hostel-schools will develop,
Wills suggests that the Warden should have a mental
health training. The chapter on " Psychological FirstAid " describes the application of his understanding of
^/"notional needs in his handling of individual difficulties
throughout the book, and a grasp is shown of the
lundamentals of child development.

Though most of his boys come from unhappy homes
and many he thinks should never return to them, the
Author advocates the use of a Psychiatric Social Worker
to serve as a link with the families, and to carry out
after-care. It is more and more realized that supervision
aJter leaving any residential Home or Hostel is necessary;
People are not so generally aware that this is not sufficient,
"Ut work with the family, and other links in the community throughout his whole stay are absolutely necessary
lQr the child brought up away from his family. Adjustments are just as much needed at home as in the boy.
? these are not possible and he must start life on his own,
this must be made clear at an early stage, so that a clean
cut may be made and he can learn to face a future on his
?Wn. Where the natural links with relatives and
^eighbours are missing, care must be taken to give him a
tart with contacts and friends.,

Such trains of thought are set in motion by the
timulating effect of reading The Barns Experiment. It
describes a great piece of work and is written in a frank
and lively style, but it is a pity that not one of his many
interested friends restrained the author from his excessive
use of exclamation marks. They give a false air of
unconsidered comment to many a page of sober expres.
sion, of experience and opinion. R S A
