News and Comment
=================

Nursing in Psychotherapy.

The Nurses' Journal of the Pacific Coast is an admirable little
magazine. For several months we have been reading it with genuine
satisfaction, and watching an opportunity to introduce it to our subscribers. In the November number is a fine article on "Nursing in
Psychotherapy" by Miss M. Grace O'Bryan. This paper was read by
its author at the Eleventh Annual Convention of the Nurses' Associated
Alumnse in San Francisco, in May of this year. Miss O'Bryan asks her
colleagues at the outset, "What do we know of the principles of mortem
psychotherapy, and how adequately are we fitted to nurse with intelligent understanding the neurasthenic, psychasthenic, or hysterical
patient?" She refers to the rapidly growing literature on the subject
of psychotherapy, and to the beginnings that have been made at a few
training schools,?at Johns Hopkins, for example,?to give instruction
to nurses in psychology and psychiatry. "Psychology must be included
as one of the definite subjects in the training school curriculum," says
Miss O'Bryan, "if the students are to be considered in any way capable
of recognizing the deviations from the normal in their patients and
undertaking later the very grave responsibility of the care of the
mentally disturbed."

This declaration of principle is heartily seconded by The
Psychological Clinic. We confidently expect in the near future to see
courses in psychology included in the training, not only of every nurse,
but also of every competent teacher, physician, and clergyman in the
land.

An Ophthalmological Department for a City School System.
Dr Joseph S. Neff, Director of the Department of Public Health
and Charities of the city of Philadelphia, reports the result of three
months' work by the division of ophthalmology established at his suggestion for the examination and treatment of the visual defects of
backward school children.

The chief of the division, Dr L. C. Wessels, during the three months
ending April 1st, received 1267 visits. "There were 345 pairs of glasses
prescribed for children too poor to buy them. The vision ranged from
15/200 to 15/20; that is, figures or letters that should be distinguished
at 200 feet with the normal eye were only visible at 15 feet, and 3/4
vision, where letters that should be seen at 20 feet were seen at 15,
With glasses properly adjusted this vision was brought up to about
15/15, or normal."

"These pupils, as evidenced by letters from the teachers, showed an
absolute absence of progress in many cases, some of them having spent
their entire school life in the first grade; and, of course, many of these
so-called 'mentally deficient' children interfered with the progress of
their fellow pupils. Often their tendency was towards truancy and
incorrigibleness. After treatment, almost all of these children began
to improve at once. Many were removed from special schools to regular
schools, and the inclination towards truancy passed away. The majority
have made rapid strides since."

The importance of this work, in Dr Neff's judgment, cannot be
overestimated. Many of these cases will, in his opinion, prove useful
citizens in the future, instead of deteriorating and in all probability
becoming charges upon the city, living useless, immoral or criminal lives.
Dr Neff, therefore, invites the assistance of the Superintendent of
Schools to obtain from the City Councils an additional salaried assistant
and clerk for the ophthalmological division, with increased appropriations for supplies and glasses, as the work can thereby be doubled or
tripled.
