   EDITORIAL

   **MERITORIOUS PROF. DR. MUHAMMAD IQBAL AFRIDI**

   |image1|\ Editor-in-Chief, JPPS (Journal of Pakistan Psychiatric
   Society)

   Dean, Faculty of Psychiatry, College of Physicians & Surgeons,
   Pakistan

   Adjunct Professor, Dept. of Psychiatry, Baylor College of Medicine,
   Houston, Texas, USA.

It is an honor and a pleasure to write this editorial as the new
Editor-in-Chief of The Journal of Pakistan Psychiatric Society (JPPS),
the official scientific journal of the Pakistan Psychiatric Society
(PPS). I am grateful to the PPS Executives’ Committee that has reposed
their trust in me to manage the affairs of the journal following my
tenure as PPS President. While I am committed to do my best, I am aware
that the potential of the journal cannot be realized without the active
and enthusiastic participation of the members of the society and the
readership of the journal.

As the world reels under the impact of the fourth wave of the Corona
Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic and the phobia of emerging
variants, it is time to thank all the Frontline Healthcare Workers, and
other professionals who have tenaciously and fearlessly served the local
and global communities. Sadly, governments in general and the Government
of Pakistan in particular have not appropriately honoured the
dedication, services and sacrifices of healthcare workers, but these
professionals have succeeded in displaying their valour to the world,
and claimed true respect as “Heroes” among citizens of the globe.
Despite, the havoc wreaked by COVID-19 Pandemic, this adversity has
provided great global research opportunities, and to act locally. This
is evident from the COH-FIT study, which is the broadest survey on
COVID-19 impact to date, involving over

230 researchers and 120 institutions across the six continents,1 which
include Dr. Afzal Javed and myself as country collaborators from
Pakistan.2

The Past Editor-in-Chief, Prof. Brig. Mowadat H. Rana, and his editorial
board deserve acknowledgement for their

excellent stewardship of JPPS during the past eight years. The “Handing
over of the Baton”3 was delayed due to both the COVID-19 aftermath and
my own grave experience of contracting the disease. As a result of Brig.
Rana and his team’s efforts, the journal thrives at a reputed level as
it continues to disseminate and promote the knowledge of Psychiatry and
Mental health. Their efforts have maintained the academic health of the
journal and its continued status with the Higher Education Commission of
Pakistan.

This Journal would not have existed were it not for the Founding editor
of JPPS, Prof. Saeed Farooq for establishing the journal in 2004.
Without the efforts of the former editors and their teams, JPPS would
not be the shining medallion of our Psychiatric society.

I am fortunate and grateful to have five excellent and capable scholars
who will serve as my managing, associate and deputy editors: Dr. Mian
Mukhtar-ul-Haq Azeemi, Prof.

M. Irfan, Prof. Asad T. Nizami, Dr. Jawed A. Dars and Dr. Ali B.
Mustafa, respectively. We also have two very capable assistant editors:
Dr. Nighat Haider and Dr. Amna Asad, and Dr. Saima Akhtar as Senior
Publishing Coordinator.

I have five goals for my editorship: First, I will continue building on
the commendable foundation laid down by past editors of JPPS since its
establishment. As the flagship and official journal of the PPS, JPPS has
the pivotal role of promoting the theoretical as well as empirical work
in the many subspecialties within the field of Psychiatry and Mental
Health, and additionally disseminating the findings from this work. The
subspecialties include, but are not

limited to, Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Forensic Psychiatry, Old
Age Psychiatry, Psychotherapy techniques etc. which are mentioned in the
PPS Special Interest Groups.4 As the editor, I will seek to continue
JPPS’ mission of representing the main scholarly voice of the various
areas of Psychiatry and Mental Health. In addition, I am delighted to
state that our Editorial Advisory Board shall be diverse with local,
global, inter- and multidisciplinary representation, with future
collaborative opportunities that may aid in transformation, advancement
of Psychiatry and Mental Health theory, de-stigmatisation, research,
practice, advocacy, teaching and training.

In pursuit of these goals, I will continue to utilize the existing
formats, including those of the innovative, high-quality Original
research articles which will continue to serve as the backbone of the
journal, along with Editorial, Review Articles, Special Articles, Short
communications, Case Reports, Letters to Editor and Creative corner. I
shall also remain open to progression in the publication format during
my tenure as the Editor-in-Chief. In the future, you will also see
special focus on improving the Promotion, prevention, investigation,
diagnosis, treatment, rehabilitation, complication, legal and
policy-making and care of mental illness, as well as the promotion of
mental health globally. Furthermore, papers on evolving topics including
novel targets for drug development, precision medicine, big data etc.
and many other emerging topics. The emphasis of the journal will also be
on the education of the scientific community by publishing excellent
reviews on highly relevant topics, as well as treatment guidelines.
These guidelines serve as a major tool to promote up-to-date treatment
options and to improve treatment for patients worldwide.

Second, we will encourage scholars and researchers from the previously
mentioned subspecialties of Psychiatry and allied sciences to submit
their work to JPPS, so that the journal will truly reflect the broad
diversity of expertise present within the field. During our brief
experience with the journal, we noticed the enthusiasm of submission
among psychologists, yet lesser keenness among clinicians and physicians
which may be attributed to lack of time due to higher quality of
clinical care, which is not being adequately translated into published
articles, and this is resulting in stagnation and lack of innovation in
Psychiatry and Mental Health in Pakistan. Thus, to address the issue,
one of our first initiatives is to ensure the presence of the journal’s
promotional stall at all PPS Conferences. This momentous action was
taken with the support of PPS President - Prof. Dr. Imtiaz A. Dogar
(also former Managing Editor of JPPS) at the 23rd National Conference
held in Lahore, where the JPPS booth was installed and JPPS Special
sessions were organized by the new Editorial Board Members. The first
session was titled “From Patients to Publication” in order to invigorate
the clinicians to strive for

research and publication, which is a gap that needs much filling. The
highlight of the session was the presence of the local and global
stakeholders of Psychiatry namely World Psychiatric Association (WPA),
Pakistani American Psychiatric Association of North America (PAPANA) and
College of Physicians & Surgeons Pakistan (CPSP), who reiterated the
importance of research and its publication, especially the exploration
of newer avenues in Mental Health. They also pledged to assist JPPS in
attaining a very prestigious rank among its global counterparts. The
second session namely “Express Pathway to Publication” was also
organised on the last day of conference to galvanize potential authors
and researchers and enfold them in the field of scientific publication.

Third, apart from the commendable work done by previous editors of JPPS,
we have come across technical concerns regarding its Impact Factor
during the past several years. As you know, the Impact Factor is a
measure of how frequently the articles published in the past two years
are cited by researchers in the subsequent year. Hence, it represents
the level of immediate influence the journal has on the field and
related disciplines. Our goals shall include raising the journal’s
impact factor, ranking in HEC Journal Recognition System (HJRS), and
metrics score with the journal’s efficient integration of Social Media
Platforms, such as Facebook, Twitter, YouTube etc. for citations. I
shall do my best to publish top quality articles that have the potential
to be highly cited, and further identify trending and influential topics
during the years to come.

Fourth, I believe that the most important component of a journal’s
operation is the work of the Editorial Board Members and the Advisory
Board, whose reviews and recommendations influence the editor’s
decision. I am very fortunate to have received warm acceptances from
prestigious colleagues for membership of the Editorial Board and both
National and International Advisory Boards. I believe that these
stalwarts of Psychiatry, Mental Health, and other Medical and Surgical
disciplines shall provide a strong support and assistance to the board
members.

Fifth, I believe that JPPS will remain an organic publication, which
will evolve and improve in the years to come. For this process, it will
be critical to communicate regularly with the members and the leadership
of PPS, members of the editorial board, and other stakeholders to obtain
their views on how the journal can be improved. This dynamic discussion
can lead to new ideas on the type of articles that shall be published in
the journal and other improvements. Hence, I am looking forward to
maintaining this open line of communication.

In addition to the above overarching goals, I have several specific
initiatives. One initiative is to increase the relevance of JPPS to
those clinicians whose primary duties involve patient care, advocacy,
and education/training. In the future,

for each article, I will ask authors to include implications for
practice, advocacy, education/training, and research. This section of
the discussion will be published (with the abstract) on our journal
website and Social Media sites, and made available to the general
public. I will also ask authors to create a PowerPoint presentation of
their articles and a 10-15 minutes video so that educators/trainers can
use them in their educational settings. I hope that making this portion
of the article available to the public, together with the PowerPoint
slides and videos, will increase the utility of the scholarly work
published in JPPS among practitioners, advocates, and educators as well
as researchers. I also hope that this website will bring more attention
to the articles in JPPS increase the frequency of article downloads, and
citations. The authors will also be asked to include a short statement
of the significance to their research to the public, by describing their
findings and why those findings are important to the public, both in
English and Urdu languages. I hope that this statement will make the
article more interesting and relevant to readers and draw them towards
understanding scientific research in Mental Health.

Another initiative I have is to increase the appeal of JPPS for our
international readership. With the assistance of our International
Advisors which includes PPS Distinguished Global Psychiatrist, Dr. Afzal
Javed, President of WPA, Dr. Asim Shah,5 Mujeeb U. Shad (President
PAPANA) to name a few. My hope is that this will draw more international
clinicians to JPPS.

The third initiative is to have JPPS indexed in Scopus. Scopus is the
largest abstract and citation database of peer- reviewed literature:
scientific journals, books and conference proceedings.6 It serves as a
major source of citations in the health field, including Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, and if JPPS is indexed, it will be accessible to
more people, globally. The application to Scopus will be submitted in
the first half of year 2022.

Our fourth initiative is to promote research and publication culture by
organizing frequent seminars and workshops for article formatting and
submission process via the Open Journal System. These events shall take
place in all provinces of Pakistan, and also international conferences
for global collaboration shall be organized by JPPS.

I also want to mention a couple of improvements that shall be
implemented to the journal’s operation. One is to improve the Jpps.pk
(Open Journal System) website for a more comprehensive, smoother and
timely submission process. Another improvement that is related to
efficiency is shorter turnaround time. I have asked our board members

to ensure that they submit their reviews within the allotted timeframe
so that the decision letter can be crafted and sent quickly for initial
submission. The fast turnaround is important because authors appreciate
having a timely decision, even if their submission is rejected.

To close, I want to reiterate my zeal in assuming the Editor- in-Chief
position of JPPS. At the same time, I recognize that with great power
comes great responsibility that this position brings. I am determined to
optimize JPPS’ status globally, and nurture it to further heights of
success. In this process, I will need your help. In addition to JPPS
being the official scholarly voice of Mental Health professionals, it
can also serve as a revenue generator leading to self- sustainability
and destigmatisation, where the advertisements will also be purposeful,
i.e. having some slogan related to promotion of mental health,
preferably in our national Language. Thus, the progression of our
disciplines and professions are directly linked to the prosperity of the
journal. We hope that collectively, JPPS will be the first choice of
local and global authors when considering high-quality publication
outlets available, and it will indeed compel researchers to submit their
best papers to us, and encourage others to do so as well.

Now, I invite you to enjoy the interesting articles that comprise my
first issue as JPPS Editor-in-Chief.

   *Jazak Allah Khair!*

REFERENCES
==========

1. Solmi M, Estradé A, Thompson T, et al. The collaborative outcomes
   study on health and functioning during infection times in adults
   (COH-FIT-Adults): Design and methods of an international online
   survey targeting physical and mental health effects of the COVID-19
   pandemic [published online ahead of print, 2021 Jul 19]. J Affect
   Disord. 2021; 299:393- 407. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2021.07.048

2. Coh-fit.com. [Internet]. Collaborators [cited 31 December 2021].
   Available from:
   `https://www.coh-fit.com/collaborators/ <http://www.coh-fit.com/collaborators/>`__

3. Rana MH, Dogar IA, Haider N. Handing Over The Baton. J Pak Psych Soc.
   2020; 17(4):5-6. https://jpps.pk/index.php/
   journal/article/view/77/52

4. Pakistan Psychiatric Society [Internet]. PPS Sections / Special
   Interest Groups (SIG) 2020; [cited 31 December 2021]. Available from
   https://ppspk.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Special-
   Interests-Group.pdf.

5. Pakistan Psychiatric Society [Internet]. PPS Honours & Titles 2019-
   2020, slides 5 & 7; 2020 [cited 31 December 2021] Available from
   https://ppspk.com/pps-honours-and-titles-2019-20/

6. Elsevier [Internet]. Scopus: Access and use Support Center [updated
   29 July 2021; cited 31 December 2021] Available from
   https://service.elsevier.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/15534/su
   pporthub/scopus/#tips

.. |image1| image:: media/image1.jpeg
