   JPPS 2008; 5(2): 122-124 COCHRANE CORNER

ABSTRACTS OF COCHRANE SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS

Chochrane corner has this time focused on the role of antidepressants in
psychiatric disorders other than the depressive disorders, such as
schizophrenia and Generalized Anxiety Disorder. In another review
evidence for the psychotic symptoms in epilepsy has been evaluated.

1. Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is not an un- common psychiatric
   condition in primary and ter- tiary care settings. Uptil now there is
   routine prac- tice of the use rather misuse of anxiolytics to treat
   this disabling disorder, leading to problem of tol- erance and
   dependence. For the last few de- cades there is growing evidence for
   the effective- ness of antidepressants in the treatment of GAD. In
   this review fifteen clinical trials were included but only eight of
   them used recognized methods of diagnosis. Moreover only one study
   included adolescents in its population. However encouraging results
   were found regarding efficacy of antidepressants in GAD. Further
   trials are needed to confirm the evidence and also to com- pare the
   efficacy against benzodiazepine anxiolytics.

2. As we know that negative symptoms in schizo- phrenia have been a
   great challenge to psychia- trists in clinical practice. Atypical
   antipsychotics have helped to some extent but the problem has still
   been partially solved. Different add on strate- gies have been
   frequently introduced to address this issue and the use of
   antidepressants is one of them. In this review the outcome of
   combination of antidepressants with antipsychotics in case of
   negative symptoms of schizophrenia has been evaluated. Only five
   studies were included in the review. According to the results
   participants treated in “combination” showed statistically
   significant improvement as compared to control group. While for
   movement disorder and other adverse effects, no significant
   difference was found in any of the study. However the amount of
   information currently available is still limited and large well
   designed studies are justified to reach to the firm conclu- sion.

3. We know that experience of psychotic symptoms in epilepsy is a common
   occurrence. Moreover management of epilepsy combined with psycho- sis
   really poses a great challenge to clinicians because of compliance
   issues and adverse ef- fects of antipsychotics on underlying
   neurological disorder. The authors have tried to evaluate the
   effectiveness of different intervention strategies in

..

   psychotic symptoms in epileptic patients. Surpris- ingly the authors
   could find only one study that could fulfill the inclusion criteria
   in this regard out of 492 studies reviewed. Results of few other
   studies could be of help in providing further information on this
   important manage- ment issue. Though “only one selected RCT” has
   proven the efficacy of antipsychotics in controlling psychotic
   symptoms but no mention has been made of typical and atypical
   antipsychotics or their effect on seizure control. However an
   important management issue has been high- lighted in this review and
   further replications are needed in view of the present insufficient
   evidence.

   **Edited by: Dr. Javaid Akhtar,** MCPS, FCPS, Senior Registrar,
   Department of Psychiatry, Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar.

1. ANTIDEPRESSANTS FOR GENERALIZED

..

   ANXIETY DISORDER

   Kapczinski F, Lima MS, Souza JS, Cunha A, Schmitt R

ABSTRACT
========

   **Background:** Pharmacological treatments have been successfully
   used to treat Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD). Benzodiazepine and
   non benzodiaz- epine anxiolytics used to be the mainstay for the
   pharmacological treatment of GAD. However, data emerging over the
   last two decades have shown that antidepressants may be as effective
   as anxiolytics in this condition. The use of antidepressants may also
   be ben- eficial, because GAD often coexists with major depres- sive
   disorder (62% comorbidity) and dysthymia (37%).

**Objectives:** To assess the efficacy and acceptability of
antidepressants for treating generalized anxiety disorder.

   **Search strategy:** Cochrane Collaboration Depression, Anxiety and
   Neurosis Controlled Trials Register - CCDANCTR (up to May 2002),
   Anxiety Neurosis (up to May 2002) and Cochrane Controlled Trials
   Register (CENTRAL/CCTR) (up to May 2002), MEDLINE (1966 to

   May 2002), LILACS (1982 to May 2002); reference searching; personal
   communication; conference ab- stracts and book chapters on the
   treatment of general- ized anxiety disorder.

*Selection criteria*
--------------------

Randomized controlled trials were included. Non randomized studies and
those that included patients with both GAD and another Axis I
co-morbidity were ex- cluded.

*Data collection and analysis*
------------------------------

The data from studies were extracted indepen- dently by two reviewers.
Relative risks, weighted mean difference and number needed to treat were
estimated. People who died or dropped out were regarded as hav- ing had
no improvement.

*Main results*
--------------

Antidepressants (imipramine, venlafaxine and paroxetine) were found to
be superior to placebo in treat- ing GAD. The calculated NNT for
antidepressants in GAD is 5.15. Dropout rates did not differ between
antidepres- sants. Only one study presented data on imipramine and
trazodone. Imipramine was chosen as the refer- ence drug and, therefore,
data on trazodone could not be included in the meta analysis. Only one
study was conducted among children and adolescents (Rynn 2000). This
showed very promising results of sertraline in children and adolescents
with GAD, which warrants replication in larger samples.

*Authors’ conclusions*
----------------------

The available evidence suggests that antidepres- sants are superior to
placebo in treating GAD. There is evidence from one trial suggesting
that paroxetine and imipramine have a similar efficacy and tolerability.
There is also evidence from placebo-controlled trials suggest- ing that
these drugs are well tolerated by GAD patients. Further trials of
antidepressants for GAD will help to dem- onstrate which antidepressants
should be used for which patients.

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008 Issue 3, Copyright © 2008
The Cochrane Collabora- tion. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd..
The full text of the review is available in *The Cochrane Library* (ISSN
1464-780X).

2. ANTIDEPRESSANTS FOR THE NEGATIVE SYMPTOMS

..

   OF SCHIZOPHRENIA

   Rummel C, Kissling W, Leucht S

.. _abstract-1:

ABSTRACT
========

   **Background:** Negative symptoms are common in people with
   schizophrenia and are often difficult to treat with antipsychotic
   drugs. Treatment often involves the use of various add-on medications
   such as antidepressants.

   **Objectives:** To review the effects of the combination of
   antipsychotic and antidepressant drug treatment for management of
   negative symptoms in schizophrenia and schizophrenia-like psychoses.

   **Search strategy:** We searched the Cochrane Schizo- phrenia Group’s
   register (January 2004). We also con- tacted authors of included
   studies in order to identify further trials.

.. _selection-criteria-1:

*Selection criteria*
--------------------

We included all randomized controlled trials com- paring antipsychotic
and antidepressant combinations with antipsychotics alone for the
treatment of prominent negative symptoms in schizophrenia and/or
schizophre- nia-like psychoses.

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-1:

*Data collection and analysis*
------------------------------

Working independently, we selected and critically appraised studies,
extracted data and analyzed on an intention-to-treat basis. Where
possible and appropri- ate we calculated the relative risk RR) and their
95% confidence intervals (CI), with the number needed to treat (NNT).

.. _main-results-1:

*Main results*
--------------

We included five studies (all short-term, total N=190). We found no
significant difference for ‘leaving the study early for any reason’
between the antipsy- chotic plus antidepressant combination and the
control group (n=90, 3 RCTs, RR 3.0 CI 0.35 to 26.04). Leaving early due
to adverse events (n=64, 2 RCTs, RR 5.0 CI

0.26 to 97.0) and leaving the study early due to ineffi- cacy (n=34, 1
RCT, RR 3.0 CI 0.13 to 68.84) also showed no significant difference
between the two treatment groups. In terms of clinical response,
participants treated with the antipsychotic plus antidepressant
medications showed a statistically significant greater improvement
(n=30, 1 RCT, WMD -1.0 CI -1.61 to -0.39) and showed a significantly
lower severity at endpoint (n=30, 1 RCT, WMD -0.9 CI -1.55 to -0.25) on
the Clinical Global Im- pression Scale than those treated with
antipsychotics alone. More people allocated to combination therapy had a
clinically significant improvement in negative symptoms compared with
those given antipsychotics and placebo (n=60, 2 RCTs, RR 0.56 CI 0.32 to
0.97, NNT 3 CI 3 to 34). Significant differences in favour of the com-
bination therapy were seen in different aspects of nega- tive symptoms:
‘affective flattening’ (n=30, 1 RCT, WMD

-7.0 CI -10.37 to -3.63), ‘alogia’ (n=26, 1 RCT, WMD -

3.00 CI -5.14 to -0.86) and ‘avolition’ (n=30, 1 RCT, WMD

-3.0 CI -5.04 to -0.96). No statistically significant differ- ence was
found between treatment groups in regards to the outcome ‘at least one
adverse event’ (n=84, 2 RCTs, RR 1.80 CI 0.66 to 4.90). For movement
disorders and other adverse effects, no statistically significant
differ- ences were found in any of the studies that provided usable data
on these outcomes. There are no data at all

   on outcomes such as compliance, cost, social and cog- nitive
   functioning, relapse, recurrence of negative symp- toms,
   rehospitalisation or quality of life. There are no medium or long
   term data.

.. _authors-conclusions-1:

*Authors’ conclusions*
----------------------

The combination of antipsychotics and antidepres- sants may be effective
in treating negative symptoms of schizophrenia, but the amount of
information is currently too limited to allow any firm conclusions.
Large, prag- matic, well-designed and reported long term trials are
justified.

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008 Issue 3, Copyright © 2008
The Cochrane Collabora- tion. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd..
The full text of the review is available in The Cochrane Library (ISSN
1464-780X).

3. INTERVENTIONS FOR PSYCHOTIC SYMPTOMS

..

   CONCOMITANT WITH EPILEPSY

   Farooq S, Sherin A

.. _abstract-2:

ABSTRACT
========

   **Background:** People suffering from epilepsy have an increased risk
   of suffering from psychotic symptoms. The psychotic syndromes
   associated with epilepsy have generally been classified as ictal,
   postictal and interictal psychosis. Anticonvulsant drugs have been
   reported to precipitate psychosis. Moreover, all antipsychotic drugs
   have the propensity to cause paroxysmal EEG abnor- malities and
   induce seizures.

   **Objectives:** To evaluate the benefits of interventions used to
   treat clinically significant psychotic symptoms occur- ring in people
   with epilepsy with regard to global im- provement, changes in mental
   state, hospitalization, behavior, quality of life, effect on the
   frequency of sei- zures and interaction with antiepileptic drugs.

**Search strategy:** We searched the Trials Registers of the Cochrane
Schizophrenia Group and the Cochrane Epilepsy Group (May 2008), the
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (*The Cochrane
Library* Issue 2, 2008), MEDLINE (Ovid, 1950 to14 May

   2008), EMBASE (1980 to 2006), PsycINFO (1872 to 12

   May 2008), CINAHL (1981 to 9 May 2008) and Biologi-

   cal Abstracts using the Cochrane Schizophrenia Group’s phrase for
   randomized controlled trials and schizophre- nia or psychotic
   disorders combined with the phrase [and {epilepsy\* or seizure
   disorders\* }].

   Two review authors (SF and AS) independently inspected the citations
   identified from the search. We identified potentially relevant
   abstracts and assessed full papers for inclusion and methodological
   quality.

.. _selection-criteria-2:

*Selection criteria*
--------------------

All randomized controlled trials comparing drugs, behavior therapy,
cognitive behavior therapy or other non-pharmacological interventions
used to relieve psy- chotic symptoms in people with epilepsy.

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-2:

*Data collection and analysis*
------------------------------

We planned to extract and analyze the data from all relevant studies
using standardized methods. As only one study met the inclusion
criteria, no meta-analysis was attempted.

.. _main-results-2:

*Main results*
--------------

After independently assessing the abstracts and titles of 492 articles,
we selected five relevant abstracts. Ultimately we found only one study
meeting the inclu- sion criteria, which was available only as an
abstract. This study compared the use of olanzapine (10 mg/day) with
haloperidol (12 mg/day) in 16 patients suffering from schizophrenia-like
psychosis of epilepsy (SLPE). Thirteen patients completed the study.
Significant im- provement was associated with use of olanzapine. We did
not identify any study on psychosocial interventions in patients
suffering from epilepsy and psychosis.

.. _authors-conclusions-2:

*Authors’ conclusions*
----------------------

Only one randomized controlled trial was found which lacked the power to
test the efficacy of antipsychotics in those suffering from psychosis
con- comitant with epilepsy.

Limited evidence from this small RCT suggests an improvement in
psychotic symptoms, but not other out- come measures, with the use of an
antipsychotic. The effects on seizure control are not well studied.
Further trials are required to inform practice.

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008 Issue 3, Copyright © 2008
The Cochrane Collabora- tion. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd..
The full text of the review is available in *The Cochrane Library* (ISSN
1464-780X).
