   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 60-61

LEARN WHILE YOU EARN.
=====================

   EDITORIAL

THE CONCEPT OF CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT (CPD) AND ITS RELEVANCE FOR PSYCHIATRISTS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
====================================================================================================================

   Saeed Farooq

“I have to face one of my biggest dilemmas when after teaching my
postgraduate students the importance of the 1-hour psychiatric
interview; I expect them to see these 40 patients in less than 4 hours.
The situation be- comes increasingly worse in the heat of summer months
when, drenching in sweat from head to toe, one has to interview patients
in a hot overcrowded room and still display the “accurate empathy,
non-possessive warmth and the genuineness” of a good therapist...”

This paragraph by a psychiatrist working in Paki- stan after his
training abroad only highlights one of the harsh realities of practicing
psychiatry in most develop- ing countries1. Talking of Continuing
Professional Devel- opment (CPD) in setting like these is considered as
luxury few can afford.

This view is perhaps based on misunderstandings related to the concept.
Continuing Professional Devel- opment (CPD) is the process by which
health profes- sionals keep their knowledge and practice updated to meet
the needs of patients and the health service2.This includes the
continuous acquisition of new knowledge, skills, and attitudes to enable
competent practice. The concept of CPD does **not** mean updating the
medical knowledge only. It also implies developing skills in di- verse
areas such as time management, team building and training in information
technology etc. This requires a long-term approach of lifelong learning
and posses- sion of the attitudes and capacities to be flexible, adapt-
able, creative and amenable to change.

CPD has benefits for both individuals and organi- zations and is
therefore needed for every professional whether in the developing or
developed world3. In fact, it can be argued that CPD is a needed more
for psychia- trists working in developing countries than those prac-
ticing in well resourced health systems. Heavy workloads are one of the
most common reasons given for lack of time for continuing professional
development (CPD), even in the developed world2, where they are perhaps
not a fraction of those in developing countries. With less than one
psychiatrist per 100 000 population and total

   **Correspondence:**

   **Saeed Farooq,** MCPS, FCPS.

   Associate Professor, and Head Department of Psychiatry, PGMI,Lady
   Reading Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan

   E-mail: sfarooqlrh@yahoo.com

health spending equivalent to £7 per person in most developing
countries4, CPD for psychiatrists must be con- sidered an important
strategy to cope with the colossal burden of mental illness, rather than
just an individual need.

One of the most important advantages of CPD is that it allows doctors
time to discover and fulfill learning needs, increase job satisfaction
and improve self-es- teem. This is perhaps more important for a
practitioner in a developing country, who is constantly faced with the
ruinous effects of bureaucratic problems and the insur- mountable
hurdles of scarce resources. Planned CPD activities in these settings
should help to prevent pro- fessional isolation and burnout while
boosting the individual’s morale3.

A common misconception about CPD is that in- volves reading journals and
the taking some MCQ tests, a burden imposed by regulatory authorities.
Actually the activities recognized for CPD tend to be varied and any
activity which can lead to ‘professional development’ can be considered
for this purpose. These can be broadly divided into three categories:
*(a)* “live” or exter- nal activities (courses, seminars, meetings,
conferences, audio and video presentations), *(b)* internal activities
(practice based activities, case conferences, grand rounds, journal
clubs, teaching, consultation with peers and colleagues), and *(c)*
“enduring” materials (print, CD Rom, or web based materials) 5.

In majority of developed countries CPD is now mandatory5. Developing a
CPD plan for a developing country, where training and development
inevitably take a back seat to meeting the basic needs of the popula-
tion, is an uphill task. The regulatory and legislative mea- sures
resulting in formal requirements for CPD in the developed world are
non-existent in almost all the de- veloping countries3.

However, it would be wrong to assume that psy- chiatrist in developing
countries are not involved in CPD activities. As true professionals we
are always trying to devlope our skills and update our knowledge. This
is mostly at individual level and lacks institutional support. In view
of increasing demands of services, a mind bog- gling expansion in
knowledge, ever changing technolo- gies and competing demands on our
time from all quar- ters this has to be more structured and planed.

In many developing countries postgraduate train- ing programes narrowly
focus on clinical skills6. How- ever, a World Health Organization task
force on the struc- ture of psychiatric services in developing countries
rec- ommended long ago that the psychiatrists in these coun- tries
should devote ‘only part of their working hours’ to the clinical care of
patients. Most of their time should be devoted to training primary
health care workers and work- ing with other disciplines7. This requires
the develop- ment of skills in training the trainers, working
effectively with other disciplines, particularly primary care, and de-
veloping partnerships with the traditional healers who cater for large
populations. A CPD programme in these countries must focus on developing
these skills. This may at times take precedence over the individuals’
needs of, for example, being updated in recent advances in
psychopharmacology, which may not be applicable or even available for
large populations.

CPD in a country like Pakistan will depend heavily on the
responsibilities and resources of individuals . One of options would be
to develope small “cooperatives” of psychiatrists who can establish a
‘group’ CPD programme. Personal Development Plans as suggested by
Holloway8 can be helpful in this. These plans can help individuals to
identify their needs for learning and development based on clear
objectives and identify the strategies to achieve these. These groups
can be orga- nized around a private practice, an organization or a
region. These small groups of practitioners can help to support and
maintain each other in CPD. An appraiser or mentor who inspires and
challenges critical thinking can help an individual to avoid the common
trap of ignoring areas of greatest need by denying their existence. For
example, a group which is facing enor- mous workloads can identify time
management and priority setting as important areas and develop a
programme of learning and practice skills required for the same.

Innovative strategies will be needed in view of the lack of educational
resources and widely different working conditions. Learning that occurs
in the context of the daily workplace is far more likely to be relevant
and reinforced, leading to better practice9. Work-based learning,
perhaps the least recognised method of CPD, should take precedence over
other methods. This should also help to allay the common misconception
that CPD is a passive learning activity. CPD should be built into busy
routines. Its activities might include observa- tion and reflection on
difficult cases, seeking the opin- ions of specialists from other
disciplines and developing special interest groups for a particular
condition or subject.

   Professional associations like Pakistan Psychiat- ric Society can
   play vital role in these activities. The continuing medical education
   activities organized by such professional organizations in these
   countries can be a starting point for the CPD programme. These
   activi-

ties, however, need to be guided by a planned educa- tional policy
suitable for a particular country or region. It should also help the
professionals from many develop- ing countries to collaborate with each
other as they are going to have similar training needs.

Internet has provided unique opportunity. Access to the latest advances
in the field is now possible even in the remote areas at an
unprecedented level. Numer- ous website with free access are devoted to
providing continuing medical education. Moreover, it is possible to
discuss the difficult cases in real time as well as ob- serve others to
learn skills like psychotherapy.

The World Health Report 2001 recommended that, ‘Most developing
countries need to increase and improve training of mental health
professionals, who will provide specialized care as well as support the
primary health care programmes... Once trained, these profes- sionals
should be encouraged to remain in their country in positions that make
the best use of their skills10.

Regional and international collaboration, supported by the use of
information technology, is urgently needed. The challenge of providing
mental health for all in these countries can be met only through a
well-planned CPD programme, both at the individual and the institutional
level.

   REFERNCES

1.  Malik SB. Dilemmas of a psychiatrist in a developing country.
    Psychiat Bull 1998; 22: 578–80.

2.  Boulay C. From CME to CPD: Getting better at getting better. BMJ
    2000; 320: 393–4.

3.  Farooq S. Continuing professional development for psy- chiatrists in
    developing countries. Adv Psychiat Treat- ment 2003; 9: 161-3.

4.  Garner P, Kale R, Dickson R, et al. Getting research findings into
    practice. Implementing research findings in developing countries.
    BMJ 1998; 317: 531–5.

5.  McCall P, McLaren B , Rotem Continuing medical education and
    continuing professional development: international comparisons.BMJ
    2000;320:,432-5.

6.  Farooq S. Psychiatric training in developing countries. B J
    Psychiatry 2001; 179: 464.

7.  World Health Organization. Organization of Mental Health Services in
    Developing Countries. Sixteenth Re- port of WHO Expert Committee on
    Mental Health. Geneva: WHO , 1975.

8.  Holloway J. CPD portfolios and personal development plans: why and
    how? Adv Psych Treatment 2000; 6: 467–73.

9.  Davis DA, Thompson MA, Oxman AD, Haynes B. Chang- ing physician
    performance: a systematic review of the effect of continuing medical
    education strategies. JAMA 1995; 274: 700-5.

10. World Health Organization. The World Health Report, 2001. Geneva:
    WHO, 2001.
