   JPPS 2007; 4(2): 125-126 BOOK REVIEW

BOOK REVIEW

   **The Day The Mountains Moved: Interna- tional Perspectives on
   Handling Psycho- trauma**

Edited by Unaiza Niaz. Published by Sama Books & IPTP, Karachi ,
Pakistan. 2007. 277 pp.

.. image:: media/image1.png
   :width: 3.16701in
   :height: 4.58802in

Psycho – Trauma has emerged as one of the most significant issues of
modern day psychiatry. While the natural disasters have regularly struck
our planet, since its birth, it is the man-made disasters, in large
numbers, in the new millennium that has affected our world. Disas- ters
will always be with us. They have been happening since time immemorial
and they will continue happen- ing. There is not much we can do to
prevent them but we can do a lot to prevent and manage their
psychosocial consequences.

Disasters like earthquakes are events that capture human attention and
concern. However, the public inter-

est in these events, are often short-lived and their long- term
consequences, like psychiatric morbidity, in par- ticular are
underestimated by the health and social service providers. In the last
few decades’ disaster re- search has indicated significant and prolonged
adverse consequences of these disasters. Modern research has however
shown that the psychiatric and social sequelae to disasters, man-made or
natural, can take diverse and multiple shape and forms, PTSD being only
one of such clinical fall-outs.

The Day the Mountains Moved, edited by Dr. Unaiza Niaz an eminent and a
highly respected Paki- stani name in the World of Psychiatry, is a book
that covers a variety of “International Perspectives on Han- dling
Psycho-Trauma”. She is a distinguished scholar and clinician in Pakistan
with recognized international stature particularly in the area of
disasters, women and children. Dr Unaiza Niaz, is already an author of
four books and she has contributed Chapters in several books. She has to
her credit numerous scientific publi- cations in both national and
international journals ,be- sides several literary publications. Dr
Niaz, has again taken the lead to publish the first book on Psycho-
trauma to came out on the Pakistan Earthquake 2005.

Spread over 300 pages ‘The Day the Mountains Moved – International
Perspective on Handling Psycho- Trauma’, the book has contributions from
some of the most respected names in the World of Trauma Psy- chiatry.
There are contributions from Aberdeen Centre for Trauma Research,
Scotland UK, Institute of Psychia- try (IOP) King’s College, London,
University of Penn- sylvania, USA, Faculty of Medicine and Istanbul Cen-
tre for Behavior Research and Therapy, Turkey, World Psychiatry
Association, School of Psychology, Univer- sity of Buenos Aires,
Argentina and El Salvador Uni- versity.

There are local contributions from Armed Forces of Pakistan, Institute
of Psychiatry and WHO Collabo- rating Centre, Rawalpindi, Lady Reading
Hospital, Peshawar and Fatima Jinnah Women University, Rawalpindi,
Pakistan. And the details of IPTP’S work with women and children.
Valuable chapters are also written by Dr Niaz on the Role of Media,&
Faith & Resil- ience in recovery from psycho-trauma

The book has a list of twenty nine Pakistan and International
contributors, who have dealt with preven- tive, promotive, therapeutic,
administrative, scientific, and ethical and public health aspects of the
issues of

Psycho – Trauma in the backdrop of the Pakistan Earth- quake, 2005.

The book is illustrated with colored photographs of the camps and the
therapy clinics run by the IPTP, alongside useful maps, figures, tables
and histograms that has added value to the excellent text. With more
than half of the articles written by the editor herself, the book is
written with a unique blend of literary and medi- cal writing styles.
This approach makes the book not only reader – friendly but also makes
it equally useful and an interesting read for professional and lay read-
ers.

The foreword has been written by Professor David Alexander of ACTR,
Scotland UK, an authority of International standing on the subject of
Trauma Psychiatry. The preface is by Professor Christodoulou of World
Psychiatric Association. The book therefore clearly has an International
acceptance, relevance and standing.

Following an introductory chapter that provides useful perspective to
the book is probably the most im- portant chapter on ‘Scientific Facts
on Earthquake’. The book is then divided into the Pakistani and the
Interna- tional perspectives. This approach links the response of
Pakistan’s mental health professionals with existing approaches on
dealing with psychosocial consequences of disasters. The public and
private sector viewpoint is augmented by approaches taken by the Armed
Forces Psychiatric services the response of the non – govern-

mental organizations, including that by the significant work of IPTP.
The chapter on the International Perspec- tive provides a review of
aetiological, psychopathologi- cal and therapeutic approaches.

The book has a strong epilogue that summarizes the work of the
contributors and also sets a futuristic agenda. The important topics
covered have been pains- takingly indexed.

This book is indeed timely produced authoritative text, identifying what
were the effects of the disaster, what were the local and international
responses, and what lessons were to be learned. As Prof Alexander states
in his preface “what impresses me even more is Dr Niaz’s ability to weld
together her humanitarian con- cern for the survivors and the equally
valuable scientific interest in the effects of major trauma and how best
to address these”.

The SAMA Books have done a good job and the book has an aesthetic and
pleasing lay out.

A reasonably priced text, this book is bound to become an excellent
addition to the world literature on the subject of Psycho-trauma and is
strongly recom- mended for all private and professional libraries.

   **Prof. Malik H Mubbashar**

   Vice Chancellor,

   University of Health Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan
