   JPPS 2006; 3(1): 25–29 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

OCCUPATIONAL STRESS AND JOB SATISFACTION AMONG NURSES AT A TERTIARY CARE
HOSPITAL

   Asad Nizami, Irum Rafique, Faiza Aslam, Fareed A Minhas, Najma Najam

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objective**: This study was conducted to find the different sources
   of occupational stress and the level of job satisfaction among nurses
   working at a tertiary care hospital.

   **Design:** Cross sectional study.

   **Place and Duration of Study**: The study was conducted at
   Rawalpindi General Hospital from March 2005 to June 2005

   **Subjects and Methods**: The sample comprised of 50 female staff
   nurses working in different depart- ments in Rawalpindi General
   Hospital. The sampling technique was stratified random sampling to
   in- clude nurses working in various departments of hospital.
   Occupational stress and job satisfaction was assessed by Pressure
   Management Indicator in terms of Job Satisfaction, Organization,
   Mental well- being, Physical well-being, a 120 item self-report
   measure, encompassing many areas of stress evident in the workplace.

   **Results:** Majority of the sample (74%) was working on full time
   whereas 26% were working on contract basis. The mean working hours in
   a week were 51.16 hrs *+* 8.98 hrs. On the scale of mental well
   being, which is comprised of various subscales, the mean score for
   resilience was 18.78 *+* 4.32 and for confi- dence level it was 10.40
   *+* 4.19. These scores were more than the standard score which were
   17.66 and

   10.37 respectively. Majority of participants (70%) felt secure in
   their organization. Similarly 74% of partici- pants scored more than
   the standard on sub scale of job satisfaction (Mean = 24.5 *+* 3.68).
   On the scale for sources of pressure, the mean score on workload was
   19.28 *+* 5.77, on personal responsibility the mean score was 14.04
   *+* 2.99 and on the home/work balance the score was 19.92 *+* 4.36.
   The mean scores of participants on all these items were more than the
   standard scores.

   **Conclusion:** It appears that the nurses at a tertiary care
   hospital have a high index of occupational stress and majority of it
   generates from the administrative disorganization of the firm and
   less from the personal or the monitory factors.

   **Key words:** Occupational Stress Job Satisfaction Nurses.

INTRODUCTION
============

Occupational stress is any discomfort which is felt and perceived at a
personal level and triggered by in- stances, events or situations that
are too intense and fre-

quent in nature so as to exceed a person’s coping capa- bilities and
resources to handle them adequately.1

Each individual is exposed to a range of stressors both at work and in
their personal lives. Pressure at work

can be positive leading to increased productivity. How-

ever, when this pressure becomes excessive it has a

   **Asad Nizami,** Consultant Psychiatrist, Institute of Psychiatry,
   WHO Collaborating Centre, Rawalpindi General Hospital,

   Rawalpindi, Pakistan

   `e-mail:asad_nizami@yahoo.com <mailto:asad_nizami@yahoo.com>`__

   **Irum Rafique,** MSc Behavioral Sciences, Fatima Jinnah Women
   University, Rawalpindi.

   **Faiza Aslam,** Research Consultant, Institute of Psychiatry, WHO
   Collaborating Centre, Rawalpindi General Hospital, Rawalpindi,
   Pakistan

   **Fareed A Minhas,** Prof & Head Institute of Psychiatry, WHO
   Collaborating Centre, Rawalpindi General Hospital, Rawalpindi,
   Pakistan

   **Najma Najam**, Vice Chancellor, Fatima Jinnah Women University,
   Rawalpindi.

   **Correspondence: Dr. Asad Nizami**

   negative impact. The individual perceive themselves as being unable
   to cope and not to possess the necessary skills to combat their
   stress. Stress is acknowledged to be one of the main causes of
   absence from work.2

   Job satisfaction is the contentedness of individu- als with their
   job. Multiple factors can influence a person’s level of job
   satisfaction; these factors range from the level of pay and benefits,
   perceived fairness of the promotion system within the organization,
   the quality of the work- ing conditions to leadership and social
   relationships.

   The occupational stressors can be categorized into four major groups.
   Firstly, the working conditions, including shift and week-end work,
   inadequate remu- neration, hours of work, discrimination and safety
   at the work environment. Secondly, relationships at work includ-

ing quality of relationships with peers, subordinates and supervisors.
Thirdly, role conflict and ambiguity including ill-defined role,
functions, expectations, and duties. Fourthly, organization structure
and climate which includes communication policy and practice, major
changes in the workplace, culture of the organization, and lack of
participation in decision-making. Another cause is career development
including under utilization of skills or failing to reach full
potential. Another contrib- uting factor is the nature of the job which
might amount to an immense amount of physical and emotional ex-
haustion.

The surveys of work-related illness in UK estimated that 563,000
individuals suffered from work-related stress, depression or anxiety.
Surveillance schemes indicated an estimated 6946 new cases of
work-related mental ill health reported by psychiatrists and
occupational physi- cians in Britain in 2002. Over 85% of these cases
were categorized as work-related anxiety and depres- sion or other
work-related stress that probably together represent cases of
work-stress related psychological ill health.3

Nursing is a stressful profession. Caring for clients, individuals,
families, groups, populations or entire com- munities, with multiple,
complex and distressing prob- lems can be overwhelming for even the most
experienced practitioner. Nurses regularly face emotionally charged
situations and encounter intense interpersonal and interprofessional
situations and conflict in the workplace while trying to make
appropriate and safe decisions.4

A study conducted in Rawalpindi found that almost all nurses reported
their work related stress as either se- vere or moderate. However, over
two-third of them re- ported as being in control of work life5. Another
study investigated the difference between female doctors and nurses
regarding the home-work stress and burnout. Data were collected from 143
women (69 doctors and 74 nurses) working in public hospitals of Lahore.
Results indicated that the nurses were significantly different from
female doctors in the levels of depersonalization of others and reduced
personal accomplishment dimen- sions of burnout. Results also suggested
that the rela- tionship between home-work stress and burnout was
moderated by organizational sources of support pre- dominantly in
nurses.

It is therefore, pertinent to identify the various sources of
occupational stress and job satisfaction among the nurses at a tertiary
care hospital through an evidenced based mechanism to highlight the
difficulties in order to ensure a better health care delivery service.
The main purpose of the present study is to find out these sources of
stress among nurses in a Tertiary Care Hospital.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

This cross sectional study was conducted at Rawalpindi General Hospital.
Over a four month period

the female staff nurses, serving in the morning and evening shifts of
various departments of a tertiary care facility were recruited for the
study. The sample com- prised of 50 female staff nurses working in
different de- partments in Rawalpindi General Hospital. The sampling
technique was stratified random sampling to include nurses working in
various departments of Hospital. Two nurses were selected randomly from
all the major de- partments of the hospital, one nurse from day shift
and one from the evening shift. The nurses having any chronic physical
or psychiatric problem were excluded.

Occupational stress and job satisfaction was as- sessed by Pressure
Management Indicator. Pressure Management Indicator was developed by
Williams and Cooper (1998) from the Occupational Stress Indicator
developed by Cooper, Sloan & Williams in 1988 in order to address
shortcomings in some scales of the Occupa- tional Stress Indicator. The
Pressure Management Indi- cator is a 120 item self-report measure,
encompassing many areas of stress evident in the workplace. Pressure
Management Indicator contains a demographic sheet and 8 subscales, which
examines the following areas.

1. Satisfaction 12 Items

2. Organization 26 Items

3. Mental Well-being 12 Items

4. Physical Well-being 9 Items

5. Sources of Pressure 40 Items

6. Type A Behavior 15 Items

7. Influence and Control 15 Items

8. Coping and Interpersonal Support 17 Items

For the present study Pressure Management Indi- cator was translated and
back translated in Urdu with the help of mental health professionals and
bilingual persons. After completing the translation process a pilot
trial was carried out on the sample of 10 staff nurses of another
tertiary care facility of Rawalpindi, to find out the reliability of the
instrument. The pre-testing of the instru- ment indicated the
satisfactory reliability of all the 24 subscales of the instrument.

All participants participated in the study voluntar- ily, they read and
signed an informed consent form prior to participating in the study.
Researcher gave a brief ori- entation to each selected participant about
the instru- ment. Pressure Management Indicator was administered to each
participant, which took approximately 25 to 30 minutes. The scores of
the participants on the test were recorded. All the data was entered and
analyzed in Sta- tistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS 10).
Descrip- tive statistics like means, standard deviations, propor- tions
and frequencies were calculated.

RESULTS
=======

All of the fifty participants completed the scales. The majority of the
sample 37 (74%) was working on full

time whereas 13 (26%) were working on contract basis. The mean working
hours in a week of our sample were

51.16 hours (S.D\ *+* 8.98 hours). The duration of the cur- rent job was
1-10 years for 52 % (n=26) of the staff nurses whereas 28 %(14) worked
for last 11-20 years and 20%

(10) had been working for last 21-30 years. All the par- ticipants
(n=50,100%) stated that they were non smok- ers and all considered
themselves to be in good physi- cal health. When inquired about any sad
event or nega- tive pressures in last three months, 9 (18%) had experi-
enced it whereas 41 (82%) did not.

35 (70%) nurses scored above the normative score of 17.44, (mean=17.44
SD=3.84) on the subscale of or- ganization security indicating that the
majority of partici- pants felt secure in their organization. As regards
the organizational commitment which shows how commit- ted a person is to
his or her organization and the extent to which he or she feels that
work improves the quality of life, 39 (78%) scored above the normative
score of 19.48 (mean=21.7, SD=3.49) . Similarly 38 (74%) participants
secured more than the normative score of 23.54 on the subscale for job
satisfaction (mean=24.5, SD=3.68) thereby showing satisfaction about the
types of work they were involved in, in terms of tasks and functions.
Re- garding the organizational satisfaction subscale that de- picts that
how satisfied one feels about the way an orga- nization is structured
and the way it works, 60% of the participants scored less than the
normative score of 20.23 (mean=19.3 SD=5.02).

The table 1, shows the mental and physical health of the participants.
Physical symptoms mean how calm a person feels in terms of physical
tension or other un- comfortable sensations. The standard score on this
subscale is 14.95 and mean score of the sample is al- most half of it.
The scores on the energy level of the par- ticipants that refers to the
amount of energy and vitality someone has before he or she feels tired
and worn out were also less than the normative levels. Similarly scores

   Table 1

   Normative mean score, respondents mean score, and standard deviation
   of the subscales State of mind, Resilience, Confidence level,
   Physical Symptoms and Energy Level (N=50).

+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    **Mental Well-       |    **Normative |          |    **Standard |
|    being**              |    score**     | **Mean** |               |
|                         |                |          |   deviation** |
+=========================+================+==========+===============+
|    State of mind        | 20.67          |    17.84 |    *+*\ 7.49  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Resilience           | 17.66          |    18.74 |    *+*\ 4.32  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Confidence level     | 10.37          |    10.40 |    *+*\ 4.19  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Physical well-being  | 14.95          |    7.54  |    *+*\ 3.64  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Energy level         | 14.95          |    11.28 |    *+*\ 5.50  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+

on resilience confidence level and mental well being were less than the
normative score for those subscales.

The scores of the subscales of influence and con- trol were also
calculated. Control refers to how much one feels able to influence and
control events and personal influence refers to the extent to which
someone is able to exercise discretion in his or her job. 31
participants who comprised 62% of the total sample showed good
controlling abilities by securing higher than the normal level. Equal
number of participants scored above and below the cut off point for
normative scores.

The table 2 shows the scores of the 8 subscales of Sources of pressure.
Mean scores of all the sources of the Pressure in the staff nurses were
higher than the nor- mative scores.

   Table 2

   Normative mean score, respondent’s mean score, and standard deviation
   of the subscales of the Section Sources of Pressure in Nurses.
   (N=50).

+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    **Sources of         |    **Normative | **Mean** |    **Standard |
|    pressure**           |    score**     |          |               |
|                         |                |          |   deviation** |
+=========================+================+==========+===============+
|    Workload             |    17.79       | 19.28    |    *+*\ 5.77  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Relationships        |    25.46       | 27.74    |    *+*\ 7.84  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Recognition          |    12.49       | 13.76    |    *+*\ 4.43  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Organization climate |    13.02       | 15.28    |    *+*\ 3.58  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Personal             |    12.26       | 14.04    |    *+*\ 2.99  |
|    responsibility       |                |          |               |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Managerial role      |    9.54        | 11.10    |    *+*\ 3.65  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Home / work balance  |    13.92       | 19.92    |    *+*\ 4.36  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Daily hassles        |    11.41       | 12.94    |    *+*\ 4.17  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+

The scores for the subscales of the section coping and interpersonal
support were also calculated where problem focus refers to the extent to
which one plans ahead and manages his or her time to deal with prob-
lems. 38 (76%) of the participants scored above the nor- mative score.
Normative Score is 24.52 and the mean score of staff nurses on this
subscale is 25.32. Life/work balance means the extent to which a person
is able to separate home from work and not let things get to him or her.
The normative score on this subscale is 16.90 and only 9 (18%) of the
staff nurses scores were above the normative score. Social support
refers to the help one gets by discussing problems or situations with
other people. The normative score on social support is 10.75

   Table 3

   Normative mean score, respondents mean score, and standard deviation
   of the subscales of Problem focus, Life / Work balance, and

   Social Support. (N=50).

+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    **Coping and         |    **Normative | **Mean** |    **Standard |
|    interpersonal        |    score**     |          |               |
|    support**            |                |          |   deviation** |
+=========================+================+==========+===============+
|    Problem focus        |    24.52       | 25.32    |    *+*\ 3.52  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Life/work balance    |    16.90       | 15.46    |    *+*\ 2.62  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+
|    Social support       |    10.75       | 11.74    |    *+*\ 2.61  |
+-------------------------+----------------+----------+---------------+

and only 17 (34%) participants scored less than the nor- mative scores.

DISCUSSION
==========

The present study was conducted to identify vari- ous sources of
occupational stress among nurses in a tertiary care hospital. Pressure
Management Indicator was used as an instrument to highlight the
different sources of occupational stress among staff nurses in a
standardized manner.

The high scores regarding the satisfaction with the organization,
indicates that the staff nurses feel satisfied about the types of work
they are involved in, in terms of tasks and functions. Majority felt
satisfied with their ac- tual job, the type of work they are doing or
the work they are required to perform. However they were unsatisfied
with the style of supervision that their supervisors use and the way
conflicts are resolved in the hospital. Appar- ently discrimination in
our hospital environments between the administrators, clinical and the
para- medical staff underlies the poor quality health ser- vice outcome.
It is well documented that undesirable work schedules, lack of autonomy,
and lack of input into decision-making can affect satisfaction with
super- visors. 6

When questioned about the Organizational aspects, majority felt secure
about the stability of their organization and level of job security.
They be- lieved that their job improved their quality of life despite
many sources of pressure. Lack of com- munication and cooperation
between professionals was major sources of distress and dissatisfaction
among nurses.

It is a common practice to assess the physical health of the health care
providers but the assessment of their mental health has generally been
ignored. Fewer years of experience, negative family and friend support,
and negative total work satisfaction were found to be sig- nificant
predictors of psychological ill health among nurses7 . The assessment of
the mental health of the

   nurses showed that majority were anxious and felt upset.

   The physical health parameters showed lower than normal scores
   indicating that the participants may have some feeling of physical
   discomfort. They felt that they had less energy and were more tired.
   This again raises the question that despite medical examination which
   is done yearly as per official protocol and indicating no
   abnormality, could exhaustion be a somatic pre- sentation of the
   underlying deteriorating mental health culminating into anxiety and
   depressive symptoms?

   Higher scores on the impatience and feeling an- gry when they could
   not get things done on time or when they were kept them waiting may
   indicate that the re- spondents had some type A personality traits.
   Studies indicate that Type A scores are correlated positively with
   scores on burnout and negatively with ratings of job sat-
   isfaction8,9.

Exploring the internal strengths and the coping skills indicates that
the staff nurses do more use of prob- lem focusing. Majority try to deal
with the situation ob- jectively in an unemotional way. The majority use
effec- tive time management to plan ahead. Coping and job satisfaction
appear to be reciprocally related 4,10 . On a personal level there was
more use of social support and majority talked to an understanding
friend. The nurses’ common coping mechanisms included problem solving,
social support and avoidance. Perceived control appears to be an
important mediator of occupational stress. Coping and job satisfaction
appear to be recipro- cally related.

   It can be concluded that the nurses working at a tertiary care
   hospital encounter various occupational stresses, which can affect
   their job satisfaction and pro- fessional capabilities. Sources of
   occupational stress are clinical workload, difficulty in
   relationships, poor recog- nition of handwork, non conducive
   organizational climate, immense personal responsibility, managerial
   role difficulties, home/work imbalances and daily has- sles. Sources
   of satisfaction included organizational security, organizational
   commitment, job satisfaction, personal influence and control but a
   general dissatisfac- tion with the organizational functioning or the
   monitory factors.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Malta. Stress at Work. A Concept in Stress. Human Factors Limited.
    Business Psychology and Strategy Development 2004.

2.  Mead R. What is Stress? Roger Mead Associates, Stress Management,
    Coaching and Training for Indi- viduals and Groups 2000.

3.  Occupational Stress Statistics Information Sheet. Health and Safety
    Highlights Publications 2003.

4.  Parikh P, Taukari A, Bhattacharya T. Occupational Stress and Coping
    among Nurses. J Health Manag, 2004; 6: 115-27.

5.  Shaikh MA. Career Satisfaction among Nurses. J Coll Physicians Surg
    Pak 2004; 14: 750-9.

6.  Joseph, Deshpande. The Impact of Ethical Climate on Job Satisfaction
    of Nurses. Health Care Manag Rev 1997; Vol No: 76-81.

7.  Arafa, Nazel, Ibrahim, Attia. Predictors of psychologi- cal
    well-being of nurses in Alexandria, Egypt. Nurs Pract 2003; 5:
    313-20.

8.  Virk, Kumar C. Occupational stress and work motiva- tion in relation
    to age, job level and type-A behavior in nursing professionals. J
    Indian Academy Applied Psychol 2001; 27: 51-5.

9.  Lavanco. Burnout syndrome and type A behavior in nurses and teachers
    in Sicily\ *.* J Psychol Health 1997; 2: 523-8.

10. Rout. Stress amongst district nurses: a preliminary investigation. J
       Clin Nursing. 2000; 2. 303-9
