Depression and anxiety in the caregivers of mentally ill patients
=================================================================

   Rashda Saif Niazi, Shabana Basheer, Fareed A. Minhas, Najma Najam

**Objective.** This research was a comparative study aimed at assessing
the level of depression and anxiety among the caregivers of male and
female patients with different psychiatric diagnosis.

   **Design:** It was a Retrospective study.

**Place and Duration of the Study:** The data was taken from both In and
Out patient departments Institute of Psychiatry Rawalpindi General
Hospital, Rawalpindi from January 2004 to April 2004.

**Subject and Method:** The sample consisted of primary caregivers of 50
patients’ of both genders, 25 male and 25 female patients. One primary
caregivers of each patient was taken. Hamilton Rating Scale for
depression (HAM-D) and HAM-A were used to assess depression and Anxiety.
Sample was taken from the out patient department of Rawalpindi general
Hospital.

**Results:** The result of study revealed that caregivers of the
patients with psychiatric illnesses have significant high level of
depression and anxiety and significant gender differences were also
observed. Results showed that caregivers of young male patients have
high level of depression as compare to older male patients and young
female patient. No significant differences were observed between care
givers of young male and female patients. The caregivers of patients
carrying the diagnosis of schizophrenia have higher level of depression
as compared to caregivers of depression and substance abuse. The
duration of illness is also important dimension as care givers of the
patients who were ill more that 18 months their family reported about
being depressed and anxious.

**Conclusion:** It can be suggested that the care givers of young
patients have higher levels of depression and anxiety as compared to
older patients and duration of illness and gender are important
parameters to this.

   **KEY WORDS:** Depression, Anxiety, Care Givers

INTRODUCTION
============

Care giving and care receiving can occur at any point in the
life-course, and is typically associated with chronic illnesses or
disabilities, which result in losses of independence and functioning.
There is no standard definition of family care giving, which can be used
consistently from one study to another (National Alliance of Care
Giving, 1997). What the term care giving means is not always clear and
frequently varies with the purpose for which such definitions are used
(Schulz et al., 1997). Successful management of major mental illness in
the community relies significantly on an informal or non-professional
network of caregivers. The needs and experiences of such caregivers have
been little studied with respect to major chronic mood disorders (Dore &
Romans, 1999).

Care giving does not cause depression, nor will everyone who provides
care experience the negative feelings that go with depression. But in an
effort to provide the best possible care for a family member, caregivers
often sacrifice their own physical and emotional needs and the emotional
and physical experiences involved with providing care can strain even
the most capable person. Everyone has negative feelings that come and go
over time, but when these feelings become more intense and leave
caregivers totally drained of energy, crying frequently or easily
angered by their loved one or other people, it may well be a warning
sign of depression. Concerns about depression arise when the sadness and
crying don't go away or when those negative feelings are unrelenting
(Family Caregiver Alliance Fact Sheet, 2002).

Almost one-third of all caregivers is balancing employment and care
giving responsibilities, and of this group, two- thirds report conflicts
in roles that require them to rearrange their work schedules, work fewer
than normal hours, and/or take unpaid leaves of absence. Because care
giving is such an emotionally draining experience, caregivers have high
rates of depression when compared to the general population. Research on
family caregivers of mentally ill relatives has historically focused on
negative aspects of care giving, often described as caregiver burden.
Caregivers' perspectives on both negative and positive aspects of care
giving in Canada. A qualitative approach was used. Data collection
involved 20 in -depth, audio taped, semi structured interviews focusing
on caregiver's positive and negative personal experiences with care
giving to a relative with mental illness. Caregivers reported common
negative impacts but also beneficial effects, such as feelings of
gratification, love and pride. Main themes included stigma, systems
issues, life lessons learned, and love and caring for the ill relative.
This study counterbalance the predominantly negative consequences
previously reported and add to emerging literature on positive aspects
of care giving. Mental health professionals need to help care giving
families make choices to improve their challenging situations & identify
rewards of care giving & to advocate for increased systemic supports to
ease caregiver burden. More than one quarter (26.6 percent) of the adult
population has provided care for a chronically ill, disabled or aged
family member or friend during the past year, (National Family
Caregivers Association NFCA, 1997). Based on current census data, that
translates into more than 54 million people. About three-fourths are
women, many of whom

also juggle work and child-care responsibilities. According to a 1997
survey by National Family Caregivers Association, 61 % of caregivers
reported feeling more depressed than before.

Some researchers use the concepts of objective and subjective burden.
Objective caregiver burden refers to the practical problems associated
with care giving (e.g. difficulties with neighbors and police, disrupted
family relationships). Subjective caregiver burden refers to the
caregiver's emotional reaction (e.g. reduce morale, anxiety and
depression. Some researchers use the concepts of objective and
subjective burden. Objective caregivers burden refers to the practical
problems associated with care giving (e.g., difficulties with neighbors
and police, disrupted family relationships). Subjective caregiver burden
refers to the caregiver's emotional reactions (e.g., reduced morale,
anxiety and depression.

A recent study conducted by the National Alliance for Care giving found
that more than half of those who provide major care for their parents
(and one in four who provide any care) experienced stresses and burden.
This is a major concern because prolonged stress can have serious
emotional consequences. Emotional impact of any psychiatric disorder on
family or primary caregivers can vary from frustration, anxiety, fear,
depression and guilt to grief Depression is one of the emotion, which is
experienced by caregivers. Four types of caregiver burden resulting from
stress have been identified (Select Committee on Aging, 1987); emotional
burden, physical burden, financial burden and family burden, the 1982
long-term care study demonstrated that the self-assessed health status
(or physical burden) of caregivers was poorer than a comparison groups
of non-care giving age peers in the general population. In contrast,
other studies found that caregiver's self- assessed health status is
compare able to (George & Gwyther, 1986) or better than (Danis, 1978)
comparison group of on-caregivers.

Deimling and Bass (1986) reported that self assessed change in
caregiver's health since becoming a caregiver was best explained by
patient's daily activities' limitations, suggestions that those who
provided the highest level of care had the greatest change in physical
heath. A new Yale study looks more deeply at family caregivers' mental
health - specifically, at the effects on caregivers when their patient
suffers frequent distress. Severe pain, delirium, choking, vomiting —
all these can leave family caregivers feeling frightened and helpless
(Bradley, 2003). For most caregivers, helplessness — rather than fear —
was the overwhelming emotion attached to their experience. The study by
Bradley (2003) "demonstrates that caregivers not only experience the
burdens of providing essential care to their terminally ill loved ones,
but that they also extensively and frequently witness their loved ones
in serious distress". More attention should be given to these
detrimental effects.

Close to one-third of caregivers surveyed said that the emotional and
behavioral symptoms of the illness caused them extreme hardship. Drug
abuse, suicide threats and violent behavior, while not necessarily daily
realities, exist as constant sources of anxiety and are cited by more
than half of caregivers as their most pressing concerns. Researchers
have also explored another dimension, the effect of race on caregiver's
depression, Flanagan (1994) conducted interviews to explore the
relationship among race, caregiver depression and global role strain
with African American and white spouse caregivers. Although African
American caregivers were less likely to report depression and role
strain, there was no interaction by race in the process influencing
caregiver distress.

According to the literature on stress and coping, the burden of care
giving to a mentally ill partner might have an impact on the mental
health of spouse. As part of a study on the burden of care giving to a
mentally ill family member. Smith (1998) conducted a structured
psychiatric interview with spouses of the patients suffering from
depression, anxiety disorders and schizophrenia (N=151) in university of
Leipzig Germany. A significantly increased prevalence of depressive
disorders was found. It was concluded that psychiatric patients'
partners are at a high risk of developing a depressive disorder. It
appears necessary to develop special interventions for spouses reducing
stress and the risk of getting depressed.

Caregivers reported significant difficulties in their relationships with
the patient when she or he was unwell, with considerable impact on their
own employment, finances, legal matters, co-parenting and other social
relationships. Violence was a particular worry for partner/parent
caregivers of both male and female patients when the patient was
severely depressed. The caregiver's own mental health appeared
unaffected. Despite this, the caregivers appeared emotionally committed
to the patients and showed considerable tolerance of problem behaviors,
which they rank- ordered for difficulty. Among non family partners,
knowledge of the illness before cohabitation was poor.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

In the present research primary care givers of 50 (25male, 25female)
patients carrying the diagnosis of schizophrenia, substance abuse, and
depression (age range 16—70 in which young and old patients with
duration of illness of 2 weeks to 24 weeks were selected. Patients were
selected from the out patient department of the Rawalpindi General
Hospital Rawalpindi, with the help of consultant psychiatrist, through
the technique of non-

probability purposive sampling. Caregivers with prior history of any
psychiatric ailment, caregivers of inpatient department and those using
depression-inducing drugs were not included in the study sample.
Following instruments were used for the data collection.

1. Demographic Sheet

2. Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety

3. Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression

RESULTS
=======

Table 1. *Comparison for HAM-D between the Caregivers of Younger Male and Older Male Patients*
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

+------------+-------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+
|            |       | *M*       |    *SD*  | *t-value* |             |
|   *Groups* |   *N* |           |          |           |   *p-value* |
+============+=======+===========+==========+===========+=============+
|    Younger |    13 | 18.92     |    3.09  | 1.957     |    .063     |
|    male    |       |           |          |           |             |
+------------+-------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+
|    Older   |    12 | 16.17     |    3.93  |           |             |
|    male    |       |           |          |           |             |
+------------+-------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+

..

   Note: df =23 and HAM-D = Hamilton Rating Scale for depression

The result presented in table 1 indicates that there is significant
difference in the level of depression among the caregivers of young male
patients and older male patients (t =1.957, df=23, p<. 063). The mean
score of the caregivers of young male patients are (M=18.92, SD= 3.09)
while the mean score of the caregivers of older male patients are (M
=16.17, SD =3.93).

   **Table 2. Comparison for HAM-A between the Caregivers of Younger
   Male and Older Male**

+-----------+-------+------------+----------+----------+------------+
|           |       | *M*        |    *SD*  |    *     |            |
|  *Groups* |   *N* |            |          | t-value* |  *p-value* |
+===========+=======+============+==========+==========+============+
|           |    13 |    26.77   |    3.30  |    1.218 |    .236    |
|   Younger |       |            |          |          |            |
|    male   |       |            |          |          |            |
+-----------+-------+------------+----------+----------+------------+
|    Older  |    12 |    24.75   |    4.90  |          |            |
|    male   |       |            |          |          |            |
+-----------+-------+------------+----------+----------+------------+

..

   Note: df =23 and HAM-A= Hamilton Rating Scale for anxiety

The result presented in table 2 also indicated that there is no
significant difference in the anxiety level of caregivers of young male
and older male patients (t= 1.218, df=23, p<. 236). The mean score on
HAM-A of caregivers of young male patients are (M=26.77, SD=3.30) while
the mean score of the caregivers of the older male patients are
(M=24.75, SD=4.90).

Table 3. *Comparison for HAM-D between the Caregivers of Younger Female and Older Female*
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

+------------+------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+
|            |      | *M*       |    *SD*  |           |             |
|   *Groups* |  *N* |           |          | *t-value* |   *p-value* |
+============+======+===========+==========+===========+=============+
|    Younger |      | 16.08     |    3.01  |    .339   |    .737     |
|    female  |   13 |           |          |           |             |
+------------+------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+
|    Older   |      | 15.67     |    3.03  |           |             |
|    female  |   12 |           |          |           |             |
+------------+------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+

The result presented in table 3 indicate the there is little difference
in the level of depression among the caregivers of young female and
older female patients (t=.339, p=.737). The mean score of the caregivers
of young female patients are (X=16.92, SD=3.01) while the mean score of
the caregivers of older male patients are (X=15.67, SD=3.03).

   **Table 4. Comparison for HAM-A between the Caregivers of Younger
   Female and Older Female**

+------------+------+-----------+----------+------------+------------+
|            |      | *M*       |    *SD*  |            |            |
|   *Groups* |  *N* |           |          |  *t-value* |  *p-value* |
+============+======+===========+==========+============+============+
|    Younger |      |    25.15  |    5.30  |    0.0941  |    .926    |
|    female  |   13 |           |          |            |            |
+------------+------+-----------+----------+------------+------------+

..

   Older female 12 25.33 4.16

The result presented in table indicated that there is no difference in
the anxiety level of caregivers of young female and older female
patients. (t=.094, p<.926). The mean score on HAM-A of caregivers of
young female patients are (M=25.15, SD=5.30) while the mean score of the
caregivers of the older female patients are (M=25.33, SD=4.16).

   **Table 5. Comparison for HAM-D between the Caregivers of Young Male
   and Young Female Patients**

+------------+-------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+
|            |       | *M*       |    *SD*  |           |             |
|   *Groups* |   *N* |           |          | *t-value* |   *p-value* |
+============+=======+===========+==========+===========+=============+
|    Younger |    13 |    18.92  |    3.09  |           |             |
|    male    |       |           |          |           |             |
+------------+-------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+

..

   2.376 .026

   Young female 132 16.08 3.01

The result presented in table 5 indicate the there is significant
difference in the level of depression among the caregivers of young male
and young female patients (t=2.376, p=.026). The mean score of the
caregivers of young male patients are (M=18.921, SD=3.09) while the mean
score of the caregivers of young female patients are (M=16.92, SD=3.01).

Table 6. *Comparison for HAM-A between the Caregivers of Young Male and Young Female Patients*
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

+------------+-------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+
|            |       | *M*       |    *SD*  | *t-value* |             |
|   *Groups* |   *N* |           |          |           |   *p-value* |
+============+=======+===========+==========+===========+=============+
|    Young   |    13 | 26.77     |    3.30  | 0.933     |    .360     |
|    male    |       |           |          |           |             |
+------------+-------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+
|    Young   |    13 | 25.15     |    5.30  |           |             |
|    female  |       |           |          |           |             |
+------------+-------+-----------+----------+-----------+-------------+

The result presented in table 6 indicate the there is minor difference
in the level of anxiety of young female and young male patients (t=.933,
p< .360). The mean score of the caregivers of young male patients are
(M=26.77, SD=3.30) while the mean score of the caregivers of young
female patients are (M=25.15, SD=5.30).

Table 7. Comparison of HAM-D Scores for Schizophrenia, Depression, and Substance Abuse
======================================================================================

+----------------------+--------------------+-------------------------+
|    Group of Diseases | M                  |    SD                   |
+======================+====================+=========================+
|    Schizophrenia     |    18.56           |    3.00                 |
+----------------------+--------------------+-------------------------+
|    Depression        |    15.35           |    3.10                 |
+----------------------+--------------------+-------------------------+
|    Substances Abuse  |    14.00           |    2.20                 |
|    Total             |                    |                         |
+----------------------+--------------------+-------------------------+

Score across three different groups of diseases indicate differences
among these groups. These differences were further analyzed by applying
the One Way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA).

Table 8. *Difference on the HAM-D Scores between the Caregivers of Schizophrenia, Depression,* and Substance Abuse
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

+-----------------+------------+-------+--------+--------+----------+
|    *Source of   |    *SS*    |       |        |    *F* | *P*      |
|    Variance*    |            |  *df* |   *MS* |        |          |
+=================+============+=======+========+========+==========+
|    Between      | 175.598    |    2  |        |        |    .000  |
|    groups       |            |       | 87.789 | 10.218 |          |
+-----------------+------------+-------+--------+--------+----------+
|    Within       | 404.042    |    47 |        |        |          |
|    groups       |            |       |  80597 |        |          |
+-----------------+------------+-------+--------+--------+----------+
|    Total        | 579.620    |    49 |        |        |          |
+-----------------+------------+-------+--------+--------+----------+

..

   df=49, \***p<.000

Table shows the one way analysis of variance of HAM-D scores of the
caregivers for different groups of diseases. To see the difference with
in-groups post hoc test was used.

Table 9. *Multiple Cmparison with in the group of three diseases.*
------------------------------------------------------------------

I. Illness (J)Illness Mean difference(I-J) Std.Error Sig.

+-------------+------------------+------------+-------------+---------+
|    Sc       |    Substance     |    3.21    |    .92      | .001    |
| hizophrenia |    Abuse         |            |             |         |
+=============+==================+============+=============+=========+
|             |    Depression    |    4.56    |    1.19     | .000    |
+-------------+------------------+------------+-------------+---------+

Table shows that there is significant difference in the level of
depression among the caregivers of schizophrenic patients as compare to
caregivers of depression and substance abuse.

Table 10. *Comparison of HAM-A Scores for Schizophrenia and Substance Abuse*
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

+---------------------+--------------+----------------+---------------+
|    *Group of        |    *N*       | *M*            |    *S.D*      |
|    Diseases*        |              |                |               |
+=====================+==============+================+===============+
|    Schizophrenia    |    25        | 25.08          | 3.87          |
+---------------------+--------------+----------------+---------------+
|    Depression       |    17        | 27.06          | 3.85          |
+---------------------+--------------+----------------+---------------+
|    Substances       |    8         | 23.63          | 6.35          |
+---------------------+--------------+----------------+---------------+

Scores across three groups of diseases indicate differences among these
groups. These differences were further analyzed by applying the One Way
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA).

Table 11. *Difference on the HAM-A Scores between the Caregivers of Schizophrenia, Depression,* and Substance Abuse
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

+-------------------+-----------+------+---+-----+-----------+--------+
|    *Source of     |    *SS*   |      |   |     |    *F*    | *P*    |
|    Variance*      |           | *df* |   |   * |           |        |
|                   |           |      |   | MS* |           |        |
+===================+===========+======+===+=====+===========+========+
|    Between groups |    73.824 |      |   |     |           |        |
|                   |           |      |   |     |   836.912 |  1.974 |
|                   |           |      |   |     |           |        |
|                   |           |      | 2 |     |           |        |
+-------------------+-----------+------+---+-----+-----------+--------+

+--------------+---------------+---------+-----------------------------+
|    0.150     |               |         |                             |
+==============+===============+=========+=============================+
|    Within    |    878.656    | 47      |    18.695                   |
|    groups    |               |         |                             |
+--------------+---------------+---------+-----------------------------+
|    Total     |    952.480    | 49      |                             |
+--------------+---------------+---------+-----------------------------+

..

   df=49, \***p<.150

Table shows the one way analysis of variance of HAM-A scores of the
caregivers for different groups of diseases.

Table 12. *Multiple Cmparisons with in the group of three diseases.*
--------------------------------------------------------------------

+-------------+----------------+------------------+----------+--------+
|             |    (J)Illness  |    Mean          |    S     | Sig.   |
|  (I)Illness |                |                  | td.Error |        |
|             |                |  difference(I-J) |          |        |
+=============+================+==================+==========+========+
|    Sc       |    Substance   |    1.98          |    1.36  | .152   |
| hizophrenia |    Abuse       |                  |          |        |
+-------------+----------------+------------------+----------+--------+
|             |    Depression  |    1.45          |    1.76  | .412   |
+-------------+----------------+------------------+----------+--------+

|image1|\ The findings indicate that there is little difference in the
level of anxiety among the caregivers of depression and substance abuse.

Table 13. *The Duration of Illness and Caregivers Scores on HAM-D and HAM-A*
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

+--------+------------+------+---------+--------+---------+---------+
|    *S  |            |      |    *M*  |        |    *t   |    *p   |
| cales* | *Duration* |  *N* |         |   *SD* | -value* | -value* |
+========+============+======+=========+========+=========+=========+
|        |    1-18    |      |         |        |         |    .96  |
|  HAM-D |    months  |   26 |   15.96 |   3.14 |   1.698 |         |
+--------+------------+------+---------+--------+---------+---------+
|        |    >18     |      |         |        |         |    .98  |
|        |    months  |   24 |   17.58 |   3.61 |   1.688 |         |
+--------+------------+------+---------+--------+---------+---------+
|        |    1-18    |      |         |        |    .097 |    .92  |
|  HAM-A |    months  |   26 |   25.46 |   5.43 |         |         |
+--------+------------+------+---------+--------+---------+---------+
|        |    >18     |      |         |        |    .099 |    .92  |
|        |    months  |   24 |   25.58 |   3.06 |         |         |
+--------+------------+------+---------+--------+---------+---------+

Table shows the impact of duration of illness on the caregivers. Table
indicate caregivers of those patients who had illness more than 18
months had little higher depression level as compare to those who had
illness less than 18 months. There is also very little difference in the
level of anxiety, so there is no mark able difference in both groups.
**DISCUSSION**

A term in the mental health literature that is frequently used to
describe the impact of mental illness on families is "family burden."
Some argue that this term is problematic because it conveys that
families will naturally find caring for the patient "burdensome".

There are four kinds of people in the world—those who have been
caregivers, those who currently are caregivers, those who will be
caregivers and those who need caregivers. Emotional burden is the most
pervasive negative consequence of care giving; parameters of emotional
burden described in relationship to care giving include symptoms of
depression, emotional exhaustion, and feelings of anxiety, helplessness,
and lowered morale (Danis, 1978; Frank father, Smith, & Caro, 1981).

The Pakistani scenario presents a disregard, fair, avoidance or ridicule
by the general public with shame, embarrassment, and concealment on the
part of the family. Mainly religious and superstitious reasons shroud
the thinking and attitude of people. A disability is seen as an invasion
of evil spirit, curse, or a punishment form a God for some sin committed
by the family or the individual in the past. According to Miles (1980a,
1982) and Shah (1982) disabled persons have not yet achieved much
publicity within Pakistan nor have their opinions being given due
consideration.

Many families will say the illness just came out of the blue. However,
it may be that the signs were already there, but were ignored because of
the stigma associated with schizophrenia. Family members will usually
view and talk themselves in believing that the bizarre and unusual
behavior is only temporary. Eventually, the patient's symptoms will
escalate to the point where family members become concerned, and the
symptoms will no longer be regarded as temporary. At this juncture, some
may get professional help; some will try to reach the patient,
encouraging them to

seek assistance; and other will entreat the patient to "snap out of it,"
"stop being lazy," or "get his/her life back on track.

The results supporting the idea that caregivers of young male patients
have higher levels of depression as compared to caregivers of older male
patients on measures higher scores were reported on HAM-D (Roychoudhuri
(1995) in his studies assessed subjective and objective burden of the
carers of schizophrenia and bipolar effective disorder patients. Burden
was found to be higher among the schizophrenic, young, male low income
patients. The present research findings are well-matching with the
result of Several patients in caregiver variables have been found to
contribute to the family burden. Greater burden is associated with
patients who are male, younger in age (Martyns- Yellowe, 1992;
Roychoudhuri et al., 1995), and who have poorer levels of functioning.

Families often experience financial strain when they have a family
member with a chronic illness. This is particularly the case when a
family member must leave the workforce to care for the ill family
member, and incur costs for home nursing, and non-reimbursable medical
expenses. Financial problems may be worse when the caregiver is a spouse
and the patient formerly earned a good income and had good pre-morbid
function.

Level of anxiety is also very high in the caregivers of younger male
patients as compared to the caregivers of older male patients. In the
light of present findings it is said that family of young male patients
have high level of anxiety and depression. They experience different
level of stress, burden as compared to caregivers of older male
patients. Reason may be to see their child as a hope for future. On the
other hand care-giving may affect their relationship with different
dimensions like they were facing financial problems or facing problems
in their daily functioning like consistency, neglecting other family
members, , compromise etc.

The results indicate that there is a little difference in the level of
depression and anxiety among the caregivers of young female patients and
older female patients. The result shows that there is significant
difference in the levels of anxiety and depression in the caregivers of
young male patients and young female patients. Care givers of young male
patients have high level of anxiety and depression as compare to
caregivers of young female patients. Reason may be the illnesses more
severe in males, is associated with higher suicidal rates, more negative
symptoms and more hospitalization. Female schizophrenics are less
frequently hospitalized; appear more responsive to neuroleptic
medication and have more benign life time disease course (Goldstein,
1993).

Another factor related to schizophrenia is gender of the patient. The
reaction by the patient as well as their family members towards the
disorder may affect the process of improvement; particularly in Pakistan
where males are give more importance. This is because males are usually
earning hands, and in case of schizophrenia to a male member not only
the earning terminates but a mouth is added for feeding a well. The
burden of looking after him is increased. In the case of female feeling
victim to schizophrenia, her duty as mother, wife or helping hand
becomes restrained giving way to negative feeling from rest of the
family members or the caregivers.

The results supporting the idea that caregivers of schizophrenic
patients have high level of depression as compared to the caregivers of
depression and substance abuse. Family care givers of bipolar patients
more often use healthier strategies than care givers of patients with
schizophrenia. Possible reason includes improved inter-episode
functioning. As reported in research by (Roychoudhuri, 1995), it was
found that caregivers of schizophrenic patients have higher level of
burden as compared to caregivers of bipolar patients. The result of
present study also supports that idea.

Families are an integral part of the care system for persons with a
chronic mental illness, such as schizophrenia (Shankar & Menon, 1993).
The demands of being involved in the care of a seriously mentally ill
relative have both an emotional and a practical impact on the caregiver
(Chakrabarti et al., 1995; Provencher, 1996). The costs that families
incur in terms of economic hardships, social isolation and psychological
strain, are referred to as family burden.

The relationship of the primary caregiver to the patient may also
mediate the experience of burden. Several researchers have documented
the concerns experienced by parent caregivers such as the patient's
difficulty in achieving normative life-span goals e.g., finding a job,
getting married and raising children. An additional concern for parents
is who will take over the care giving role after them (Hatfield &
Lefley, 2000).

*“*\ Not only victims but also families and friends are effected by
schizophrenia, each in different ways. Their sufferings are
immeasurable, as are the social and financial costs to communities at
large”. Results indicate that there are significant levels of depression
in the care givers of those patients which are ill more than 18 months
as compared to those whose duration of illness is less than 18 months.

Helping professionals tend to forget the impact of the chronic aspects
of mental illnesses such as when the patient decompensate. It becomes
very strainful for the caregivers to get along with the stride.
Families, often report that

they need support with the more chronic phases of the illness such as
the day-to-day care giving activities, decisions, and strains to get a
relief from the stressful situation. Therefore strategies and coping
plans should also be designed for the caregivers to help them release
their mental tensions.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Aammohan, A., Rao, K., & Subbakrishna, D. K. Burden And Coping In
    Caregivers Of Persons With Chronic Recurrent Mood Disorder. Indian
    Journal of psychiatry. 2002; 44(3), 220-7.

2.  Bradley, E. Caregivers feel helpless, need help: home health
    agencies, social workers can help lift family caregivers' burden.
    American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2003. Retreived

3.  Chakrabarti, S., Raj, L., Kulhara, P., Avasthi, A., & Verma, S. K.
    Comparison of the extent and pattern of family burden in affective
    disorders and schizophrenia. Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 1995; 37,
    105-12.

4.  Cohen, C., & Eisdorfer, C. Depression in family members caring for a
    relative with alzheimer's disease. Journal of the American
    Geriatrics Society, 1988; 36, 885-9.

5.  Danis, B. Stress in individuals caring for ill elderly relatives.
    Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Gerontological Society
    of America, Dallas, 1978. TX. Retreived
    http://ninr.nih.gov/ninr/research/vol3/FamCare.html

6.  Deimling, G., & Bass, D. Symptoms Of Mental Impairments Among
    Elderly Adults And Their Effects On Family Caregivers. Journal of
    Gerontology, 1986; 41, 778-84.

7.  Dore, G. & Romans, S. E. Impact of bipolar affective disorder on
    family and partners. Journal of affective disorders, 2001; 67,
    147-58.

8.  Family Caregiver Alliance. releases New Fact Sheets On Long-Term
    Care Issues. (2002).Retrieved
    http://www.caregiver.org/caregiver/jsp/content_node.jsp?nodeid=747

9.  Flanag Flanagan, S. A. The mental health care society act: an update
    of long-term care reform. HF MA mass media, 1994; 17 (7). Retreived
    Np/ninr/research/vol3/FamCare.html

10. FrankftFranks, D., Smith, M., & Caro, F. Family care of the elder:
    Public initiatives and private obligations. Lexington, MA: Lexington
    books. 1981.

11. George, L., & Gwyther, L. Caregiver well-being: A multidimensional
    examination of family caregivers of demented adults. The
    Gerontologist, 1986; 26, 253-9.

12. Goldstein, J. M., Santangelo, S. L., Simpson, J. G., et al. Gender
    and mortality in schizophrenia: do women act like men? Psychological
    Medicine, 1993; 23, 941-8.

13. Grant M, & Hodgson R.Treating addictive behavior, process of
    change.New York:Heather Plenum.1991.

14. Hatfield, A. B., & Lefley, H. P. Helping elderly caregivers plan for
    the future care of a relative with mental illness. Psychosocial
    Rehabilitation Journal, 2000; 24, 103-7.

15. Khachatourians, L. Report on Mental Illness in Canada. 2002.
    Retreived http://www.usask.ca/lists/hplink/2002/msg00266.html

16. National Alliance for Caregiving NAC. Tips for family caregivers.
    1997. Retreived

..

   http://www.caregiving.org/National%20Alliance%20for%20Caregiving%20-%20Tips%20For%20Caregivers.htm

17. Neale, M. J., & Davison, C. Abnormal psychology (7\ :sup:`th` ed.).
    New York: John Willey and Sons, Inc. 1998.

18. Niaz, U. Women mental health. Pakistan Psychiatric Society. 2000.

19. Pai, S., & Kapur, R. L. The burden on the family of a psychiatric
    patient: development of an interview schedule. British Journal of
    Psychiatry, 1981; 138, 332-5.

20. Pickett SA, Cook JA, Choler BJ. Care Giving Burden Experienced By
    Parents Of Offspring With Severe Mental Illness: The Impact Of
    Off-Timedness. The Journal of Applied Social Sciences, 1994;
    18,199-207.

21. Provencher, H. L. Objective burden in primary caregivers of persons
    with chronic mental illnesses. 1996.Retreived
    http://www.ijponline.org/July2002/indIJPOrgArticle2.html

22. Rammohan, A., Rao, K., & Subbakrishna, D. K. Religious coping and
    psychological wellbeing in carers of relatives with schizophrenia.
    Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 2002; 105, 356-62.

23. Roychauduri, J., & Mohandad, A. Family burden among long term
    psychiatric patients. Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 1995; 37 (2),
    81-5.

24. Schulz, R., Beach, S. R., Lind, B., Martire, L. M., Zdaniuk, B.,
    Hirsch, C., Jackson, S., & Burton, L. Involvement in caregiving and
    adjustment to death of a spouse: f indings from the caregiver health
    effects study. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1997;
    285, 3123-9.

25. Smith, E. Support for Families: Beginning, maintaining and
    developing family self-help: Emotional and Practical Support. 1997.
    Retreived
    http://wwsw.world-schizophrenia.org/publications/14a-support.html

.. |image1| image:: media/image1.png
