   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 83-85 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

   THE PERCEPTION OF PROFESSIONAL WOMEN ABOUT THEIR JOB AND ITS EFFECTS
   ON

PSYCHOSOCIAL WELL BEING

Unaiza Niaz, Sehar Hassan
=========================

   ABSTRACT

   **Objective**: The study was conducted to identify the stressors at
   work faced by the professional women and their impact on their
   psychosocial well being.

   **Design**: Cross-sectional survey.

   **Subjects and Methods:** 150 women from Medical, Teaching and
   Secretarial professions were selected with the help of random
   sampling technique. They were interviewed through a structured
   questionnaire.

   **Results:** The mean age of the participants was 32 years. The mean
   duration of job was 8 years. 57% of the participants were married,
   43% were single. 48% were availing the facilities like accommodation,
   transport, medical and education of children provided by the
   employers while 52% were working without any additional facilities.
   48% were working in shifts and 52% had fixed job timings. Among those
   working in shifts 71% perceived that there work has affected their
   psychosocial well-being. Limited career- making opportunities (74%),
   lack of participation in decision making processes (77%), lack of
   social support at work (30%) were identified as major job stressors.
   28% of the respondents reported their psychosocial and physical
   problems as concurrent to job stressors.

   **Conclusion**: Decision latitude (control), job timings, limited
   opportunities for career development and lack of social support at
   work were the major work stressors which were perceived by the
   professional women to affect their psychosocial well-being .

   **Key words:** Job stressors, Women, Profession, Psychological
   impacts

INTRODUCTION
============

Professional women are defined as “women who are working in some
institutions for a fixed payment of their services”. As societies become
more advanced technologically, women depend increasingly on their
individual talent and inventiveness for their progress and development.
The dual roles of the working women can lead to additional stress in
their lives It has been concluded by various studies that women cope up
with stress physiologically in a more economic way but at a higher
psychological cost1.

Biologically, the term “stress” signifies “physiologi- cal strain
reactions” in the organism when exposed to various “environmental
stimuli” – “stressors”. Nature of job and workplace environment
constitutes possible sources of strain and subsequent stress outcomes. A
study in Canada showed associations of work stressors with levels of
distress among the broad Canadian work-

   **Unaiza Niaz,** M.D .DPM F.R.C., Psych, Director, (IPTP), The
   Psychiatric Clinic & Stress Research Center, 6C, 7th, Commer- cial
   Lane, Zamzama Boulevard, Phase V, D.H.A. Karachi, Pa- kistan. E-mail:
   `drunaiza@cyber.net.pk. <mailto:drunaiza@cyber.net.pk>`__

   **Sehar Hassan**, M.Sc. Beh. Sc. (Counselor, IPTP)

   **Correspondence: Dr. Unaiza Niaz**

ing population2. Earlier studies have also shown that work stressors can
adversely affect mental health of employee3. The findings of study
conducted on single Chinese women showed that job satisfaction intercede
with job control and security which predict psychologi- cal distress in
employees; where as psychological job demand has an independent effect
on mental distress. Their findings showed that psychological distress
was best predicted by company size, high psychological job demand, and
low job satisfaction4.

   The work stressors are therefore recognized as potentially essential
   determinants of mental health sta- tus of recruits. The present study
   concentrated upon iden- tifying the stressors at work faced by
   professional work- ing women in Pakistan and the impact of these
   stressors on their psychosocial well-being i.e. performance and
   efficiency at job and home.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

A cross-sectional study design was used. Profes- sional women working in
various institutions of medical, teaching and secretarial were
interviewed. A total of 150 women participated in study. A random sample
of 50 women from each from medical, teaching and secre- tarial was taken
according to their designation. A sched- uled structured interview was
conducted to obtain infor-

   mation which included age, working hours, nature of job, duration,
   family patterns, facilities provided by the employers, attitude of
   supervisors and colleagues at work, opportunities to participate in
   decision making, prospects and effects of career development on their
   psycho-social well-being.

RESULTS
=======

   Out of 150 participants, 124 (82.6%) were from

government, 10 (6.677%) from semi-government, and 16 (10.67%) were from
private organizations. The mean age of the participants was 32 years.

The mean duration of job was 8 years. 57% of the participants were
married, while 43% were single. 58% were living in nuclear family system
whereas 34% lived in joint family system. 62% of the respondents worked
up to 6hrs a day, 21% for 7-10 hrs a day and 16% worked for 11-14 hrs a
day. 48% worked in shifts and 52% had fixed job timings. 68% of the
respondents categorized the attitude of supervisors and other colleagues
as co- operative, 10% as uncooperative whereas 20% de- scribed it as
indifferent. 55% of professional women felt that the attitude of general
public towards them as posi- tive, 34% described it as indifferent
whereas 10% re- ported as negative. 10% of the respondents often expe-
rienced discrimination of at work, 50% seldom felt it and 39% of working
women never experienced it.Regarding Career development, 64.6% of
professional women came up with the view that they are provided less
chances of career development as compared to male colleagues, 11% had
hopeless view about the issue where as 24% stated that they had equal
opportunities for career development. Regarding their participation in
decision making meetings, 61% reported that they were seldom given the
opportunity for decision making, 16% complained that they are seldom
invited in such meet- ings, and 22% gave positive response and acknowl-
edged their active participation in such meetings..

To assess the facilities provided by the institutions the respondents
were asked about the facilities provided by their employers.The
percentages of respondents who availed the facilities provided by the
institutions to its employees are given in table 1:

   Table 1

   Facilities provided by the Institutions

+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    **Facilities**             |    **Frequency   |    **Percentage  |
|                               |    (n)**         |    (%)**         |
+===============================+==================+==================+
|    Accommodation              |    39            | 26               |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    Transport                  |    28            | 18.6             |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    Medical                    |    64            | 42.6             |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    Recreational               |    11            | 7.3              |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    Education of Children      |    8             | 5.33             |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    No Significant Facility    |    78            | 52               |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+

..

   The respondents were asked to specify their per- ception of the
   effects of the shift work on parameters like social life, family life
   and personal health. The effects of shift work and fixed timings as
   perceived by the respondents are given in table 2:

   Table 2

   Comparison of effects of shift work and fixed time job on employees

+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|    **Effects**            |    **Shift Work    |    **Fixed Time     |
|                           |    (n=72)**        |    Jobs**           |
|                           |                    |                     |
|                           |                    |    **(n= 78)**      |
+===========================+====================+=====================+
|    Low level Efficiency   | 17 (23.61%)        |    7 (8.97)         |
|    at job                 |                    |                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|    Decreased Involvement  |    11 (15%)        | 5 (6.41%)           |
|    in Family Matters      |                    |                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|    Deteriorated Personal  |    9 (12.5%)       | 6 (7.6%)            |
|    Health                 |                    |                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|    Insufficient Time for  | 14 (19.4%)         | 9 (11.5%)           |
|    Social Life            |                    |                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|    No Significant Effects | 21 (29.1%)         | 51(65.3%)           |
+---------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+

28% of professional women in this study linked their psychological
problems to job stressors while 72% reported they did not have any job
related illness. They identified the health problems given in table 3 as
ad- verse effects of the job on their health. These included
(psychosomatic illnesses) hypertension, gastric ulcer, migraine, GIT
disorders and other psychological prob- lems. (See Table-3).

   Table 3

   Impacts of Job Stressors on Health

+------------------------+---------------------+-----------------------+
|    **Impacts**         |    **Frequency      |    **Percentage (%)** |
|                        |    (n=150)**        |                       |
+========================+=====================+=======================+
|    “Makes you upset”   |    30               |    20.0               |
+------------------------+---------------------+-----------------------+
|    Loss of interest in |    8                |    5.3                |
|    work                |                     |                       |
+------------------------+---------------------+-----------------------+
|    Hypertension        |    36               |    24.1               |
+------------------------+---------------------+-----------------------+
|    Gastric Ulcer       |    32               |    21.2               |
+------------------------+---------------------+-----------------------+
|    Migraine            |    26               |    17.1               |
+------------------------+---------------------+-----------------------+
|    GIT Disorders       |    18               |    13.0               |
+------------------------+---------------------+-----------------------+

..

   As no strict pre-employment or periodic medical check ups were
   carried out; therefore significant behaviour changes or psychosomatic
   disorders due to work stressors could not be identified.

DISCUSSION
==========

Present study investigated the perception of job stressors and their
impact on well-being of professional women. Several other studies have
identified key work factors associated with psychological illness as :
work overload and pressure 5; conflicting demands6; low effi- ciency at
work, lack of participation in decision making7; poor social support at
work8; and decreased involve- ment in family matters9. As working women
have to play multiple roles they are more vulnerable to be affected by
job stressors. Besides, the quality and intensity of work stressors
faced by them also differ10.

The professional women felt that long hours and shift work had adverse
effects on their social life, family life and personal health which is
in agreement with the findings by Shield11. 16% of professional women in
this study worked up to 11 to 14 hrs a day. Present study findings also
showed that professional women working in shifts are likely to suffer
from distress. 48% of women in our study were working in shifts and
reported facing certain problems like deteriorated personal health, re-
duced efficiency at work, poor family functioning, insuf- ficient time
for social activities etc.

It has been found that many professional working women were satisfied
with their jobs and responsibilities deputed to them, though the
attitude of the supervisors and colleagues created dissatisfaction which
disturbed them. Results from a longitudinal study among working women
indicated correlation between changes in the perceived quality of social
climates at work and family to changes in depressive and psychosomatic
symptoms over one year12.

Stress in relation to organizational structure results from such factors
such as lack of coherence within an organization or exclusion from
decision making process. Studies have shown that work stressors like job
demands and lack of control in particular are related to increased
mental distress13. Participation in decision making is es- sential to a
feeling of meaningfulness at work. The find- ings of this study also
showed that majority of profes- sional working women had a sense of
deprivation be- cause of non-participation in decision making meetings,
though the overall reporting of work stress in this group was 28%and 72%
were well adjusted in their work and home lives.

   The study had several limitations. The sample was drawn from only
   three professions; medical, teaching and secretarial professions.
   However, working women from other professions like industrial sector
   and labor class should also have been included in the study. Only the
   perceptions of doctors about the job and its effects were

elicited. A structured instrument for measuring the ef- fects of work
conditions on mental health or physical effects was not used.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Frankenhaeuser M. Dissociation between sympathetic- adrenal and
    pituitary-adrenal responses to an achieve- ment situation
    characterized by high controllability. Biol Psychol 1980; 10: 79-91.

2.  Cole DC, Ibrahim S, Shannon HS, Scott FE, Eyles J. Work and life
    Stressors and Psychological Distress in the Canadian Working
    Population; a structural equation modeling approach to analysis of
    the 1994. National Population Health Survey. Chronic Dis Can 2002;
    23: 91-9.

3.  Kalimo R, El-Batawi MA, Cooper GL. Psychosocial fac- tors at work
    and their relation to health. Geneva: World Health Organization;
    1987.

4.  Dannii YL. Impact of Job Characteristics on Psycho- logical Health
    of Chinese Single Working Women. Women Health 2001; 33: 95-111.

5.  Reifman A, Biernat M, Lang EL. Stress, social sup- port, and health
    in married professional women with small children. Psychol Women
    Quart 1991;15: 431–45.

6.  Stansfeld SA, North FM, White I, et al. Work characteris- tics and
    psychiatric disorder in civil servants in London. J Epidemiol
    Community Health 1995;49:48–53.

7.  Smulders PGW, Nijhuis FJN. The job demands-job con- trol model and
    absence behaviour: results of a 3-year longitudinal study. Work
    Stress 1999;13:115–31.

8.  Stansfeld SA, Bosma H, Hemingway H, et al. Psychoso- cial work
    characteristics and social support as predic- tors of SF-36 health
    functioning: the Whitehall II study. Psychosom Med 1998;60:247–55.

9.  Sparks K, Cooper CL. Occupational differences in the work-strain
    relationship: towards the use of situation- specific models. J Occup
    Organ Psychol 1999;72: 219-29.

10. Vermeulen M, Mustard C. Gender differences in job strain, social
    support at work and psychological dis- tress. J Occup Health Psychol
    2000; 5:428-40.

11. Shields M. Long working hours and health. Health Rep 1999;11:33–48.

12. Holahan CJ, Moos RH. Social support and psychologi- cal distress: a
    longitudinal analysis. J Abnorm Psychol 1981; 90:365-70.

13. Bourbonnais R, Brisson C, Moisan J, Vézina M. Job strain and
    psychological distress in white-collar work- ers. Scand J Work
    Environ Health 1996;22:139-45.
