   JPPS 2006; 3(1): 39–42

CLOZAPINE INDUCED
=================

   ORIGINAL ARTICLE

NEUTROPENIA IN PATIENTS
=======================

   SUFFERING FROM SCHIZOPHRENIA : A MULTI CENTRE AUDIT

   Munir Hamirani , Asghar Naqvi, M Shehzad Saleem , Intisar Ahmad
   Siddiqui

ABSTRACT
--------

   **Objective:** To determine the frequency of clozapine induced
   neutropenia and its associated clinical features among the patients
   suffering from schizophrenia.

   **Design:** Cross sectional, comparative

   **Place and duration of study:** The study is based on the blood
   count reports from various centres in Pakistan using Clozapine during
   a period 1992-2005.

   **Subjects and Methods:** The medical records of 917 patients with a
   diagnosis of schizophrenia, aged 18 years and above were reviewed.
   Patient’s profile was evaluated consisting of gender, dose of
   clozapine, duration of treatment and complete blood count (CBC)
   findings including white blood cell (WBC) count or absolute
   neutrophil count (ANC), before starting the treatment. The case
   records showing WBC count below 3000 and ANC count less than 500 were
   identified and details of the clinical and sociodemographic variables
   were recorded on a proforma.

   **Results:** Thirty eight patients (4.1%) developed clozapine induced
   neutropenia. Median duration of clozapine treatment in these patients
   was 6.0 years that was significantly higher than Median = 1 year of
   those patients who did not develope neutropenia (p < 0.001). An
   inverse correlation (r = -0.046) was observed between ANC and
   duration of clozapine induction. Median dose (mg) of clozapine
   induced neutropenia patients was higher (200 vs. 150, p = 0.262),
   however statistically insignificant.

   **Conclusion:** The incidence of clozapine induced neutropenia of our
   study is comparable with that of worldwide reported incidence.
   Prolongation of treatment also increase the incidence.

   **Key words:** Schizophrenia, Clozapine, Neutropenia.

INTRODUCTION
------------

Clozapine is a dibenzodiazepine derivative that is more valuable than
standard neuroleptic drugs in refrac- tory schizophrenic patients. This
dibenzodiazepine de- rivative was discovered 35 years ago, but its
introduc- tion in some countries was delayed by its susceptibility to
cause blood dyscrasias. Its use was restricted in the mid-1970s because
it induced agranulocytosis.1,2 In the USA3 and UK,4 it was licensed in
the early 1990s for two main reasons:

   **Munir Hamirani,** MCPS, FCPS, DPM

   Assistant Professor of Psychiatry Abbasi Shaheed Hospital Karachi
   Medical & Dental College.

   **Asghar Naqvi,** MBBS

   Novartis Pharma Pakistan Limited

   **M Shehzad Saleem,** MBBS Novartis Pharma Pakistan Limited

   **Intisar Ahmad Siddiqui**

   Statitician

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. M Shehzad Saleem**

-  It is highly effective in treating patients with schizophrenia who do
      not respond to con- ventional neuroleptics; and

-  The induced neutropenia and agranulocyto- sis appear to develop
      slowly and are easily detected by means of regular hematologic
      monitoring.

This means that the cytopenias are reversible if the treatment is
promptly discontinued. Over the last fifteen years, different reports
have clearly demonstrated that agranulocytosis and neutropenia can be
easily prevented by means of strict hematologic surveillance.

Over the last ten years, a large number of epide- miologic studies have
been undertaken in order to ob- tain an accurate estimate of the
incidence of clozapine- induced blood dyscrasias. Surveillance reports
from dif- ferent countries have shown that the risk of agranulocy- tosis
and neutropenia is respectively 0.38% and 1.5-2.9%; as a result of
hematologic monitoring, these rates decrease significantly after the
first year of treatment, as does the risk of death due to secondary
complications.3-11.

According to the recommended guidelines by Novartis, neutropenia in the
range of a white blood cell count less than 3000 per mm3, or an absolute
neutrophil count (ANC) less than 1500 per mm3, is classified as being in
the ‘red-alert zone’ during clozapine treatment. If a patient’s blood
test result falls into this zone, imme- diate discontinuation of
clozapine is recommended and reinstitution is prohibited. However, in
some patients, it is not entirely feasible to implement this standard
guide- line because of the lack of effective alternatives to clozapine
treatment. However, there is some evidence in the literature that while
the guidelines for the preven- tion of agranulocytosis should be
generally followed, it may be that judicious continuation of clozapine
treatment is less risk-prone than previously considered in selected
cases where only a few feasible alternatives to clozapine are
available.12 Moreover, there is an apparent necessity to develop new
measures or methods that can differenti- ate between benign neutropenia
and that leading to fa- tal agranulocytosis.

   Although clozapine has been liscenced for use in Pakistan over the
   last 15 years , the hematologic abnor- malities associated with its
   use have not been studied. The present study aimed at determining the
   frequency of clozapine induced neutropenia among the patients suf-
   fering from schizophrenia.

MATERIAL AND METHODS
--------------------

The medical records of 917 patients with a diag- nosis of Schizophrenia
who are currently on the data base of Novartis Pakistan were retrieved.
All the patients age 18 years and above, taking clozapine during the
period 1992 -2005, were included. These patients have been under the
care of different psychiatrists in various cen- tres, mostly teaching
hospitals and district headquarter hospitals. According to the Novartis
Guidelines, every consultant have to record the diagnosis and other rel-
evant clinical details before initiating clozapine Blood tests i.e.
complete blood count (CBC) was done to check the white blood cell (WBC)
count or absolute neutrophil count (ANC), before starting the treatment
and if the WBC count was more than 3000 per mm3 or an absolute neu-

trophil count (ANC) more than 1500 per mm3 only than the treatment was
initiated. In the first 18 weeks of treat- ment CBC was done weekly and
clozapine was also given weekly. After 18 weeks CBC was done on monthly
basis and clozapine was also given on monthly basis. During clozapine
treatment whenever neutropenia in the range of a white blood cell count
less than 3000 per mm3 or an ANC less than 1500 per mm3 is found , is
classified as being in the ‘red-alert zone’. If a patient’s blood test
re- sult falls into this zone, clozapine was discontinued im- mediately,
as recommended by Novartis. All the relevant information was collected
on a proforma designed for this purpose.

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS:
---------------------

Data analysis was performed through SPSS ver- sion-10.0. Frequency and
percentages were computed to present clinical characteristics and
neutropenia. Dis- crete variables including duration and dose of
clozapine induction were presented by median (interquartile range); In
view of high variation and heterogeneity in the data regarding duration
and dose of clozapine and in order to control outliers (either very
small or large observations), we presented the data by Median
(Interquartile range) rather than Mean ± S.D. Mann Whitney U test was
ap- plied to compare these variables between groups of pa- tients with
and without neutropenia. Continuous variables were compared using the
Students t-test Pearson’s cor- relation was computed to assess
correlation between ANC and duration of clozapine induction. Statistical
sig- nificance was taken at p < 0.05.

RESULTS
-------

We reviewed the records of 917 patients suffering from schizophrenia
during this period. 640 (52.9%) were males and 277 (47.1%) were females
(M: F = 1.13: 1). Incidence of clozapine induced neutropenia was 4.1% (n
= 38 patients). Median duration of clozapine treat- ment in these
patients was 6.0 years that was significantly higher than the median
duration of 1 year for those pa- tients who did not developed
neutropenia (p < 0.001). An inverse correlation (r = -0.046) (p= .16)
was observed

   Table-1

   Duration of treatment, gender distribution and dose of Clozapine in
   patients with and without neutropenia.

+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------------+-------+
| Variables          |    Neutropenia  |    Without            |    p- |
|                    |    (n = 38)     |    Neutropenia (n =   | value |
|                    |                 |    879)               |       |
+====================+=================+=======================+=======+
| Gender (M / F)     |    28 / 10      |    612 / 267          |       |
|                    |                 |                       | 0.594 |
+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------------+-------+
| Duration of        |    6 (1 –       |    1 (<1 – 3)         |       |
| treatment (years)† |    9.25)\*      |                       | 0.001 |
+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------------+-------+
| Dose used (mg) †   |    200 (100 –   |    150 (87.5 – 250)   |       |
|                    |    300)         |                       | 0.262 |
+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------------+-------+

..

   Key: † Median (Interquartile range), ‡ Mean ± SD (95% confidence
   interval of means),

   \*Shows significantly greater at p < 0.001.

   ANF = Absolute Neutrophil count, WBC = White blood cell count

   Table-2

   Comparison between male and female patients suffering from
   neutropenia (n=38).

+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
| Variables          |    Male           |    Female          |    p- |
|                    |                   |                    | value |
+====================+===================+====================+=======+
| Gender             |    28 (73.7%)     |    10 (26.3%)      |       |
|                    |                   |                    | 0.004 |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
| Duration of        |    3.5 ( 1 – 3.5  |    10 ( 7.25 – 10  |       |
| treatment (years)† |    )              |    )               | 0.041 |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
| Dose used (mg)†    |    150 (100 – 250 |    250 ( 187 – 340 |       |
|                    |    )              |    )               | 0.054 |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
| Median ANC‡        |    5.6 ± 1.41     |    5 ± 1.49 (3.93  |       |
|                    |    (5.09 – 6.18 ) |    – 6.06)         | 0.640 |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
| Lowest ANC         |                   |                    |       |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
|    •1 0.0          |    21 (75%)       |    10 (100%)       |       |
|                    |                   |                    | 0.156 |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
| -  2 1.0           |    7 (25%)        |    0 (0%)          |       |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
| WBC‡               |    8.55 ± 1.96    |    8.10 ± 1.97     |       |
|                    |    (7.79 – 9.31)  |    (6.69 – 9.51)   | 0.530 |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
| Platelet count‡    |    253.13 ± 70.10 |    262 ± 67.94     |       |
|                    |                   |                    | 0.073 |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+
|                    |    (225.91 –      |    (213.4 – 310.6  |       |
|                    |    280.41)        |    )               |       |
+--------------------+-------------------+--------------------+-------+

..

   Key: † Median (Interquartile range), ‡ Mean ± SD (95% confidence
   interval of means),

   \*Shows significantly greater at p < 0.001.

   ANF = Absolute Neutrophil count, WBC = White blood cell count

between ANC and duration of clozapine induction. Me- dian dose (mg) of
Clozapine induced neutropenia pa- tients was higher (200 vs. 150, p =
0.262) however sta- tistically insignificant (Table-1).

Male predominance (73.7% vs. 26.3%) was found among 38 neutropenic
patients (p = 0.004). Incidence of neutropenia in relation with duration
of treatment was significantly higher in females than males (p = 0.041).
Mean levels of ANC, WBC and platelet count were found insignificant
between both genders (Table-2).

DISCUSSION
----------

Despite its clear therapeutic advantages, strict limi- tations have been
imposed on clozapine administration to schizophrenic patients due to the
potential develop- ment of neutropenia and agranulocytosis, which occurs
in a small subset of patients. A clozapine analogue, DMP developed by
Dupont-Pharma for the treatment of schizo- phrenia also exhibited
similar problem. In a 3-month tox- icity study in dogs, DMP 406 produced
dose dependent, reversible hematological abnormalities resembling those
seen in patients.14

It has been reported that Neutropenia or agranu- locytosis with myeloid
hypocellularity develops in a small subset (1 to 5%) of
Clozapine-treated patients.14 In our 14 years’ experience of clozapine
treatment of schizo- phrenia on 917 patients, incidence of clozapine
induced neutropenia was 4.1% (n = 38 patients). However, the 0.9%
incidence of clozapine-related neutropenia in Italy is much lower than
the 2.9% reported in American and British patients;4 this difference is
probably due to the fact that for Italian psychiatrists adhesion to the
ICLOS

study is optional.6, 7 Furthermore, an important finding emerging from
ICLOS and other epidemiologic studies is that the risk of developing
neutropenia and agranulo- cytosis clearly exists during the first 18
weeks of therapy, but decreases significantly after the first year and
is similar to that observed with some phenothiazines whose use is not
associated with regular blood testing.3,4,9 In our retrospective
analysis, median duration of clozapine treat- ment in these patients was
6.0 years that was significantly higher than Median = 1 year of those
patients who did not developed neutropenia (p < 0.001). An inverse cor-
relation (r = -0.046) was observed between ANC and duration of clozapine
induction.

Treatment with clozapine for a year results in neu- tropenia in 1.5 to
2.9% of patients and agranulocytosis in 0.8% of patients. The mechanisms
of both forms of neutrophil toxicity are unclear.11 It is has been
suggested that the neutropenia and agranulocytosis are due to dif-
ferent mechanisms (Gerson, 1994). It is possible that apoptosis may play
a role in the pathogenesis of both forms of toxicity. With regard to
clozapine agranulocyto- sis, it can be postulated that the cellular
target will be a more committed neutrophil precursor, as well as mature
peripheral PMNs, and for the neutropenia, In initial ex- periments,
Guest et al found that the cells of two of three patients with a history
of clozapine associated severe neutropenia exhibited a great sensitivity
to the effects of clozapine oxidized by HOCl at low concentrations when
compared to cells from normal controls or patients who had been treated
with clozapine without experiencing neutropenia. The parent drug did not
cause significant toxicity at the same concentrations.16 The main objec-
tion to the hypothesis that antibody mediated damage is

responsible for the observed neutropenia: agranulocy- tosis is the
time-course of the pathology, particularly upon re-exposure. Based upon
published clinical studies (Safferman et al., 1992) and our own
observations, the average duration between exposure to clozapine and
agranulocytosis is 8–12 weeks upon first exposure and 6–12 weeks for the
second exposure. The long lag time between reemergence of
agranulocytosis upon re-expo- sure to clozapine is very difficult to
reconcile with an amnestic antibody response, which would be expected to
occur much faster and is in contrast to what is ob- served in cases of
aminopyrine- induced agranulocyto- sis on second exposure. If clozapine
or clozapine me- tabolites affected the neutrophil precursors, a drop in
the number of neutrophils in the blood would be expected to occur 10–14
days later, which would not be consis- tent with the time course
observed in CIA.17

An increased sensitivity of cells of some, but not all, patients has
also been documented in neutropenia induced by other drugs, including
chlorpromazine, carbamazepine and sulphamethoxazole18 Therefore, it is
possible that clozapine-induced agranulocytosis is due to the toxicity
of the reactive metabolite of clozapine and the idiosyncratic nature of
the reaction could be due to differences in the sensitivity of
neutrophil precursors; however, the increased sensitivity was not
consistent and it is difficult to understand why the onset of
agranulocy- tosis would be delayed for a month or more after initia-
tion of clozapine therapy.19

   **Declaration of conflict of interests:**

   The study was supported financially and adminis- tratively by
   Novartis Pharma Pakistan Limited.

REFERENCES
----------

1. Anderman B, Griffith RW. Clozapine-induced agranu- locytosis: a
   situation report up to August 1976. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1977; 11:
   199-201.

2. Griffith RW, Saameli K. Clozapine and agranulocyto- sis. Lancet 1975;
   2: 657.

3. Alvir JM, Lieberman JA, Safferman AZ, Schwimmer JI, Schaaf JA.
   Clozapine induced agranulocytosis: in- cidence and risk factors in
   the United States. N Engl J Med 1993; 329: 162-7.

4. Atkin K, Kendall F, Gould D, Freeman H, Liberman J, S’Sullivan D.
   Neutropenia and agranulocytosis in pa- tients receiving clozapine in
   the UK and Ireland. Br J Psychiat 1996; 169: 483-8.

5. Dev VJ, Krupp P. Adverse event profile and safety of Clozapine. Rev
   Contem Pharmacother 1995; 6: 197-208.

6. Honigfeld G. Effects of the Clozapine national registry system on
   incidence of deaths related to agranulocytosis. Psychiatric Services
   1996; 47: 52-6.

7. Honigfeld G, Arellano F, Sethi J, Bianchini A,Schein

..

   J. Reducing Clozapine-related morbidity and mortal- ity: 5 years of
   experience with the clozaril national reg- istry. J Clin Psychiatry
   1998; 59 : 3-7.

8.  Mendelowitz AJ, Gerson SL, Alvir JJ, Lieberman JA. Clozapine-induced
    agranulocytosis. Risk factors, monitoring and management. CNS Drugs
    1995; 4: 412-21.

9.  Pirmohamed M, Park K. Mechanism of cloza- pineinduced
    agranulocytosis. Current status of researchand implications for drug
    development. CNS Drugs 1997; 7: 139-58.

10. Rosenheck R, Cramer J, Xu W, Thomas J, Hender- son W, Frisman L, et
    al. A comparison of cloza- pine and haloperidol in hospitalized
    patients with refractory schizophrenia. N Engl J Med 1997; 337:
    809-15.

11. Deliliers GL. Blood dyscrasias in clozapine- treated patients in
    Italy. Haematologica 2000; 85: 233-7.

12. Ahn YM, Jeong SH, Jang HS, Koo YJ, Kang UG, Lee KY, Kim YS.
    Experience of maintaining Clozapine medication in patients with
    ‘red-alert zone’ neutrope- nia: long-term follow-up results. Int
    Clin Psychopharmacol 2004;19: 97-101.

13. Lorenz M, Evering W E, Provencher A, Blue J T, Lewis H B, Hazelette
    J et al. Atypical Antipsychotic-Induced Neutropenia in Dogs.
    Toxicology and Applied Phar- macology 1999; 155: 227-36

14. Hummer M, Kurz M, Barnas C, Aria A, Fleischhacker WW.
    Clozapine-induced transient white blood count disorders. J Clin
    Psychiat 1994; 55:429-32.

15. Guest I, Sokoluk B, MacCrimmon J, Uetrecht J. Ex- amination of
    possible toxic and immune mechanisms of Clozapine-induced
    agranulocytosis. Toxicology 1998;131: 53-65.

16. Safferman, AZ, Lieberman JA., Alvir JMJ, Howard A. Rechallenge in
    Clozapine-induced agranulocytosis. Lancet 1992; 339: 1296-7.

17. Irvine AE, French A, Daly A, Ranaghan L, Morris TCM.. Drug-induced
    neutropenia due to direct effects on CFU-C-Ten years of culture
    experience. Eur J Haematol 1994; 52: 21-7.

18. Williams DP, Pirmohamed M, Naisbitt DJ, Uetrecht JP, Park BK.
    Induction of Metabolism-Dependent and – Independent Neutrophil
    Apoptosis by Clozapine. Molecular Pharmacol 2000; 58: 207-16.
