JPPS 2007; 4(1): 60–62 SHORT COMMUNICATION
------------------------------------------

MENTAL HEALTH EDUCATION INTERVENTION FOR TRAINING TEACHERS IN AREAS
AFFECTED BY EARTHQUAKE

   **Asad Nizami, Faiza Aslam, Fareed A Minhas, Sajjad Raza, Sema Genel,
   Burcu Tetik**

INTRODUCTION
============

On 8th October, 2005, Pakistan was ht by a mas- sive earthquake
resulting in more than 86,000 deaths, twice as many injured andnearly
2-3 million people made homeless.

A mental health needs assessment survey con- ducted after the earthquake
in Pakistan found willing- ness and motivation among a range of local
people in- cluding schoolteachers, and community and faith leaders in
participating in awareness raising and health promotion activities to
help their community to deal with the massive psychological impact of
the di- saster1 .

In the current scenario of mental health services in Pakistan where only
3.2 psychiatrists are available for a population of 1 million, the
psychosocial interventions and mental health awareness cannot be
delivered by mental health professionals alone. The essence of the
community mental health programme in Pakistan has always depended on an
intersectoral collaboration and a multifaceted and a multiprofessional
approach in imple- menting mental health in the community. Personnel be-
longing to education, Non Government Organizations and social
development sectors have always been use- ful in creating mental health
awareness.

Previous work indicates that specially the school mental health program
as part of the community mental health programme in Pakistan succeeded
in improving

   **Asad Nizami,** Consultant Psychiatrist, Institute of Psychiatry,
   WHO Collaborating Centre, Rawalpindi General Hospital, Rawalpindi,
   Pakistan. E-mail: asad_nizami@yahoo.com

   **Faiza Aslam,** Research Consultant, Institute of Psychiatry, WHO
   Collaborating Centre, Rawalpindi General Hospital, Rawalpindi,
   Pakistan

   **Fareed A Minhas,** Prof & Head Institute of Psychiatry, WHO
   Collaborating Centre, Rawalpindi General Hospital, Rawalpindi,
   Pakistan

   **Sajjad Raza,** Resident, Institute of Psychiatry, WHO Collabo-
   rating Centre, Rawalpindi General Hospital, Rawalpindi, Paki- stan

   **Sema Genel,** Project Manager for Pakistan, Diakonie
   Katastrophenhilfe Humanitarian Aid

   **Burcu Tetik,** Project Officer for Pakistan, Diakonie
   Katastrophenhilfe Humanitarian Aid

   **Correspondence: Asad Nizami**

the awareness of mental health not only of schoolteach- ers and school
children but also in general of the whole community 2.

   The present study aimed to find the level of aware- ness for mental
   health in the school teachers in an earth- quake affected area.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

This study was conducted as part of a two days workshop which was
conducted for the primary school teachers for ‘understanding mental
health and psycho- social interventions’ in the Union Council Salmiah of
Azad Jammu & Kashmir in August 2006.

Union Council Salmiah has a total of 42 schools out of which 4 are
privately run and the rest are adminis- tered by the District Education
Department. There are 4 schools for higher education, 6 for middle
education and the rest 32 for primary education. There are a total of
3708 students currently attending the schools and 130 school teachers
involved in teaching.

The study design was pretest and post test interventional. In the study
there were 29 primary level schools teaching from class nursery till
class five, with a total number of 86 teachers. All the teachers were
in- vited for the workshop but unfortunately due to difficul- ties in
communication and adverse weather and road access only 12 teachers
attended the two days work- shop.

Questionnaire
-------------

An indigenous questionnaire was designed to as- sess the baseline
knowledge about various aspects of mental health. The questionnaire had
20 questions with a range of three possible responses; Yes, No or Don’t
Know.

The Questionnaire was developed in English and back translated in Urdu.
It can be obtained on request from the author.

Statistical Analysis
--------------------

The pretest evaluation questionnaires were admin- istered before the
start of the workshop and post teat evaluation done at the end. The
pretest and the post test questionnaires comprised of the same questions
to evalu- ate the knowledge imparted by the intervention. Both had 20
questions in total with three possible responses, ‘yes’, ‘no’ ’and ‘do
not know’.

Question no 1-4 were related to knowledge regard- ing the general
awareness about mental illnesses and mental health, question 5-10 were
related to knowledge about causes for the common mental illnesses. Ques-
tions 11 and 12 were about presentation of mental ill- nesses and
questions 13-14 were about mental health difficulties in children.
Question 15-17 were related to issues related to addiction. Question
18-20 were about the knowledge of treatment modalities available for
men- tal illnesses. Scoring was done for each question, 1 for one
correct answer and 0 for wrong answer or those with response ‘do not
know’ with a highest possible attain- able score of 20.

Data was entered in SPSS version 11 and statisti- cal analysis was done.
Descriptive statistics were applied for background variables and means
of scores were cal- culated along with the frequencies and percentages
of participants with correct and incorrect responses both before and
after the intervention training course was as- sessed as some
participants answered to questions cor- rectly before and after the
training course whereas some answered incorrectly after the course.
Similarly some participants answered to questions incorrectly before and
ven after the intervention whereas other corrected them- selves after
the interventions. For the hypothesis that the intervention led to
increase in scores, t–test involving paired differences (dependent
sample) was applied (for each teachers score in pre test evaluation form
and post test evaluation form) at a=0.05, a single tailed test.

RESULTS
=======

A total of 12 teachers participated in the workshop, 2 (16.66%) were
females and 10 (83.33%) were males and all of them were teaching at the
primary level of edu- cation. About 50 % of the teachers had been
teaching at the same facility for last 5 months whereas the mean
duration of the remaining 50 % of the teachers for teach- ing at the
same facility was 238.33 months (S.D. + 50.03 months).

The mean scores of the females were 12.00 (S.D. + 0.0) before the
intervention and in their post test evaluation forms their mean score
was 14.00 (S.D. + 2.82). The mean scores of the males were 11.80 (S.D. +
1.36) in the pretest evaluation forms and in the post test evaluation
forms it was 12.60 (S.D. + 1.64).

When the questionnaires were evaluated on the basis of the questions
related to specific areas, the im- provement in responses was determined
by calculating the percentages .

Regarding the issues related to the General Aware- ness about mental
illnesses and mental health, 39.85% of participants gave correct
responses in both the pre- test forms and post test evaluation.

There were 27.08% of participants with incorrect responses in the
pretest forms but in the post test forms

they answered it correctly. There were 25% of the par- ticipants who
were incorrect in the pretest evaluation and remained incorrect in the
post test evaluation too. How- ever, 8.33% of the participants had
answered correctly in the pretest but gave incorrect responses in the
post test. Based on the questions answered by the partici- pants
regarding each issue in the pretest forms com- pared with their post
test forms.

   Overall the mean scores of the participants were

11.83 (S.D. + 1.19) in the pretest evaluation forms and in the post test
evaluation forms their mean score was

12.83 (S.D. + 1.80). When single tailed t-test, involving paired
differences was applied for each participants scores in the pretest
forms compared to their post test scores , at α=0.05, the value of
d\ :sub:`0` that is the critical value turned out to be 1.06 and the d
i.e. -1.16, ( the sample mean of the differences of scores for each par-
ticipant) lied in the critical region. The differences of scores, in the
pretest and post test forms of the partici- pants were statistically
significant.

The greatest improvement was noted in response to different treatment
modalties availabe for Menal Ill- nesses as 61% of respondents were able
to recognize different treatment modalities in post test, compared to
pre test. Least improvement was reported to issues re- lated to
addiction as only 2.7% of respondents answered correctly post test,
compared to pre test. 4.16% of re- spondents werre able to give correct
responses in iden- tification of mental health difficulties, 8.3% to the
presen- tation of illnesses and 18.5% were able to recognize causes of
mental illness correctly.

DISCUSSION
==========

Post earthquake, the affected areas in Azad Kash- mir and NWFP which
already had meager mental health services showed a steep decline. The
mental health ser- vice provision had to rely on primary care
physicians, paramedical staff and the social organization workers. The
survivors had some reservations relating their psy- chosocial issues to
these healths professional, however the lady health workers and the
school teachers com- paratively had a better rapport with the survivors1
.

   During the rehabilitation phase, one of the sectors which developed
   quickly was the education sector. For- tunately majority of the
   surviving school teachers were not only active in providing the
   educational services but were also a source of motivation for the
   community in rehabilitative services.

Previous experience with school teachers for men- tal health service and
promotion2 prompted the idea of using them as a resource for mental
health and psycho- social rehabilitation in the earthquake affected
areas.

However it was pertinent to assess the baseline knowledge of the school
teachers regarding the mental health issues before they could be
involved to dissipate mental health information. The current study
highlighted the various positives and the negatives in the knowledge

of the schoolteachers before and after their training for mental health
and psychosocial training.

Regarding the general awareness about mental health, majority of the
school teachers had positive in- formation. The cumulative percentage
showed an over- all improvement in the knowledge after the training
work- shop. However some concepts did not altered and knowl- edge alone
cannot alter the practical perceptions .Ma- jority had a belief that
those who have mental illness are morally weak and a curse for the
family and that those who suffer from a mental illness can never fulfill
their re- sponsibilities. Post workshop there has not been a sig-
nificant improvement and this aspect needs more inten- sive efforts if
teachers have to provide mental health ser- vice.

Majority of the school teachers had an understand- ing about the various
etiological factors for mental ill- nesses and there was an improvement
in the knowledge after the workshop. A majority continued to answer in-
correctly to concepts regarding mental illnesses can be contained with
will power. This has again strong implication because within the
community population suffering from mental illness either adults or
children are advised to “be strong” or use their will power to con- tain
the mental illness. The understanding about the bio- logical basis of
mental illnesses is still vague and there- fore a majority also believed
that not being close to reli- gious practices can predispose to having a
mental ill- ness.

   naire did not focused on common psychiatric disorders in the children
   but the input from the school teachers in the after math of the
   earthquake was positive. Majority believed that psychosocial
   intervention would be more valuable in the children.

   Misconceptions about the treatment modalities in our setting are
   again evident from this brief survey also. The high index of false
   response even post intervention indicates that the prevalent cultural
   values dominate the existing behaviors and attitudes. Majority of the
   school teachers misinterpreted the long term use of psycho tropics
   with being addictive. In the community this misnomer dominates that
   mental illnesses are not treat- able and therefore the medication has
   to be at times life long.

   About marriage, as being one of the treatment mo- dalities, majority
   believed so even after the intervention indicating that the knowledge
   pertained and for bringing a change in the practices a culturally
   appropriate mental health strategy is required.

   In general the school teacher can be a good source for providing
   mental health and psychosocial rehabilita- tion in earthquake
   affected areas where no other mental health service exists but the
   training has to incorporate the correction of firm culturally
   accepted concepts re- garding mental health.

REFERENCES
==========

The school teachers in general had adequate knowledge regarding the
presentation of mental illnesses in our setting and specially the
somatic presentation of psychiatric disorders which is very prevalent in
the Pakistani setting3. Majority acknowledge the various physical and
psychological presentations of mental ill- nesses

   The school teachers had a good understanding about the difficulties
   of the children and during the work- shop their attitudes towards
   solving the psychological difficulties of children was positive.
   Though the question-

1. Siddiqi K, Siddiqi N, House A, Saeed K. Assessing mental health needs
   and developing services after a major disaster: experience from the
   Pakistan earth- quake. 2006. [Unpublished Work]

2. Rehman A, Mubbashar M H, Gater R, Goldberg D. Randomized trial of
   impact of schoolmental-health program in rural Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
   Lancet 1998; 352: 1022-5.

3. Mum Ford DB, Saeed K, Ahmad I, Latif S, Mubashar MH. Stress and
   psychiatric morbidity in rural Punjab

..

   – community survey. Brit J Psychiatry 1997; 170: 473-8
