   JPPS 2006; 3(1): 21–24 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

WANDERING IN ADULT PSYCHIATRIC PATIENTS: CLINICAL AND SOCIODEMOGRAPHIC
CORRELATES

   Bashir Ahmad, Saeed Farooq, Inayat ur Rehman, Ijaz Hussain

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objective:** This study was conducted to define the wandering and
   various factors associated with it in patients admitted to an acute
   psychiatry unit.

   **Design:** Descriptive study

   **Place and duration of study:** The study was conducted at the in
   patients of psychiatry department, Lady Reading Hospital between
   March 1998 and June 1998

**Subjects and Methods:** All the patients admitted to psychiatry unit
in the period were selected by convenient sampling. They were screened
with the help of questionnaire during the course of their psychiatric
illness for the wandering behaviour. Wandering was operationally defined
for the purpose of the study. Those patients who had one or more episode
of wandering were further evaluated to assess their socio demographic
and clinical characteristics with the help of a structured interview
eliciting the information about precipitants, duration and experience of
the wandering.

   **Results:** From 240 screened patients a total of 32 patients
   fulfilled the inclusion criteria, 22 were male & 10 female. 43.74%
   were living with their parents and40.62% with siblings and 15.62 %
   with other relatives. In 22 (86%) patients relapse of psychiatric
   illness precipitated the wandering while in 9 patients (28%) conflict
   with the family members precipitated wandering. The underlying
   psychiatric disorders were schizophrenia (32%) followed by major
   depression (22%) and manic episode (15%).

   **Conclusion:** wandering was more common in younger population.
   Schizophrenia, brief psychosis, depressive illness and dissociative
   disorders were the common psychiatric disorders associated with the
   condition. The common preceding factor of wandering behavior was
   relapse of psychiatric illness.

   **Key words:** Wandering, Schizophrenia, Psychiatric diagnosis

INTRODUCTION
============

Wandering by mentally ill patients is a central com- ponent of the
caregiver’s burden1. When away from home with out any supervision these
patients may be prone to Psychological, physical or perhaps even sexual
abuse. The problem has mainly been studied in the elderly popu- lation
suffering from dementia2. It has been estimated that this problem
affects up to 60% of patients suffering from dementia3. To cope with the
wandering and its

   Bashir Ahmad

   Consultant Psychiatrist, Milton Keynes Primary Care NHS Trust UK

   Saeed Farooq

   Associate Professor Psychiatry, Deptt: Lady Reading Hospital,
   Peshawar Pakistan

   Ijaz Hussain

   Clinical Psychologist, Government Mental Hospital, Peshawar Pakistan

   Inayat ur Rehman

   Trainee Medical Officer, Deptt: Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar
   Pakistan

   **Correspondence: Dr. Bashir Ahmad**

consequences in elderly even the measures like use of locked doors,
physical restraint an electronic de- vice tagged to the patients has
been advocated4,5.

The research on the subject has generally been limited to the elderly
population. An electronic search of literature over last 5 years made on
PubMed using key words “wandering” combined with the terms, “mental
disorder, schizophrenia, epilepsy, mania, dissociative fugue” and
limited to the age range of 11 to 60 years yielded only 12 studies. Out
of these ten studies were related with wandering behaviour in de-
mentia. In general adult population wandering has rarely been studied
systematically. The phenomenon has been described to be associated with
epilepsy6, com- plex partial seizures7, factitious disorder8 and sleep
dis- orders9.

The scientific study of wandering has been hin- dered by the definition
of the phenomena and the ethi- cal considerations. Wandering is defined
vaguely by most of the studies. It has been described as walking into
po- tentially dangerous areas or away form areas where they cannot be
monitored. In other studies it is considered as equivalent to agitation
in the elderly or wandering from one hospital to the other for
admissions10.

None of the major diagnostic interviews or sched- ule attempt to define
the term. This is surprising when one considers that the mentally ill
are generally recognized as wanderers or vagrants at least in the public
eye.

In the present study we attempted to define the wandering and various
factors associated with it in pa- tients admitted to an acute psychiatry
unit.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

All the patients admitted to the psychiatry unit Lady Reading Hospital
between March 1998 and June 1998 were included in the study. Total
number of patients ad- mitted during this period was 240.Only patients
in the age range of 15-60 years were included.

These patients were screened with the help of a questionnaire. This
questionnaire elicited the information about patients leaving home
without informing the rela- tives and whether the patient was considered
as “lost” by the relatives. Following definition of wandering was
adopted for the purpose of this study. “A patient is con- sidered as
wandering when he or she leaves home with- out informing his carers. He
is considered as “lost” by his carers and they take the steps to find
him or her like informing police, other agencies or advertisement or
announcement to the public for locating the whereabouts of the patient”.
(A common way of finding the lost person in our setup is announcement
through the mosque.)

Those patients who met these criteria for wander- ing were further
interviewed. The interview elicited infor- mation about the
precipitants, duration and experience of the wandering. In addition
information was also col- lected about the expenses family had to incur
during each episode of wandering and any physical or sexual abuse
patients suffered during wandering.

Psychiatric diagnoses were made according to DSM IV criteria. All the
information was recorded in the performa made for this purpose.

RESULTS
=======

Out of the total 32 people with wandering, 22 (68.75%) were male and 10
(31.25%) were females. More than half of the patients who had episodes
of wandering were in the age range of 11-30 years. The details of the
age distribution are shown in table-1.

Fourteen (43.74%) patients were living with parents, 13(40.62%) with
siblings and 5 (15.62 %) with other rela- tives, while none of them were
living alone during these episodes of wandering.

27( 84.37%) patients who wandered away from their homes were found
within 24 hours, 03(9.34%) with in 30 days and 2(6.25%) were away from
home for 3 to 6 months.

   Table 1

   AGE DISTRIBUTION

+-------------------------------+------------------+-------------------+
| **Age Group**                 |    **Number**    |    **Percentage** |
+===============================+==================+===================+
| 11——20                        |    12            | 37.5              |
+-------------------------------+------------------+-------------------+
| 21-30                         | 6                |    18.75          |
+-------------------------------+------------------+-------------------+
| 31——40                        | 5                | 15.62             |
+-------------------------------+------------------+-------------------+
| 41——50                        | 6                | 18.75             |
+-------------------------------+------------------+-------------------+
| 50-60                         | 3                | 9.37              |
+-------------------------------+------------------+-------------------+

Seven (21.87%) patients with wandering didn’t re- veal where they spent
their nights, 9 (28.12%)slept in other’s home mostly with a close
relatives. Further de- tails of where patients spent their night during
episodes of wandering are given in the Table 2 .

   Table 2

   PLACES WHERE PATIENTS SLEPT DURING EPI- SODES OF WANDERING

+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| **Where slept when lost**       |    **Number** |    **Percentage**  |
+=================================+===============+====================+
| Other home                      | 09            |    28.12           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Fields                          | 02            |    6.25            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Grave yard                      | 04            |    12.5            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Mosque                          | 03            |    9.34            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| On the road                     | 03            |    9.34            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Police custody                  | 02            |    6.25            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Bus stand                       | 01            |    3.12            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Hotel                           | 01            |    3.12            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Not revealed                    |    07         |    21.87           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+

Nine (28.12%) people with wandering behavior ob- tained their food from
relatives, 4 (12.5%) by begging, three (9.34%) were able to work for
their food, one didn’t took his food and no information was available
about 14(43.75%) of them.

We also noted the frequency of the episodes of wandering during the
entire psychiatric history of the patients. 26 (81.26%) were lost from
their homes for the first time one was lost for the 2nd time 3 were lost
five times and two were lost 15 times during their psychiatric illnesses
including the recent one.

In 22 (68.75%) people wandering was preceded by relapse of a psychiatric
illness, 9 (28.12%) had some conflict with one of the family members, 5
(15.62%) re- ported negligence by the family (parents) in 6(18.75%)
peoples death or separation from the main carer led to wandering
(table-3) In 31.28 % people schizophrenia was the underlying psychiatric
disorder, major depressive dis- order & dissociative disorder was the
diagnosis in 27.87% wanderer and 15.62 % of them had bipolar I and II
disor- der (table-4).

   Table 3

   PRECIPITANTS LEADING TO WANDERING

+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| **Precipitants leading to       |    **Number** |    **Percentage**  |
| Wandering**                     |               |                    |
+=================================+===============+====================+
| Relapse of Psychiatric illnes   | 22            |    68.75           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Conflict with family            | 09            |    28.12           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Neglect by the family           | 05            |    15.62           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Death/separation from the main  | 06            |    18.75           |
| carer                           |               |                    |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Not reported                    |               |                    |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+

..

   Table 4 DIAGNOSTIC BREAKDOWN

+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| **Psychiatric diagnosis**       | **Number**    |    **Percentage**  |
+=================================+===============+====================+
| Schizophrenia                   | 10            |    31.28           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Brief Reactive Psychosis        | 10            |    31.28           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Major Depressive Episode        | 07            |    28.87           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Dissociative disorder           | 07            |    28.87           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Bipolar I & II Disorders        | 05            |    15.62           |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Mental retardation with         | 02            |    6.25            |
| schizophrenia                   |               |                    |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Delirium                        | 02            |    6.25            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Mental retardation              | 01            |    3.12            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Migraine                        | 01            |    3.12            |
+---------------------------------+---------------+--------------------+

DISCUSSION
==========

This to our knowledge first study which has used an operational
definition of wandering and studied the phenomena in adult psychiatric
patients admitted to an

   acute psychiatric unit. As we could not find similar stud- ies on the
   subject it is impossible to compare the find- ings with literature
   which mainly describes the wander- ing in elderly population11-14.
   Only the implications of the findings will be highlighted.

   From this study as would be expected in a society like Pakistan
   wandering appears to be more predomi- nant in males, which accounted
   for about 2/3rd of the sample. However, it is pertinent to note that
   at least 31% of the patients who wandered away were females. This can
   have more serious consequences in a society in which females are
   mainly confined to the homes like the North West Frontier Province.
   Sometimes it can even result in disruption of the families.

   In the literature it is generally reported that wan- dering is more
   common in patients who have less family support, while in this study
   we found that majority of the patients were living in joint families.
   However, in absence of a control group we can’t posit a causal
   relationship and this aspect needs further research.

   In this study majority of the patients were lost only for a brief
   period and only few patients were lost for a longer duration i.e.
   more than a month. However, it must be stressed that the study was
   conducted in an acute psychiatry Unit where the patients mostly
   presented in acute episode which themselves were not long enough to
   be associated with the longer duration of wandering.

   A majority of the patients were living in the places like grave
   yards, mosques, fields, on the roads & bus stands etc during the
   episodes of wandering. This only reveals the lack of any
   institutional care when the family and the relatives do not provide
   the care for mentally ill patients. These patients are therefore
   predisposed to all kinds of adverse circumstances. Most of the
   patients were dependant for their food on begging etc. This also
   high- lights the urgent need for providing the shelter for these
   patients.

Unlike most other studies on the subject, wander- ing in our study
appears to be more common in the younger patients. More than 1/3rd of
the patients belonged to the age group 11—20 years. This may be due to
the fact that we used an operational definition of wandering and studied
the phenomenon in adult population; while almost all the studies on the
subject are either based on the case notes records of elderly patients
leaving home or on the patients found wandering in the streets.

Patients and their relatives were asked to give rea- sons, which they
thought could lead to the wandering. It is interesting to note that the
relapse of psychiatric ill- ness was the main cause in more that 2/3rd
of the sample. This carries important implications, as it is a
preventable cause.

Almost all the studies in the literature so far come from the elderly
population. In this population wander- ing has mainly been studied in
dementia. Our study re-

veals an interesting pattern of diagnoses. Schizophre- nia, brief
psychosis and dissociative disorders appear to be the leading diagnoses
associated with the wandering.

CONCLUSION
==========

We found schizophrenia the common psychiatric disorder followed by brief
psychosis, depression and dis- sociative disorders. Common precipitant
of wandering behavior was relapse of psychiatric illness which carries
important implications as a preventable cause.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Anonymous. Wondering about the wanderers. The Lancet.1994; 343:
    1237-8

2.  Hope RA, Fairburn CG. The pattern of wandering in dementia; a
    community-based study. In J Geriat Psychiat 1990; 5: 239-45.

3.  Rapp M, Flint AJ, Herman N, Prolon GB. Behavioural disturbances in
    the elderly; phenomenology, pharma- cotherapy and behavioral
    management Canadian J Psychiat 1992; 37: 651-7.

4.  Price JD, Hermans DG, Grimbley Evans J. Subjective barriers to
    prevent wandering of cognitively impaired people. Cochrane Database
    Syst Rev 2000; 4: CD001932

5.  Meshane R, Hope I, Williams J. Tracking patients when wander; ethics
    and technology. Lancet1 994; 343: 1274.

6.  Duffau H, Kujas M, Taillandier L. Episodic nocturnal wandering in a
    patient with epilepsy due to a right temporoinsular low-grade
    glioma: relief follow- ing resection. Case report. J Neurosurg 2006;
    104:436-9.

7.  Huang YZ, Chu NS. Episodic Nocturnal wandering and complex visual
    hallucinations: A case with long term follow up. Seizure 1998;
    7:67-71.

8.  Baver, Boegner. Neurological syndromes in factitious disorder. J
    Nerv Ment Dis 1996; 184:281-8.

9.  Gulleminault C, Moscovite A Forensic sleep medi- cines; nocturnal
    wandering and violence. Sleep 1995; 18:740-8

10. Pankar L, Jackson, J. Habitually wandering patients. N Engl J Med
    1994;331: 1752 – 5.

11. Pietsch T. Addressing the predicament of wandering in patients with
    dementia. Rehabil Nurs. 2006; 31: 47-53.

12. Rolland Y, Payoux P, Lauwers-Cances V, Voisin T, Esquerre JP, Vellas
    BA SPECT study of wandering be- havior in Alzheimer’s disease. Int J
    Geriatr Psychiat 2005;20:816-20.

13. Dewing J. Screening for wandering among older per- sons with
    dementia. Nurs Older People 2005;17: 20-2.

14. Aud MA. Dangerous wandering: elopements of older adults with
    dementia from long-term care facili- ties. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other
    Demen. 2004 ;19: 361-8.
