   JPPS 2009; 6(1): 14-16

PSYCHIATRY IN CONFLICT ZONE — CHALLENGES IN KASHMIR

   Ovais Wadoo, Aadil Jan Shah,

REVIEW ARTICLE

ABSTRACT 
=========

   War damages the very fabric of society. This damage relates to its
   physical structure, its institutions, its social fabric, its
   environment, its communications and the normal routine of life.
   Indian-administered Kashmir has been no exception and the ongoing
   conflict has had its toll on Kashmiri population. The impact on the
   physical and mental health and socio-economic functioning of region’s
   13 million people is alarming. The challenges faced by healthcare
   professionals as a result of scarce financial resources, grossly
   inadequate manpower and infrastructure are enormous. This article
   gives a brief overview of the psychosocial impact of conflict in
   Indian-administered Kashmir and the profile of the psychiatric
   services available in the region.

   **Key words:** Conflict Zone, Psychiatric Services, Psychosocial
   Impact, Psychiatry Training

INTRODUCTION
============

Kashmir is a beautiful region of snowcapped moun- tains and clear lakes,
covering approximately 86,000 square miles. It is nestled between
Pakistan, India, and China and is dominated by the Himalayan mountains
which rise to 28,000 feet. Kashmir has been at the heart of conflict
between India and Pakistan since the birth of both nations in 1947. Both
Pakistan and India have laid claim to the region of Kashmir over the
past fifty years. The two countries have fought many wars to gain con-
trol over the entire region. After the first war between India and
Pakistan in 1948, the Kashmir territory was divided into
Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir and a smaller area under Pakistani
control. In Indian- administered Kashmir, from 1989 onwards, there has
been a chronic strife in the region as Kashmiri’s have been fighting for
independence, which has taken the form of guerrilla warfare. Once a
tourist destination, it has been ravaged by years of fighting and an
estimated 60,000 people have died in the struggle between the two sides.
The impact on the physical and mental health and socio-economic
functioning of region’s 13 million people is alarming.

Psychosocial impact of the conflict
-----------------------------------

War damages the very fabric of society. This dam- age relates to its
physical structure (buildings, homes,

and sanitation), its institutions (judicial, educational, medical,
religious), its social fabric (families, communi- ties), its environment
(mines, defoliation, pollution, corpses, and disease), its
communications (roads, rail- ways, postal and telecommunication
services, radio and television) and the normal structure (routine) of
life1. Kashmir has been no exception and the ongoing con- flict has had
its toll on Kashmiri population. Nearly ev- erybody has been affected by
the violence. High levels of confrontation with violence have been
reported in studies from Kashmir. People are frequently confronted with
physical and psychological mistreatment. Torture, detention, threats,
killings and disappearances are com- mon. The most frequent traumatic
events encountered are firing and explosions (81%) and exposure to
combat zones (74%)2.

Exposure to violence has potential implications for mental health.
Poverty, low education, social exclu- sion, gender disadvantage,
conflict and disasters are the major social determinants of mental
disorders. Ex- amination of the literature reveals a paucity of data on
the impact of violence on mental health of population in Kashmir. In
areas affected by chronic strife a larger chunk of population would be
expected to experience mental health problems and such figures ought to
apply to the people of Kashmir. There are high levels of psychologi- cal
distress prevalent in the population3. There has been

a qualitative and quantative difference in the psychiatric

   **Ovais Wadoo,** MB, MRCPsych, Specialty Registrar, Rathbone
   Rehabilitation Centre, Rathbone Hospital, Liverpool, Merseycare NHS
   Trust\ **.** Email\ **:** `owadoo@nhs.net, <mailto:owadoo@nhs.net>`__
   Telephone: 0044 - 1514717782, Fax: 0044 - 1514717760

   **Aadil Jan Shah,** MB MRCPsych, Specialty Registrar\ **,** Univer-
   sity Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, Merseycare NHS Trust\ **.**

   **Correspondence: Dr Ovais Wadoo**

morbidity as a direct result of the violence. A phenom- enal increase in
the number of people attending the psychiatric hospital is a direct
reflection of that. There is a significant increase in the number of
people being diagnosed with acute stress reaction, depressive disor-
ders, anxiety disorders, and post traumatic stress disor- der4,5. The
prevalence of post traumatic stress disorder is reported to be 15.9%6.

A predominantly Muslim society where death due to suicide has always
been very low finds suicide as the second common cause of unnatural
deaths 7. One third of the respondents contemplate suicide, in a survey
done in four districts of the region3. Most of the people who complete
suicides are young males in the age group 25

– 347.There have been an increase in the number of people who attempt
suicide. Law makes attempted sui- cide a punishable offence and help is
often not sought, which leads to underreporting.

Substance misuse is an increasing public health concern. A study which
compared prevalence of sub- stance misuse pre and post conflict reveals
that the use of substances is ever increasing. Use of alcohol has
increased by 30% in a society where alcohol use was almost non existent.
Use of opioids has increased from 9% to 73%, people using multiple
substances has increased from 15% to 41%.15% of people attri- bute their
drug use to the prevailing trauma and tur- moil8 . Misuse of
non-prescription drugs is very common. Benzodiazepines, codeine and
opioid based preparations are freely available in the unregulated
markets.

Symptoms of anxiety and depression are common in all ages. No age group
is immune from exposure to trauma and children have been severely
affected in the current turmoil. The most common traumatic event
experienced by children in a study was witnessing the killing of a close
relative (49%), followed by wit- nessing the arrest and torture of a
close rela- tive (15%)9.Parental loss, frequent displacement and
exposure to violence have led to an increase in pediat- ric
psychopathology. Behavioral changes amongst chil- dren have been
reported which include isolation, ag- gression, drug abuse, lack of
respect for elders, loss of morality/values and hopelessness. Children
often com- plain of somatic symptoms. Children who lost their par- ents
are often reared in orphanages. PTSD and depres- sion are common
diagnoses in children living in orphan- ages10.

Psychiatric services in Kashmir
-------------------------------

The context for the provision of mental health ser- vices in Kashmir is
set by the Indian Ministry of Health’s policy on mental health care, the
National Mental Health Programme. Mental health resources in Indian
Kashmir are few. Psychiatric services are confined to the Govern- ment
Psychiatric disease hospital, an erstwhile asylum. In addition to this,
there is one ward for psychiatric ill- ness in a general hospital. More
recently a private psy- chiatric hospital has started functioning. The
total bed strength in these hospitals is one hundred and fifty. Com-
munity based mental health services are non-existent. Large parts of the
region lack even the most basic of mental health facilities11. Families
play an important and supportive role in the treatment of people with
men- tal illness. Most of the people with mental health prob-

lems are cared by extended families and access to psy- chiatric services
is through psychiatric out-patient ser- vices available in Government
Psychiatric disease hos- pital and the two teaching hospitals of the
region. People can attend these clinics following self referral or
referral by healthcare professionals. Faith healers are also known to
refer people to psychiatric services12. Clini- cians are known to
conduct private clinics in some towns and villages. As the services are
mostly provided in the capital city, patients often have to travel long
distances to access services. According to one of the surveys by the
government of India, the state of Jammu and Kashmir had just four
psychiatrists for a population of more than 10 million11.The authors
gather that there are approximately 10-15 psychiatrists working
presently in Kashmir. Most of them work in ur- ban areas.

Non-governmental Organisations
------------------------------

Medicins Sans Frontieres (MSF), a private humani- tarian medical
emergency organization, has run psy- chosocial and mental health
interventions in healthcare facilities in rural areas as well as the
capital Srinagar. MSF has also provided outreach and support to others
in rural areas and assisted in the rehabilitation of the infrastructure
of the psychiatric hospital in Srinagar. To increase the public
awareness of mental health and re- duce stigma, MSF used to operate a
weekly radio pro- gram in Kashmir.

There is one non-governmental de-addiction cen- ter in the valley.

Traditional and complementary medical sector
--------------------------------------------

For many people, the first person they seek out during times of crisis
and need is a ‘Pir’ (indigenous faith healer)12.Mental illnesses are
widely misunder- stood, they are often taken to be a condition brought
about by supernatural forces and the stigma attached to mental disorders
is widespread. Many people with neu- rotic disorders attribute their
symptoms not to personal intrapsychic conflicts, but to the harsh and
violent real world around them.

The traditional and complementary medical sec- tor includes ‘Hakims’ who
practice alternative healing systems such as unani medicine.

Primary care
------------

The primary provider of health care in Kashmir is the primary health
sector, with its network of community health centers and district
hospitals mostly in public sec- tor. However there are no community care
facilities for patients with mental disorders.

Mental Health legislation
-------------------------

The Mental Health Act 1987 of India regulates in- voluntary detention of
people with mental health prob-

lems. These stipulate that involuntary admissions can occur only in
designated psychiatric hospitals on the recommendation of a psychiatrist
and two medical prac- titioners

Given the gross inadequate facilities and re- sources that are available
for the treatment of mental health conditions in Kashmir and given the
scale of the situation there, mental health legislation is un-
implementable. Compulsory care is based on the con- sent by a family
member. Involuntary detention, manag- ers hearing, mental health review
tribunals, second opin- ion are not a part of the vocabulary of the
mental health care professionals in the Kashmir valley.

Medical education and qualifications in psychiatry
--------------------------------------------------

Kashmir valley has two medical colleges, both of which have psychiatry
departments. One of them offers basic specialist training in psychiatry
wherein trainees work towards attaining MD in Psychiatry. The MD re-
quires a residency of three years, written and clinical examinations and
a research dissertation. Trainees who work as registrar for another
three years are eligible for consultant posts. There are only two
training positions available each year. Doctors who wish to train in
psy- chiatry can apply in training schemes in other states of India
through a competitive exam. In addition to MD, other Indian states offer
other qualifications which in- clude the Diploma in Psychological
Medicine and the Diplomate of the National Board.

Publications
------------

There is no professional psychiatry journal; none- theless psychiatric
research papers do find a place in the sole medical journal of the
valley.

CONCLUSION
==========

Government spending on mental health is far lower than is needed, and
the burden of mental disorders far greater. Increased emphasis on mental
health, improved resources, and enhanced monitoring of the situation is
called for to advance mental health. Strengthening care and services for
people with mental disorders is a prior- ity; this will need additional
investment in human re- sources and infrastructure.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Palmer I. Psychosocial costs of war in Rwanda; Adv Psychiat Treat
    2002; 8: 17.

2.  Jong KD, Ford N, Kam SVD, Lokuge K, Fromm S, Galen RV, et al
    .Conflict in the Indian Kashmir Valley I- expo- sure to violence.
    Conflict and Health 2008; 2:10.

3.  Jong KD, Kam SVD, Ford N, Lokuge K, Fromm S, Galen RV, et al
    .Conflict in the Indian Kashmir Valley II- psy- chosocial impact.
    Conflict and Health 2008; 2:11.

4.  Khan AW, Beg AA. A study of psychiatric morbidity i n Kashmir under
    stressful conditions in the valley. MD The- sis, 1993 (Unpublished).

5.  Margoob MA, Firdosi MM, Banal R, Khan AY, Malik YA, Sheikh AA, et
    al. Community Prevalence of Trauma in South Asia – Experience from
    Kashmir. JK-Practitioner 2006; 13:S14-7.

6.  Margoob MA, Sheikh AA. Community prevalence of adult PTSD in South
    Asia- experience from Kashmir. JK-Prac- titioner 2006; 13: S18-25.

7.  Hussain A, Muslim Suicide-Kashmir experience. Euro- pean Psychiatry
    2008; 23: S84.

8.  Margoob MA, Majid A, Hussain A, Wani ZA, Yousf A, Malik YA, et al.
    Changing sociodermographic and clini- cal profile of substance use
    disorder patients in Kash- mir valley. JK-Practitioner 2004; 11:
    14-6.

9.  Khan AY, Margoob MA. Pediatric PTSD-Clinical Presen- tation,
    Traumatic Events and Sociodemographic Vari- ables – Experience From
    a Chronic Conflict Situation. JK-Practitioner 2006; 13: S40-4.

10. Margoob MA, Rather YH, Khan AY, Singh GP, Malik YA, Firdosi MM, et
    al. Psychiatric Disorders among Children living in Orphanages-
    Experience from Kashmir. JK- Practitioner 2006; 13: S53-5.

11. Goel DS, Agarwal SP, Ichhpujani RL, Shrivastava S. Men- tal Health
    2003: the Indian scene. In: Agarwal SP, Goel DS, Ichhpujani RL.
    Salhan RN. Shrivastava S, editors. Mental health: an Indian
    perspective, 1946–2003. New Delhi: Directorate General of Health
    Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 2004: 3–24.

12. Mushtaq H, Margoob MA. Pir, Faqir and Psychothera- pist-Their Role
    in Psychosocial Intervention of Trauma. JK-Practitioner 2006; 13:
    S89-93.
