   **JPPS 2007; 4(1): 10–14 TUTORIAL**

DEPRESSION IN PAKISTAN:

AN EPIDEMIOLOGICAL CRITIQUE

   **Haider A. Naqvi**

ABSTRACT
========

   The epidemiological studies from Pakistan have given rise conflicting
   findings. Besides very high prevalence in different studies, rates
   from Northern Pakistan are much different from big urban centre such
   as Karachi. If the findings of these studies are to be taken at face
   value than every third Pakistani is expected to be suffering from
   depression and Anxiety. Obviously this has serious implications for
   the country’s mental health care scenario. There are design, sampling
   and methodological issues which needs to be revisited. This review
   aims to This review presents a critique, from an epidemiological
   perspective, on studies carried out in Pakistan on estimating rates
   and risk factors of depression. It is expected that this critique
   will serve to enhance awareness on research methods in psychiatry and
   suggest future directions for research in this important area.

   **Key words:** Depression, Psychiatric Epidemiology, Pakistan.

INTRODUCTION
============

Psychiatric Epidemiology is a discipline that deals with methodological
issues of measurement, i.e. case definition and case identification,
psychometric proper- ties, study design and samples, and theoretical
models of environment and genetic origins of psychopathology. This
review presents a critique, from an epidemiological perspective, on
studies carried out in Pakistan on esti- mating rates and risk factors
of depression. It is expected that this critique will serve to enhance
awareness on research methods in psychiatry. A general discussion on
various measures of disease morbidity is firstly presented followed by
specific critique on epidemio- logical evidence on depression in
Pakistan. This may appear too basic but will help to put the findings in
context.

Measures of Disease Morbidity
-----------------------------

In epidemiology, the most important tool for mea- suring disease is the
rate, but ratio and proportions are also used. A *ratio* expresses the
relationship between two numbers in the form x:y or x/y X k. A
*proportion* is a specific type of ratio in which the numerator is
included in the denominator, and the resultant value is expressed as a
percentage. A rate is a special form of proportion that includes
specification of time. The rate is the basic measure of disease
occurrence because it is the mea- sure that most clearly expresses
probability or risk of

Correspondence: 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

   **Dr. Haider A. Naqvi,** Department of Psychiatry, The Aga Khan
   University, P.O. Box 3500, Stadium Road, Karachi 74800, Paki- stan.
   Tel: 493 0051 ext 4692. Fax: 493 4294

   disease in a defined population over a specified period of time.1

In order to calculate rate, we must be able to count accurately all
events of interest that occur in a defined population during a specific
period of time. A number of different rates of morbidity, or illness,
are used in public health and epidemiology. All fall into two basic
types, rates of incidence and rates of prevalence.

*Incidence* rates measure the probability that healthy people will
develop a disease during a specific period of time; hence, it is the
number of new cases of a disease in a population over a period of time.
Incidence rates are a measure of probability or risk of disease
(conditional on the individual’s not dying from any cause). Risk can
vary from zero to one, is dimension- less, and requires a specific
period referent. The most common way to estimate risk is to divide the
number of newly detected cases that developed during follow-up by the
number of disease-free subjects at the start of follow-up; a proportion
called as cumulative incidence (CI).1 Importantly, determination of date
of onset is nec- essary for studies of incidence. For some events, this
determination is relatively simple. The onset of influ- enza, acute
myocardial infarction, gastroenteritis can often be pinpointed to
specific hour. However, this is not true of certain psychiatric
conditions, whose onset may be insiduous and difficult to define..

   The *Prevalence* rate measures the number of people in a population
   who have the disease at a given time. Prevalence measures the
   probability of people having a disease at a given point in time (more
   specifi- cally termed as point prevalence). Prevalence depends on two
   factors: the number of people who have been ill

   in the past (i.e. previous incidence) and the duration of the
   illness. The relation of prevalence (P) to both inci- dence (I) and
   duration (d) of disease is expressed in the formula P ~ I x d, which
   states that prevalence varies directly with both incidence and
   duration.1

In contrast to incidence, high prevalence does not necessarily signify
high risk; it may merely reflect an increase in survival, thus giving a
biased picture. This difference is crucial to an understanding of
screening programs. The first screening of a population picks up
prevalent as well as incident cases of disease. Re- screening detects
only incident cases (i.e. those that developed between the first and
subsequent screens). It is important to remember that cross-sectional
surveys (even if repeated over some time) do not constitute a
longitudinal study and, therefore, do not permit etiologi- cal inference
or estimates of changes in risk of disease over time.

Reliability: Kappa Statistics
-----------------------------

Kappa quantifies the extent to which the observed agreement that the
observers achieved exceeds that which would be expected by the chance
alone, and ex- presses it as the proportion of the maximum improve- ment
that could occur beyond the agreement expected by chance alone. It can
be defined in an equation:

   Kappa = (Percent agreement observed) – (Percent agreement expected by
   chance alone)

   100% - (percent agreement expected by chance alone) For example, if
   two psychiatrist are asked to as-

sess 50 patients for probable depressive disorder. Each

psychiatrist will classify individual case as depressed or not-depressed
or Normal (For the sake of clarity we will assume that individual
patient has no other comorbidity). Following 2x2 can be constructed:

Agreement between two psychiatrists: 16+ 28/50 = 88%

For A Depressed = 18/50 = 0.36, For B Depressed = 20/50 = 0.40

Agreement expected by chance for depression = 0.36x 0.40= 0.144

For A Normal 32/50= 0.64, For B Normal 30/50 = 0.6 Agreement expected by
chance for normal = 0.64x0.6

= 0.384

Table 1: Prevalence of depression from community studies in Pakistan
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Total chance agreement = 0.144+0.384= 0.528 Kappa=P0_Pc/1-Pc
K=0.88–0.528/1–0.528=0.75.

P0= Observed agreement K < 0.4, Poor agreement

Pc= Agreement expected by Chance 0.4 – 0.75, Moder- ate agreement; 0.75
or > very good to excellent.

*Validity Issues: Sensitivity and specificity*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Strength of studies carried out by Mumford et al is two stage screening
method. In their initial assessment they have screened the population
using screening in- strument (Bradford Somatic inventory - BSI) for
depres- sion followed by a structured psychiatric interview (Present
State Examination- PSE-9). There are some issues (strengths and
weaknesses) in choice of sequen- tial use of two screening instruments.
In sequential screening only those patients, who score positive on the
first stage, are enrolled for further tests. Those who score negative on
the test might have a disease and are liable to be misclassified, given
the specific validity of the screening instrument. An evaluation of
those who score negatively on the test, although some what expensive, is
likely to give an indication of this misclassification. Sequential use
of two instruments, however, increases the net specificity. In
sequential or two-stage screening, a less expensive, less invasive or
less uncomfortable test is generally performed first, and those who
screen positive are recalled for further testing with a more ex-
pensive, more invasive, or more uncomfortable test, which may have
greater sensitivity and specificity. It is expected that bringing back
those who test positive, for further testing, will reduce the problem of
false positive. However this will result in loss of sensitivity at the
cost of increase in specificity.

In order to understand it further, considers a hypo- thetical example;
if disease prevalence in a study is given as 30%, so that in the
population of 10,000, 3000 persons have the disease. With a sensitivity
of 70%, the test will correctly identify 2100 of the 3000 people who
have the disease. With a specificity of 80%, the test will correctly
identify as non-depressed (Normal) 5600 of the 7000 people who are free
of depressive disorders; however 1400 of these 7000 will have positive
results. Thus a total of 3500 people will test positive and will be
brought back for a second test.

Now those 3500 people are brought back and screened using a second test
(such as PSE), which for

   purpose of this example is assumed to have a sensitivity of 90% and a
   specificity of 90%. 2x2 table shows that test 1 together with test 2,
   which deal only with 3500 people who tested positively in the first
   screening test and have been brought back for second-stage screen-
   ing. Since 2100 people (of the 3500) have the disease and test has a
   sensitivity of 90%, 1890 of those 2100 will be correctly identified
   as positives. Because 1400 (of the 3500) do not have depression and
   the test specific- ity is 90%, 1260 of the 1400 will be correctly
   identified as negative and 140 will be false positives. We can now
   calculate the net sensitivity and the net specificity of us- ing both
   tests in sequence.

   Example: Assume; Disease Prevalence = 30%, Population = 10,000

   Test 1: (screening questionnaire for Depression) Sensitivity; 70%,
   Specificity; 80%

+--------------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
|                    |    Depres-     |    Depres-     |              |
|                    |    sion po-    |    sion Ne-    |              |
|                    |    sitive      |    gative      |              |
+====================+================+================+==============+
| Test Positive      |    2100        |    1400        |    3500      |
+--------------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
| Test Negative      |    900         |    5600        |    6500      |
+--------------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
|                    |    3000        |    7000        |    10,000    |
+--------------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+

..

   Test 2 (structured interview) Sensitivity; 90%, Specificity 90%

   DEPRESSION

+--------------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
|                    |    Depres-     |    Depres-     |              |
|                    |    sion po-    |    sion Ne-    |              |
|                    |    sitive      |    gative      |              |
+====================+================+================+==============+
| Test Positive      |    1890        |    140         |    2030      |
+--------------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
| Test Negative      |    210         |    1260        |    1470      |
+--------------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+
|                    |    2100        |    1400        |    3500      |
+--------------------+----------------+----------------+--------------+

..

   **Net sensitivity** = 1890/3000 = 63%

   **Net specificity** = 5600 + 1260/ 7000 = 98%

Prevalence Estimates of Depression and Anxiety from Pakistan
------------------------------------------------------------

There are five community based studies reporting prevalence estimates
for Depression and Anxiety from various regions of Pakistan (See table
1). These studies give variable prevalence estimates of Depression; from
as high as 66% in women from rural areas to 10% in men from urban areas.
The mean overall point preva- lence is 33.62% (n=2658).2 These hand full
of studies, along with few other center based studies, comprises the
epidemiological evidence for Common mental dis- orders from Pakistan.

A critical re-evaluation of these studies is required given the
variability of findings. There are design, sam- pling and methodological
issues which needs to be re- visited. If the findings of these studies
are to be taken at

   face value than every third Pakistani is expected to be suffering
   from depression and Anxiety. Obviously this has serious implications
   for the country’s mental health care scenario. Rates from Northern
   Pakistan are much different from Karachi. Is this an artifact or the
   low rates of depression and anxiety from Karachi could be as- cribed
   to the systematic error of center based sampling methodology?

Prevalence Rates from Karachi:
------------------------------

In a study carried out in semi-urban squatter settle- ments of Azam
Basti, Karachi, Ali (2000) reported an apparent prevalence (proportion)
of 30% in study popu- lation. Crude estimates for males were 18.1% and
for females 42.2%3. Absence of age-adjusted rates and lack of validated
screening instruments raise certain meth- odological issues. The
participants were interviewed by four Consultant Psychiatrists on
weekends. Diagnosis was based on DSM-III R criteria. Authors made no
men- tion of inter-rater reliability or the level of agreement among the
group. Lack of either screening instrument or a structured interview
brings the issue of case ascer- tainment in to question. The literature
during 1980s and 90s is replete with references, to the lack of
reliability in clinical judgment when using the categorical approach for
case definition.

Other methodological limitation of this study is that only those
individuals were included who could under- stand the National Language,
Urdu. This could have a major *selection bias* as Azam Basti is an area
which has large number of immigrants. These people are not ex- pected to
be fluent in Urdu. Azam Basti, like other field sites of Department of
Community health Sciences, Aga Khan University Hospital is a semi-urban
squatter settle- ment. Squatter settlements like Azam Basti, Hijrat
Colony, and Bilal Colony cater to large influx of immigrant popu- lation
from various parts of the country. In a recent ran- dom house hold
survey of Bilal colony (n=425), 40% were identified to be Punjabi, 27%
Pathans, 16% Sindhis and 9% Urdu speaking.4 According the last census
22.1% of the Karachi city’s population are migrants from other places.
Therefore study by Ali gives prevalence rates in a selected sub-group of
Urdu speaking popula- tion residing in the semi-urban squatter
settlement.

Another selection-bias was the recruitment of only those patients who
could attend the primary health care center. Author describes this
limitation as “a random- ized house hold survey could not be conducted
as most of the households had only one or two rooms and taking
permission to enter the house holds and ensuring pri- vacy could not be
arranged”.3 However, from an epide- miological point of view, the
denominator of proportions and rates may not be population in the usual
sense.

*Prevalence rates from Northern Pakistan:*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Another series of paper by Mumford et al describes the prevalence
estimates for depression and anxiety

   from Northern Punjab. The apparent point prevalence of depression
   from Urban Rawalpindi was found to be 25% for women and 10% for men.5
   In another study, using a similar methodology, the prevalence
   estimate from rural community setting of Rawalpindi was 57.5% for
   women and 25.5% for men.6 One of the limitations in the analysis
   phase of the study and subsequent presen- tation is absence of age
   cutoff for geriatric population. Authors reported the prevalence
   estimates on any subject older than eighteen.6 It is well known that
   prevalence estimate for many illnesses increases with the age besides
   the presenting features of the illness. Similarly a much higher
   estimate was found by the same author from mountainous region of
   Chitral in Northern Pakistan. Depression was estimated to be 25% to
   72% among women and 10% to 44% among men.7

The wide variation in estimates raises certain va- lidity issues of
screening tests. Validity of any test or screening instrument is defined
as its ability to distin- guish between who has a disease and who does
not. Validity is a component of sensitivity and specificity of a test.
Next section addresses these issues from an epi- demiological point of
view.

*Establishing causality: Risk factors for* Depression
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to determine antecedents of disease, it is necessary to
establish a time sequence and show that presumed independent variable(s)
antecede the depen- dent one. Such temporal relationship can not be
estab- lished by cross sectional data8. It is important to keep this
limitation in mind because it is tempting to use preva- lence data for
causal inference, since they are more readily obtained than incidence
data. So how do we determine whether a certain disease is associated
with a certain exposure? To determine whether such an as- sociation
exists, we must determine, using data obtained in case-control and
cohort studies, whether there is an excess risk of the disease in
persons who have been exposed to certain agents as opposed to risk in
unex- posed population.

   Review of studies carried out on depression in Pakistan shows that
   all are cross sectional studies in design. These studies report
   various risk factors for de- pression in studied population. Some are
   congruent to studies in the west while other gives contrary evidence.
   Rates for depressive disorder are reported to be higher in women than
   men. This is consistent with the esti- mates from western countries.
   However one disparity that is observed is significantly higher rates
   in married than single females. Literature, from western countries,
   considers marriage to be a protective factor. It can be hypothesized
   that there are socio-cultural stressors spe- cific to Pakistani
   culture that renders married females vulnerable to depression. One
   can ask; is this factual or an artifact of measurement?

In a cross sectional study carried out by Ali and Naeem in urban middle
class population of Karachi, looking specifically at the psychosocial
risk factors, found extended family systems to be a particular risk
factor9. However findings from Northern Punjab are contradic- tory6. It
reports extended family networks as a protective factor for married
females. Other reported risk factors for depression from Pakistan are
low level of education, poverty and economic constraints.

Landmark study by social scientists from U.K (Brown and Harris, 1978)
reports emotional burden of child-care, non confiding relation with
husband and non- professional status (having no job outside the home) as
vulnerability factor for depression among females10. In an earlier study
(Naeem S) these risk factors were repli- cated besides the stressor of
hostile in-laws. 11 Contrar- ily studies from Northern Punjab reports
that risk factors identified by Brown and Harris in London do not seem
to apply for women in Punjab.

Another identified risk factor for Depression is socio-economic status.
It is a complex concept that has been borrowed by medical researchers,
often without due regard to its sociological inheritance. In epidemiol-
ogy the concept is assessed indirectly using a variety of different
measures with different implications for social and economic policy.
Income, material possessions (or standard of living), occupational
status, and education are the domains most commonly studied.12 Neverthe-
less, these measures are not equivalent and might have different
meanings and represent different concepts of social position in
different cultures. For instance, income changes throughout life while
education remains com- paratively “frozen” after early adulthood and
educational attainments can have different meaning in different places.
The association between relative or absolute income and health is among
the most commonly reported in the scientific literature. However, recent
studies from western countries, using robust deigns, have found that
this association is weakened or disappear when con- trolling for other
socioeconomic variables, especially education.13

In conclusion all of the studies carried out in Paki- stan were cross
sectional in design. Given the limitation of the study design, it
remains unclear what exposure acts as a risk factor for depression.
Univariate and covariate analysis of data can give putative risk factors
which can be subsequently tested using multivariate regression analysis.
However, one need to be careful, regression analysis has its limitation
in handling com- plicated data. In order to build a model one needs ad-
equate sample per variable (at least 10) besides the significance and
sequence of individual variables, which have a bearing on the final
model of regression analy- sis14. Longitudinal studies need to be
carried out in or- der to establish robust evidence on incidence and
risk- factors of depression in Pakistan.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Gordis, L. Assessing the validity and reliability of diag- nostic and
   screening tests, *In:* L. Gordis (ed.), Epidemi- ology, 3rd ed.
   Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders; 2004; p. 71-940.

2. Mirza I, Jenkins R. Risk factors, prevalence, and treat- ment of
   anxiety and depressive disorders in Pakistan: systematic review. BMJ
   2004; 328:794-7.

3. Ali BS, Amanullah S. Prevalence of Anxiety and Depres- sion in an
   Urban Squatter settlement of Karachi. J Coll Physicians Sur Pak 2000;
   10:4-6.

4. Khawaja MR, Mazahir S, Majeed A, Malik F, Merchant KA, Maqsood M, et
   al. Chewing of Betel, Areca and Tobacco: Perceptions and Knowledge
   Regarding their Role in Head and Neck Cancers in an Urban Squatter
   Settlement in Pakistan. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 2006; 7: 95-100

5. Mumford DB, Minhas FA, Akhtar I, Akhtar S, Mubbashar MH. Stress and
   Psychiatric disorder in Urban Rawal- pindi: a community survey. Br J
   Psychiatry 2000; 177:557-62.

6. Mumford DB, Saeed K, Ahmad I, Latif S, Mubbashar MH. Stress and
   psychiatric disorder in rural Punjab: a community survey. Br J
   Psychiatry 1997; 170:473-8.

7. Mumford DB, Nazir M, Jilani FU, Baig IY. Stress and psychiatric
   disorder in Hindukush: a community survey of mountain village. Br J
   Psychiatry 1996; 168:299-307.

8. Grimes DA, Schulz KF. Descriptive studies: what they can and cannot
   do. Lancet 2002; 359: 145-9.

9. Ali BS, Rahbar MH, Naeem S, Tareen AL, Gul A, Samad

..

   L. Prevalence of and factors associated with anxiety and depression
   among women in a lower middle class semi-urban community of Karachi,
   Pakistan. J Pak Med Assoc 2002; 52:513-7.

10. Brown GW, Harris TO: Social Origins of Depression: A Study of
    Psychiatric Disorder in Women. London, Tavistock, 1978.

11. Naeem S. Psychosocial risk factors for depression in Pakistani
    women. [Dissertation] Karachi: College of Phy- sicians and Surgeons
    of Pakistan, 1990.

12. Ellison G. How robust is the association between income distribution
    and health? J Epidemiol Community Health 1998; 52:694.

13. Muller A. Education, income, and mortality: a multiple regression
    analysis. BMJ 2002; 324:1–4.

14. Katz MH. Multivariable analysis: A practical guide for clinicians.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University press; 1999.
