   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 105-107 CASE REPORT

EDUCATOR INDUCED POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (EIPTSD) IN A 6 YEAR OLD
BOY

   Iqbal Saman, Syed Ehsanullah

ABSTRACT
========

   Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a delayed and/or protracted
   response to exceptionally threatening or catastrophic events. The
   event is persistently remembered or relived with concomitant distress
   sometimes even leading to harmful life-long psychological sequelae.
   We present a 6-year old boy who developed the classical syndrome
   following corporal punishment at school when his class teacher
   injected an empty syringe into his gluteal region.

   **Keywords :**\ Post-traumatic stress disorder, trauma, stressor,
   corporal punishment

INTRODUCTION
============

A number of case reports and retrospective re- views have linked
corporal punishment with develop- ment of post-traumatic stress disorder
and other psychi- atric illnesses in children1,2,3. The nosology of
Post-trau- matic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is based on adult psycho-
pathology, child vulnerabilities are different. Childhood maltreatment
has profound impact on the emotional, behavioral, cognitive, social and
physical functioning of children. Developmental experiences literally
determine the organizational and functional status of the mature brain
and, therefore, adverse events can have a tre- mendous negative impact
on the development of the brain4. Corporal punishment – a common form of
child- hood maltreatment – is commonplace among children both at home
and in schools as highlighted by the South Asia Report of UNICEF (2001)
5. It is often considered necessary in Asian cultures to children’s
upbringing, to facilitate learning and to instill discipline.

One-half of students who are subjected to severe punishment develop an
illness called Educator- Induced PTSD (EIPSD) 6, a symptomatology
analogous to the PTSD. PTSD requires the presumptive cause of trauma of
which the initial view was war experience but the no- tion later
extended to natural disasters, catastrophes7, physical attacks8, rape9,
10, child and wife battering and sexual abuses also medical events such
as traffic acci- dents11, 12, heart attack, cancer or even
hospitalization

   **Iqbal Saman,** M.B,B.S. Resident , Department of Psychiatry, Aga
   Khan University, P.O Box 3500, Stadium Road, Karachi 74800, Pakistan.
   E- mail: saman.zuberi@aku.edu

   **Syed Ehsanullah,** M.B.B.S. Diplomat American Board of psy- chiatry
   and neurology. Assistant Professor, Department of Psy- chiatry, Aga
   Khan University Hospital

   **Correspondence: Dr Iqbal Saman**

   following resuscitation13 .The emotional responses14 and threat to
   perception of self as an autonomous human being15 play a significant
   part in PTSD-type response to any event.

   15 years ago children were considered to respond to acute traumatic
   events with transient brief reactions however increasing data with
   full syndrome in child- hood proves contrary. We present a case of a
   6-year old boy who developed a full syndrome after receiving pun-
   ishment from his class teacher.

CASE STUDY
==========

“M”, a 6-year-old boy belonging to Sanghar, was brought to the
outpatient clinic by his father and uncle with a 4-month history of
aggressiveness, night terrors, disturbed sleep/appetite and school
refusal. Immediate preceding development of these symptoms, the boy’s
teacher had injected an empty syringe into his buttock as punishment for
misbehaving in class. Since then, he had become stubborn, aggressive and
very demand- ing. There were frequent complaints from school of his
poking others with pointed objects. At home he would wake up in the
night crying, his appetite reduced to small demands like chocolates. “M”
experienced flashbacks of the same event and refused school. His parents
changed his school but he remained fearful, lacked in- terest in
learning and avoided activities previously en- joyable.

He started school a year back. He belonged to an extended family setup
with both parents illiterate. He is the elder of two siblings. His
father is a businessman.

On examination he had low weight for his age and was unkempt,
hyperactive and restless. It was difficult to establish rapport with
him. Frequent staring/blinking of eyes was observed.

   A diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder was

   made. He was prescribed Imipramine 25 mg /day in- creased to 50
   mg/day(antidepressant) as he needed a sedating anti-depressant for
   sleep disturba nces. Risperidone 0.5 mg/day(atypical antipsy- chotic)
   was added for agitation in a small dose and gradually tapered off in
   two weeks. He was advised regular follow-up every two weeks in which
   graded ex- posure was planned. Gradual improvement was ob- served
   over the next 2 months to complete return of functioning.

DISCUSSION
==========

PTSD is an anxiety disorder that stems from memo- ries of a traumatic
event. Signs and symptoms typically appear within three months and
include flashbacks and distressing dreams of the event (in which the
memories may themselves be a distorted form16), efforts to avoid
thoughts and feelings related to the trauma and feelings of estrangement
from others, hopelessness about fu- ture and physical/psychological
hypersensitivity. In “M’s” case, the traumatic event being the
punishment, all of the above immediately followed.

Age-specific symptoms of PTSD are now recog- nized17. Younger children
may report more generalized fears such as stranger or separation
anxiety, avoidance of situations that may or may not be related to the
trauma, sleep disturbances, and a preoccupation with words or symbols
that may or may not be related to the trauma. They may display
posttraumatic play in which they re- peat themes of the trauma and may
lose an acquired developmental skill (such as toilet training) or show
re- gression17. M re-enacted by poking his peers with pointed objects.
Clinical reports suggest that elementary school- aged children may not
experience visual flashbacks or amnesia for aspects of the trauma.
However, they do experience “time skew” (mis-sequencing trauma related
events when recalling the memory) and “omen forma- tion” (a belief that
there were warning signs that pre- dicted the trauma). School-aged
children also report- edly exhibit posttraumatic play or reenactment of
the trauma in play, drawings, or verbalizations17.

Research on etiology focuses on psychological and biological mechanisms.
Psychological mechanisms supported are fear conditioning18, negative
appraisals of the event19 and certain behaviors that maintain the state
such as safety behavior, suppression, dissociation and drug abuse20. The
boy had developed the habit of frequent staring and blinking. Certain
biological char- acteristics have also been related such as enhanced
negative feedback of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adre- nal axis, evidence
of sensitization of adrenergic and serotonergic systems21, 30, a rise in
endogenous opiates and increased levels of corticotrophin-releasing

   factor22. Neuroimaging studies show reduced hippoc- ampal volume,
   decreased blood flow in middle temporal lobes and increased flow in
   the limbic sys- tem23 . This points towards a possible abnormal
   amygdala response.

Co-morbidity24 is noted with affective disorders, other anxiety
disorders, substance-use disorders and somatization. PTSD in children is
often misdiagnosed as Attention-Deficit Hyperkinetic Disorder, childhood
onset depression and conduct disorder. Pre-morbid anxi- ety and
depression may prolong symptoms beyond 6 weeks. There is future risk of
depression, eating disor- ders and cardiovascular disease with childhood
mal- treatment25, 26.

A cumulative risk model incorporating failure to thrive and maltreatment
during early childhood is cur- rently supported to be detrimental to
child development27 consistent with previous studies relating
environmental risks to negative consequences. It is reported that 50 per
cent recover within a year but one-third may not re- cover for many
years. Such children may later on ex- press antisocial tendencies,
intense dislike for author- ity, school-dropout and evidence of
high-risk adoles- cent behavior.

Best treatment options are cognitive-behavior therapy28 in combination
with SSRIs29. The former con- tains education of symptoms and treatment
rationale, narrative-exposure, cognitive restructuring, stress inocu-
lation and eye-movement desensitization reprocessing (EMDR). However a
tricyclic anti-depressant was used for its sedation (the boy was having
sleep disturbances). A small dose of anti-psychotic was used for
agitation and tapered off in 2 weeks time.

   Finally, research into the phenomena of corporal punishment and the
   root causes of violence in our soci- ety is needed and would pivot
   promotion of child men- tal/emotional health.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Hyman IA, Zelikoff W, Clarke J. Psychological and physi- cal abuse
    in the schools: A paradigm for understanding post-traumatic stress
    disorder in children and youth. Journal of Traumatic Stress 1988; 1:
    243-67.

2.  Duncan RD, Saunders BE, Kilpatrick DG, Hanson RF, Resnick HS.
    Childhood physical assault as a risk factor for PTSD, depression,
    and substance abuse: findings from a national survey. Am J
    Orthopsychiatry 1996; 66: 437-48.

3.  Hyman IA. Research on EIPTSD [Educator-Induced Posttraumatic Stress
    Disorder]. In: Reading, Writing and the Hickory Stick: The Appalling
    Story of Physical and Psychological Abuse in American Schools.
    Lexington Books; 1990: 97-101.

4.  Gefner B. The cost of child maltreatment: Who pays? We all do.
    Haworth Press; 2000.

5.  Corporal punishment in schools in South Asia – submit- ted to the
    Committee on the Rights of a Child, Day of General Discussion on
    Violence against children 28 Sep 2001,UNICEF (Regional Office for
    South Asia) p3.

6.  Hyman IA. Eliminating corporal punishment in schools: Moving from
    advocacy research to policy implementa- tion. Child Legal Rights
    1988;9:14–20.

7.  Carr JV, Lewin TJ, Webster RA, Hazell PL, Kenardy JA, Carter GL.
    Psychological Sequelae of the 1989 New Castle Earthquake: II.
    Exposure and morbidity profiles during the first 2 years
    post-disaster. Psychol Med 1997; 27: 167-78.

8.  Riggs DS, Dancu CV, Gershuny BS, Greenberg D, Foa EB. Anger and
    post-traumatic stress disorder in female crime victims. J Traumatic
    Stress 1992; 5: 613-25.

9.  Kessler RC, Sonnega A, Bromet E, Hughes M, Nelson CB. Post-traumatic
    stress disorder in the National Co- morbidity Survey. Arch Gen
    Psychiat 1995; 52: 1048-60.

10. Foa EB, Riggs DS. Post-traumatic stress disorder in rape victims.
    Ann Rev Psychiat 1993; 12: 273-303.

11. Mayou RA, Bryant B, Duthie R. Psychiatric Conse- quences of road
    traffic accidents. B M J 1993; 307: 647-51.

12. Keppel-Benson JM, Olendick TH, Benson MJ. J Child Psychol Psychiat
    2002; 43: 203-12.

13. Gavin LA, Roesler TA. Post-traumatic distress in children and
    families after intubation. Paediatr Emerg Care1997; 13: 222-4.

14. Roemer L, Orsillo SM, Borkovec TD, Litz BT. Emotional response at
    the time of a potentially traumatizing event and PTSD
    symptomatology: a preliminary retrospec- tive analysis of the DSM-IV
    criterion A-2. J Behav Ther Experimental Psychiat 1998; 29: 123-30.

15. Schreier H, Ladakakos C, Morabito D, Chapman L, Knudson MM.
    Posttraumatic stress symptoms in chil- dren after mild to moderate
    pediatric trauma: a longitu- dinal examination of symptom
    prevalence, correlates, and parent-child symptom reporting. J Trauma
    2005; 58: 353-63.

16. Lanius R. The Nature of Traumatic Memories: A Func- tional MRI
    Connectivity Analysis. Am J Psychiatry 2004; 161: 36-44.

17. Hamblen J, PTSD in Children and Adolescents, A Na- tional Center for
    PTSD Fact Sheet.

18. Charney D, Deutch AY, Krystal JH, Southwick SM, Davis, M.
    Psychobiological mechanisms of post-trau- matic stress disorder.
    Arch Gen Psychiat 1993; 50: 294-305.

19. Foa EB, Ehlers A, Clark DM, Tollin DF, Orsillo SM. The
    post-traumatic cognitions inventory (PTCI):development and
    validation. Psychol Assess 1999; 11: 303-14.

20. Ehlers A, Clark DM. A cognitive model of persist PTSD. Behav Res
    Ther 1999;38: 319-45.

21. Bremner JD, Licinio J, Darnell A, et al. Elevated CSF
    corticotrophin-releasing factor concentrations in post- traumatic
    stress disorder, Am J Psychiat 1997; 154: 624-9.

22. Bremner JD, Neuroimaging of post-traumatic stress dis- order.
       Psychiat Ann 1998; 28: 445-50.

23. Linning LM, Kearney CA. Post-traumatic stress disorder in maltreated
       youth: a study of diagnostic comorbidity and child factors. J
       Interpersonal Violence 2004;19: 1087-101.

24. Batten SV, Aslan M, Maciejewski PK, Mazure CM. Child- hood
       maltreatment as a risk factor for adult cardiovas- cular disease
       and depression. J Clin Psychiat 2004; 65: 249-54.

25. Tobin DL, Molteni AL, Elin MR. Early trauma, dissocia- tion, and
       late onset in the eating disorders. Int J Eat Disord 1995; 17:
       305-8.

26. Kerr MA, Black MM, Krishnakumar A. Failure-to-thrive, maltreatment
       and the behavior and development of 6- year-old children from
       low-income, urban families: a cumulative risk model. J Child
       Abuse Neglect 2000; 24: 587-98.

27. Onyut LP, Neuner F, Schauer E, Ertl V,Odenwald M, Schauer M Elbert
       T. Narrative Exposure Therapy as a treatment for child war
       survivors with posttrau- matic stress disorder: Two case reports
       and a pilot study in an African refugee settlement. BMC Psychiat
       2005; 5:7.

28. Friedman MJ. Current and future drug treatment for post-traumatic
       stress disorder. Psychiat Ann 1998; 28: 461-8.

29. Delahanty DL, Nugent NR, Christopher NC, Walsh M. Initial urinary
       epinephrine and cortisol levels predict acute PTSD symptoms in
       child trauma victims. J Psychoneuroendocrinol 2005; 30: 121-8.
