   JPPS 2009; 6(1): 1-2 EDITORIAL

WORKING WITH INTERPRETERS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES — IMPLICATIONS FOR
PSYCHIATRIC RESEARCH AND TRAINING

   Saeed Farooq

Cross cultural psychiatry is a burgeoning field. Almost universally
cross cultural psychiatry has become synonymous for working with ethnic
minorities living in developed countries. We tend to think that only
white psychiatrists have cross cultural issues when working with ethnic
minorities. It is rarely considered that as a psychiatrist from a
different ethnic background, we also need to understand the ‘culture’ of
the host nation. As an English speaking mental health professional, it
is thought that we have adequate knowledge of the ‘English’ cul- ture,
gained perhaps from English medium system of education quite prevalent
in subcontinent or Hollywood movies.

More interestingly, perhaps the cross cultural psy- chiatry and its
applications are not considered in rela- tion to the cultural
differences for the many ethnically diverse populations living in large
countries like India and Pakistan. We rarely, if ever consider the
cultural differences when seeing a patient from a different prov- ince
or a state which may have totally different language, cultural heritage
and even a different world view. The vast literature on cross cultural
psychiatry has very little, if any, research on the cultural differences
and their rel- evance to mental health in ethnically diverse popula-
tions living in many developing countries.

An important aspect of these cultural consider- ations is the language
spoken by the patients. Language is the principal investigative and
therapeutic tool in psy- chiatry. Interference with communication
impairs our ability to assess a patient comprehensively. Nowhere is this
more evident than in the situation where patient and professional are
separated by a language barrier, creat- ing a state of dependency on an
interpreter, who holds the key to mutual understanding. Although
considered as an ethnic minorities’ issue, I will argue that this is a
major problem for many developing countries with large populations.

   At least three entirely different languages (*not dia- lects*) are
   spoken in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Prov- ince, a relatively
   small province with population of about 20 millions. Similarly India
   is a potpourri of different cul-

   **Correspondence:**

   **Prof. Saeed Farooq,** MCPS, FCPS. Professor and Head De- partment
   of Psychiatry, PGMI, Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan.

   E-mail: sfarooqlrh@yahoo.com

   tures, religions and beliefs and is home to many lan- guages.
   Presently 22 languages are officially recognized by the Indian
   Constitution and it is estimated that there are more than 400 living
   languages in India. It is quite common for a psychiatrist to see a
   patient in these set- tings whose language is not shared by him or
   her at all.

   A large number of internally displaced persons moving to different
   places within a country, as a result of number of conflicts, further
   complicate the issue. The number of refugees and internally displaced
   person world wide is estimated to be 25.1 millions with an un-
   precedented increase of 2.5 millions in one year only

   i.e. 2007 1. Most of these populations are unfortunately in the
   developing countries. A recent example is the crisis in Malakand
   which displaced a large number of Pashtu speaking people to areas
   where the language may entirely be different. Moreover, migrant
   populations exhibit a higher incidence of mental illness compared
   with native populations2.

   Nevertheless, the study of linguistics in relation to psychiatry is
   rarely mentioned in psychiatric texts and perhaps not considered at
   all in psychiatric training in our countries. While many services in
   Western coun- tries have lists of interpreters and there are some
   guide- lines on how to work effectively through interpreters, there
   is practically nothing in the literature from large developing
   countries.

A number of studies, mostly in medical settings, confirm that patients
with limited English in Western coun- tries, experience difficulties in
communication3, 4. A sys- tematic review of the evidence has suggested
that qual- ity of care is compromised when patients with limited English
need but do not get interpreters. More inter- preter errors occur with
untrained, *ad hoc* interpreters5. Provision of trained professional
interpreters and bilin- gual health care providers have been shown to
have positive effects on patients’ satisfaction, quality of care and
outcomes5.

The reality of practice in most developing coun- tries would mean that
most of us will have to rely on use of a relative or friend of the
patient or even another pa- tient as an interpreter. It is therefore
even more important for professionals in these countries to have
training in the basic skills needed to work through interpreters. It
should be remembered that the clinician’s competence and familiarity
with the use of interpreters is extremely

important. The process will be further complicated if a clinician speaks
quickly, uses long sentences or fails to use ‘laymen’s’ language.
Talking to the interpreter about the patient using the third person
invites a conversation about them rather than with them and raises the
inter- preter from the position of facilitator to participant, dis-
torting the process still further.

Simple steps can help. In the interview, address- ing the patient
directly instead of through the interpreter helps to establish a better
rapport and give control of the interview to the clinician. Questions
should be planned in advance so as to make the best use of the time
avail- able. Long questions, excessive jargon and use of the passive
voice will make an interview more difficult. Breaks, while the
interpreter is speaking to the patient should be used by the clinician
to observe the patient’s non-verbal behaviours, helping to gain
non-verbal clues to the patient’s mental state and enabling the next
ques- tion to be framed more appropriately. Writing notes dur- ing these
breaks wastes the opportunity to acquire valu- able clinical data and
should be avoided. A statement that is inconsistent with a patient’s
non-verbal behaviour should be explored by changing the wording,
breaking down the question or asking about a related issue. A
post-interview meeting with the interpreter is essential to clarify the
interview material and the dynamics of the interaction. It must be
remembered that the use of such emergency interpreters will greatly
increase the num- ber of errors, particularly those involving role
conflict and normalization (a tendency on the part of interpreters to
“normalize” the patient’s responses). Responses such as ‘does not know
...’ or ‘talks irrelevantly ...’ should be explored further to look for
errors or psychopathology. In such situations, a verbatim translation
should be re- quested. The interpreter may have his or her own agenda or
insecurities in such settings. During the interview, how- ever, it is
important to keep a focus on the patient. For further guidance on how to
work effectively through in- terpreters please consult Farooq and Fear
(2003)6 or visit `http://www.vtpu.org.au/. <http://www.vtpu.org.au/>`__

These considerations highlight only few of the is- sues which are
important in working with interpreters. It is crucial that the
postgraduate training programmes in low and middle Income countries
incorporate the cul- tural and linguistic diversity found in many of
these na- tions as an integral component of the training. The prac-
tical part of the postgraduate examinations should test

   the ability to work with the help of lay interpreters, a common
   situation in these countries.

It has been claimed that transcultural psychiatry is an applied science,
converting research-derived con- cepts into reliable health strategies7.
This science has rarely been applied in the settings outside western or
developed nations. It is essential for psychiatrists to rec- ognize the
complexity of the task. Living in a large coun- try with seemingly one
or two major languages should not blind us from the fact that patients
may not share our language and culture, even though we may belong to one
province or perhaps the same region. Talking to the patients does not
always mean that we are communi- cating as well. The power that
interpreters have to con- trol the information being relayed back and
forth and thus influence the outcome of the interview must not be
underestimated, particularly when they have no training for the job and
we have no understanding of what to expect.

   REFERENCES

1. 2007 Global Trends: Refugees, Asylum-seekers, Return- ees, Internally
   Displaced and Stateless Persons. [Online] 2007 [Cited on 2008,
   December 03] Available from URL:
   `http://www.unhcr.org/statistics/STATISTIC
   S/ <http://www.unhcr.org/statistics/STATISTICS/>`__ 4852366f2.pdf.

2. Westermeyer J. Psychiatric Care of Immigrants. Wash- ington DC:
   American Psychiatric Press,1989.

3. Ramirez D, Engel KG, Tang TS. Language interpreter utilization in the
   emergency department setting: a clini- cal review. J Health Care Poor
   Underserved 2008; 19: 352-62.

4. Ngo-Metzger Q, Sorkin DH, Phillips RS, Greenfield S, Massagli MP,
   Clarridge B, et al. Providing high-quality care for limited English
   proficient patients: the impor- tance of language concordance and
   interpreter use. J Gen Intern Med 2007; 22:324-30.

5. Flores G. The impact of medical interpreter services on the quality
   of health care: A systematic review. Med Care Res Rev 2005; 62:
   255-99.

6. Farooq S, Fear C, Oyebode F. An investigation of the adequacy of
   psychiatric interviews conducted through an interpreter. Psychiatric
   Bull 1997; 21: 209–13.

7. Jablensky A. Whither transcultural psychiatry? A com- ment on a
   project for a national strategy. Australasian Psychiatry 1994; 2:
   59–61.
