   JPPS 2008; 5(1): 38-40 CASE REPORT

PSYCHOSIS, INTERMITTENT HYPONATRAEMIA, POLYDIPSIA AND NEUROLEPTIC
MALIGNANT

   SYNDROME IN A PATIENT WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA

   S. B. Menezes, D. A. Braganza Menezes

ABSTRACT
========

   The syndromes of psychosis, intermittent hyponatraemia and polydipsia
   (PIP) and neuroleptic malig- nant syndrome (NMS) are rare. Rarer
   still is their concomitant occurrence.

   This case report describes a 44 year old, schizophrenic, Caucasian
   female who presented with vomiting and confusion. A subsequent
   seizure and fluctuating consciousness prompted rapid investigation
   re- vealing a very low sodium level. These symptoms coupled with a
   history of excessive water consumption in the weeks preceding
   admission led to the diagnosis of PIP syndrome. Intensive care led to
   an initial recovery, however the patient deteriorated again,
   developing fever and muscle rigidity. A subsequent elevated creatine
   kinase level led to the diagnosis of NMS and antipsychotic medication
   was stopped. Upon stabilisation she was transferred to psychiatric
   care and managed with closely monitored antipsy- chotic medication.

   The exact pathogenesis of these two syndromes is not well understood.
   Neither is their potential to have a synergistic effect. Though
   polydipsia and hyponatraemia are well documented in psychiatric
   patients, whether or not there is an underlying disorder leading to
   excessive water consumption is unclear, as is the association between
   NMS and hyponatraemia. PIP is thought to be related to a dysfunction
   in the limbic system. In addition to this several investigators have
   shown that NMS is related to the degree of D2 receptor blockade. Both
   typical and atypical antipsychotics can lead to NMS. The co-existence
   of these two conditions can have important implications for their
   diagnosis and management.

   **Key words:** Psychosis, Intermittent hyponatraemia, Polydipsia and
   Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome, Schizophrenia.

INTRODUCTION
============

PIP Syndrome is defined as the triad of psychosis, intermittent
hyponatraemia and polydipsia. Similarly, the symptoms of fever, muscle
rigidity, delirium and auto- nomic instability are collectively referred
to as Neuro- leptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS).

In terms of the aetiology of PIP syndrome, although polydipsia and
hyponatraemia are well noted to be present in psychiatric patients,
especially those with schizophrenia1, an underlying disorder causing
com- pulsive water consumption in psychiatric patients re- mains
unclear2. It is hypothesised though that impair- ment in central thirst
regulation1,3, drug therapy4 or the endogenous opioid system5, may well
contribute to an

altered sensation of thirst, and result in compulsive drink- ing
behaviour.

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a rare, but serious and
potentially fatal complication of treat- ment with antipsychotic
medication. There have also been papers alluding to an association
between NMS and hyponetraemia6,7, believed to be either coinciden- tal
or as a result of an undefined common pathogen- esis6 i.e. an acute
imbalance of sodium in the central nervous system7. Others8 hypothesise
that acute hyponatraemia may have served as a precipitating fac- tor for
NMS.

   The chances of an individual having both PIP and NMS simultaneously
   is quite rare, however a previous

   history of psychiatric illness, and subsequent treatment

   **S. B. Menezes,** MBBS DPM MRC Psych, Consultant Psychia- trist,
   Queen Elizabeth Psychiatric Hospital, Edgbaston, Bir- mingham, B15
   2QZ. E Mail: Simon.Menezes@bsmht.nhs.uk

   **D. A. Braganza Menezes**, University of Birmingham, Birming- ham UK

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. Simon B Menezes.**

   with psychotropic medication may provide valuable clues to the
   diagnosis and management of such patients.

   Despite the number of reports currently in litera- ture, there are
   few cases documented of both PIP and NMS concurrently. This case
   report describes a female schizophrenic patient exhibiting the
   cardinal symptoms of both PIP and NMS.

CASE HISTORY
============

Miss X, a 44-year-old Caucasian female with schizophrenia, presented to
the University General Hos- pital with vomiting and confusion. There was
a history of a large volume of water consumption in the weeks pre-
ceding admission.

Soon after admission, she suffered a grand mal seizure, and on
investigation was found to have pro- found hyponatraemia (serum sodium
levels were 108mmol/L). A series of investigations were undertaken,
including blood tests, CT scan, MRI and an EEG, all of which were
normal.

Her condition subsequently deteriorated and she suffered respiratory
arrest and became comatose. She was transferred to ITU and put on a
ventilator, following which she underwent kidney dialysis to normalise
her serum sodium levels.

She regained consciousness and appeared to recover, but deteriorated the
next day, developing fever and muscle rigidity. She again became
confused and her CK levels were found to be 58,000 Units.

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome was diagnosed following consultation by a
neurologist. Her antipsy- chotic medication was stopped, and she was
treated with Dantrolene and other supportive measures. When her
condition stabilised, she was transferred back to the psychiatric
hospital, where her behaviour deteriorated. She was thought-disordered,
with auditory hallucina- tions, paranoid beliefs, incoherent speech,
irritability and a lack of insight into her condition. She was started
on Clozapine but as she refused oral medication, she was initially
treated with Lorazepam injection and then was treated with Depixol 40 mg
IM every two weeks, under close observation. When her psychiatric
condition im- proved, she was treated with Quetiapine 150 mg per day and
oral Lorazepam.

Miss X did not have any significant previous medi- cal history, and
there was no family history of mental illness. Premorbidly, her mother
described her as a quiet lady who lacked self-confidence. She isolated
herself and did not have many friends.

Her conclusive diagnosis was that of schizophre- nia with PIP syndrome
and NMS. She was monitored closely to ensure that she did not consume
excessive amounts of water. Owing to management difficulties, she
presented to an acute psychiatric ward, she was placed, and currently
resides in, a low security private facility. Her mental state has
improved but she remains thought- disordered, and lacks insight into her
condition, but takes Quetiapine and Lorazepam with gentle persuasion.

DISCUSSION
==========

This case highlights how consumption of large amounts of water prior to
admission led to a presenta-

tion of vomiting, confusion and delirium. As doctors were attempting to
stabilise her electrolyte imbalance, it is evident that the possibility
of developing NMS was over- looked. In this way, the presence of PIP
clearly hindered the diagnosis of NMS.

PIP is thought to be caused by dysregulation of the endogenous opioid
system, which in turn leads to compulsive drinking behaviour5. It is
also hypothesised that there is a close link between dysfunction of the
lim- bic system (causing psychosis) and dysregulation in hy- pothalamic
centres manifesting in polydipsia and osmo dysregulation8. Hence one can
view PIP as a neuro- logically-related dysregulation rather than a
drug-in- duced condition.

Several investigators have suggested that the like- lihood of an
antipsychotic causing NMS may correlate with its D2 receptor blockade in
the nigrostriatal tract, mesocortical pathway and hypothalamic nuclei9.
Both typical and atypical antipsychotics can give rise to NMS10. The
re-introduction of antipsychotics after one has had NMS and the ability
of the patient to tolerate them without giving rise to the condition
again, suggests that NMS is multifactorial in nature, and not solely
pre- cipitated by drugs. Advanced stages of psychotic disor- ders
associated with catatonia can progress to exhaus- tion, stupor,
hyperthermia and death.

Simultaneous management of the two conditions is quite complex, and it
is difficult to say if there was any cause-effect relationship between
the two conditions. However in this particular case, PIP was followed by
NMS and delirium was the link between the two condi- tions. The presence
of hyponatraemia may hinder the diagnosis of NMS. Hyponatraemia is a
common electro- lyte disturbance occurring in a broad spectrum of pa-
tients, from asymptomatic to critically ill11.There are thought to be
serious neurological sequelae associated with hyponatraemia12. Miss X
suffered some neurologi- cal damage, but establishing the exact nature
of the neurological damage was hampered by her psychiatric condition. As
part of her management we had to keep a close eye on her water intake.
The quick identification and management of both the PIP and Neuroleptic
ma- lignant syndromes led to a favourable outcome.

The association of hyponatraemia and NMS that has been found may be due
to an undefined common pathogenesis of NMS and PIP, or may indeed be
coinci- dental. As delirium is common in both, the combined management
of the two conditions is quite challenging. The combination of
psychosis, intermittent hypona- traemia, and polydipsia (PIP syndrome),
seen in the seriously mentally ill, can result in an acceleralated death
rate if not identified early. Although rare, it is neverthe- less very
important to maintain a high level of suspicion when any patient
presents with fever, muscle rigidity, confusion and autonomic
instability (NMS), making it essential for all doctors and nurses to be
familiar with this life threatening condition.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Illowsky BP, Kirch DG. Polydipsia and hyponatraemia in psychiatric
    patients. Am J Psychiatry 1988; 145: 675 â€“ 83.

2.  Lydakis C, Apostolakis S, Thalassinos E, Stamataki K, Saridaki K,
    Basta M. PIP syndrome: A potentially threatening manifestation of a
    psychiatric disorder. Int J Clin Pract 2005; 59: 612 â€“ 3.

3.  GoldmanMB, Luchins DJ, Robertson GL. Mechanisms of altered water
    metabolism in psychotic patients with polydipsia and hyponatraemia.
    N Engl J Med 1988; 318: 397 â€“ 403.

4.  Rao KJ, Miller M, Moses A. Water intoxication and thioridazine. Ann
    Intern Med 1975; 82: 61.

5.  Nishikawa T, Tsuda A, Tanaka M, Nishikawa M, Koga I, Uchida Y.
    Involvement of the endogenous opioid system in the drinking behavior
    of schizophrenic patients dis- playing self-induced water
    intoxication: a double-blind controlled study with naloxone. Clin
    Neuropharmacol- ogy 1996; 19: 252-8.

6.  Schmitz B, Trimble MR. Carbamazepine and PIP-syn- drome in temporal
    lobe epilepsy. Epilepsy Res 1995; 22: 215-20.

7.  Mann SC, Caroff SN, Fricchione G, Campbell EC. Cen- tral dopamine
    hypoactivity and the pathogenesis of the neuroleptic malignant
    syndrome. Psychiatr Ann 2000; 30:363â€“74.

8.  Rose BD. New approach to disturbances in the plasma sodium
    concentration. Am J Med 1986; 81: 1033 â€“ 40.

9.  Milionis HJ, Liamis GL, Elisaf MS. The hyponatremic patient: a
    systematic approach to laboratory diagnosis. Can Med Assoc J 2002;
    166: 1056 â€“ 62.

10. Caroff SN, Mann SC. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Medical Clinics
    of North America1993; 77: 185â€“202.

11. Vachharajani TJ, Zaman F, Abreo KD. Hyponatremia in Critically Ill
    Patients. J Intensive Care Med 2003; 18: 3-8.

12. Ellis SJ. Severe hyponatraemia: complications and treat- ment. Q J
    Med 1995; 88: 905-9.
