   JPPS 2008; 5(2): 118-119 CASE REPORT

TREATMENT OF TICS IN TOURETTES SYNDROME WITH ARIPIPRAZOLE

   Mohan Chawla, Ashok Kumar Jainer, Zoreh Fouladi

ABSTRACT
========

   We report a case of 59 year old man who was suffering from tics since
   the age of 5 but when he came to the services for depressive symptoms
   at the age of 45, he came to the attention and was diagnosed as a
   case of Tourettes syndrome with co morbid depression.

   **Key words:** Tics, Tourettes synderome, Aripiprazole.

INTRODUCTION
============

Tourettes syndrome (TS) is characterised by in- voluntary motor and
vocal tics and most often manifests in children and adolescents. The
aetiology of TS is not known. However, evidence suggests that the
pathophysi- ology involves an abnormality in the central dopaminer- gic
system. In support of this hypothesis, dopamine block- ing drugs
(antipsychotic) show some efficacy in reduc- tion of tics and
dopaminergic agents like amphetamine worsen the tic severity in TS
patients. Controlled trials have documented the efficacy of several
typical antipsy- chotic such as haloperidol, pimozide, Sulpiride and
fluphenazine for tic suppression, but these medications are limited by
troublesome side effects including Par- kinsonism, drowsiness,
akathasia, weight gain and neu- roleptic malignant syndrome.

Recently atypical antipsychotic with different pharmacological profiles
have emerged as new thera- peutic options in the treatment of TS with
less extra py- ramidal side effects. To date, several atypical
antipsychotics (risperidone, olanzapine, ziprasidone and quetiapine)
have been successfully used to treat TS patients1.

   Overall treatment of TS with currently prescribed antipsychotics is
   still unsatisfactory for many patients, especially children and
   adolescents, having difficulty bearing the side effects.

   **Mohan Chawla,** M.B.B.S, M.D(Psych), MRCPsych, Consult- ant
   Psychiatrist, Clarendon House, 8-12, Station Road, Kettering,
   Northantoms, NN15 7HH, UK.

   **Ashok Kumar Jainer,** M.B.B.S., M.D(Psych), MRCPsych, Dip.
   Evidence-Based Health Care, Consultant Psychiatrist, The Caludon
   Centre, Walsgrave Hospital, Coventry, CV2 2TE, UK. E-mail:
   ashokjainer@hotmail.com

   **Zoreh Fouladi,** Senior House Officer, The Caludon Centre,
   Walsgrave Hospital, Coventry, CV2 2TE, UK.

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. Ashok Kumar Jainer**

   In this scenario Aripiprazole, the dopamine sys- tem stabiliser
   currently used for treatment of schizophre- nia2 could be an
   alternative treatment because of a favourable side effect profile.
   Aripiprazole acts as a par- tial agonist at dopamine–2(D2) receptors
   in hypodopominergic conditions and displays antagonist properties in
   hyperdoperminergic states, thus stabilising the dopamine imbalance
   leading to clinical efficacy with least side effects.

   Here, we report a patient with Tourettes syndrome in whom motor tics
   almost completely resolved with Aripiprazole.

CASE HISTORY
============

59-year-old Mr. DH was suffering from tics since the age of 5 years and
came to the attention of the services only at the age of 45 for his
depressive symp- toms. Then he was diagnosed to have Tourettes syn-
drome with co morbid depression.

He had multiple motor tics comprising of facial gri- maces, head jerks,
shoulder shrugs and abdominal tens- ing with a single vocal tic of
coughing. He fulfilled the criteria for Tourettes Syndrome according to
ICD-10. All these symptoms were chronic in nature with classic waxing
and waning picture of tourettes syndrome. His symptoms had a negative
effect on his schooling and occupation. He was depressed on occasions
with ideas of suicide. He was free from tics for a period of 8 years
(1969-1977) when he was in Australia without any medi- cation.

He was treated with haloperidol from 1991 to 2001 with maximum dose
50mg/day without any significant improvement. Later risperidone was
tried from 2002 to May 2005 with maximum dose of 5mg/day; this could not
be increased because of intolerable side effects. Tics continued to be
present without significant change.

Based on the side effect profile, we tried Aripiprazole 15 mg/day in
this patient from June 2005. Yale global tic severity scale score was 73
at this point in

   time. After 3 weeks of treatment there was a significant reduction in
   the number and frequency of tics. Yale glo- bal tic severity scale
   score dropped to 6. He started to socialize more and became regular
   and efficient in work. These effects were stable during the follow up
   period of 28 weeks. He has not reported any side effects from
   Aripiprazole .

DISCUSSION
==========

Though this is a single case report, this gives fu- ture direction for
systematic research regarding path physiology of Tourettes and its
treatment with Aripiprazole.

This preliminary observation indicates that Aripi- prazole is effective
in treatment of tics in tourettes with clean side effect profile. One
possible explanation could be a unique mechanism of action on dopamine
neu- rotransmitter. As Aripiprazole differs from other antipsychotics by
acting as a partial agonist at the D2 receptor2. It is believed that
excessive dopamine avail- ability in nigrostratial pathway in patients
with TS

   ,aripiprazole is likely to have antagonistic effects on dopamine
   neurotransmission. Unlike dopamine antago- nists, aripiprazole may
   restore more functional levels of dopamnegic activity because its
   antagonistic action is dependent on the availability of dopamine
   itself. If so, the partial D2 antagonism of aripiprazole could also
   be of benefit in other disorders, such as in Tardive Dyskine- sia and
   schizophrenia, where dopamine dysfunction is also thought to play a
   role.

   The role of aripiprazole in movement disorder has also been
   validated. The improvement in symptoms of Tourette syndrome3,
   restless legs syndrome4 and ob- sessive-compulsive disorder5.

The natural waxing and waning pattern of tics in Tourettes poses a major
limitation to any drug treat- ment in Tourettes. Therefore, further
well-designed controlled trials are clearly indicated to prove the
efficacy of aripiprazole in the treatment of Tourettes syndrome.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Mukkades NM, Abali O. Quetiapine treatment of children and
   adolescents with Tourette‘s disorder. Child Adoles Psychopharmacol
   2003; 13: 295-9.

2. McGvin JK, Goa L. Aripiprazol. CNS Drugs 2002; 16: 79-86.

3. Kastrup A, Schlotter W, Plewnia C, Barteis M. Treatment of tics in
   Tourette syndrome with aripiprazole. J Clin Psychiatry 2005; 25:94-6.

4. McLen AJ. The use of the dopamine-receptor partial agonist
   aripiprazole in the treatment of restless legs syn- drome. Sleep
   2004; 27:1022.

5. Connor KM, Payne VM, Gadde KM, Zhang W, Davidson JR. The use of
   aripiprazole in obsessive-compulsive pa- tients: preliminary
   observations in 8 patients. J Clin Psy- chiatry 2005; 66:49-51.
