   JPPS 2008; 5(2): 81-85 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

URDU TRANSLATION AND CULTURAL ADAPTATION OF SCHEDULE FOR AFFECTIVE
DISORDERS &

   SCHIZOPHRENIA FOR SCHOOL AGE CHILDREN (6-18 YRS) K-SADS-IV R

   Sajida Abdul Hussein, Panos Vostanis

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objective:** The main objective of the study was the urdu
   translation and cultural adaptation of Schedule for Affective
   Disorders & Schizophrenia for School Age Children (6-18 yrs)
   K-SADS-IV R.

   **Design:** Descriptive study.

   **Place and duration of study:** The study was carried out in
   Karachi, Pakistan from January 2006 to July 2007.

   **Subjects and Methods:** The translation panel consisted of nine
   members from variety of backgrounds. All member had experience
   working with children and were fluent in both languages (original and
   target). The ‘Multiple-forward translation’ process was applied.

   **Results:** A number of items were reworded and rephrased to meet
   the cultural, social and religious values of the Pakistani society.

   **Conclusion**: The translation and adaptation of the K-SADS-P-IV-R-U
   represents an advance in the process of identifying children with
   mental health problems in Pakistan. However there is a need to
   conduct further clinical validation studies to establish the
   reliability and validity of this tool in Pakistan.

   **Key words:** Child psychiatry, Diagnostic tool, Pakistan.

INTRODUCTION
============

In recent years interest in the problems of transla- tion and
cross-cultural adaptation of health and service outcome measures has
grown considerably. Often men- tal health measurements and psychological
tests have been developed for content, validity and reliability in one
country or language exclusively. Some of these in- struments are then
used in different languages and cul- tural settings, but often without
detailed attention to the cross-national and cross-cultural adaptation
that is nec- essary1. while the ideal solution is to develop indigenous
instruments and establish their psychometric properties

in the local population, this is not always possible be- cause of lack
of resources and expertise. Furthermore, most health constructs are
universal and can be applied to diverse populations after cultural
adaptation. There- fore it is often more feasible to use tried and
tested in- struments after appropriate adaptation2. Literature points
out that before any research instruments can be used with populations
beyond that of their original purpose, source documents should be
adapted for language and cultural appropriateness3.

   In Pakistan the lack of instruments limits research- ers to two
   alternatives: developing a new instrument or

   translating, adapting and validating an existing one. The

   **Sajida Abdul Hussein,** MSc child and adolescent mental Health (PhD
   Candidate) University of Leicester, Greenwood Institute of Child
   Health, Westcotes House, Westcotes Drive, Leicester, LE3 OQU, UK.

   E-mail: sa227@leicester.ac.uk

   **Panos Vostanis** Professor of Child and Adolescent Psychia- try,
   University of Leicester (Greenwood Institute of Child Health).

   **Correspondence: Sajida Abdul Hussein**

   first option has the disadvantages of high cost, prolonged research
   time and above all, limitations in terms of com- parisons with data
   from other parts of the world. Thus, the second alternative is more
   economic, efficient and practical.

   Health research in Pakistan often requires ques- tionnaires in
   English language developed in the West to be translated into the
   local language. Many of the fac- tors measured by these
   questionnaires are complex and

   apply to a different culture. Simple translations may lead to
   problems of validity and reliability in the Pakistani setting2.

   A recent systematic review of psychiatric ratings scales in Urdu
   (official language of Pakistan) indentified only nineteen
   questionnaires. Six of these question- naires were developed
   indigenously in Urdu while thirteen were translated from English. All
   the tools were for adult populations with the exception of the
   Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), designed to screen
   emotional and behavioural problems in children which has been
   translated and validated in Pakistan4.

Therefore there is a need in Pakistan to translate and adapt instruments
according to the culture. Cultural adaptation of research instruments
aims to achieve, as far as possible, research tools that are
‘culture-free’ or culturally equivalent. An instrument can be considered
culturally equivalent when all forms of biases, or social norms specific
to the culture of origin, have been re- moved5.

   The process of translation and adaptation can be broken down into
   three steps: (a) the translation pro- cess; (b) cross-cultural
   verification and adaptation; and

(c) verifying the psychometric properties of the instru- ment in the
target population1. The first two steps of the process will be
considered in this paper, which will de- scribe the development of a
translation protocol, and the cultural adaptation process. The third
step i.e. verify- ing the psychometric properties of the instrument will
not be addressed in this paper.

Kiddie Schedule of Affective Disorders & Schizophre- nia for School-Age Children
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Kiddie Schedule of Affective Disorders & Schizophrenia for
School-Age Children (6-18 years) (K- SADS-P-IV) was updated by Ambrosini
and Dixon6 to its current version (K-SADS-P-IV-R), which is compatible
with the DSM-IV. The research diagnostic criteria (RDC) were used to
reach a diagnosis of those syndromes covered both in the research
diagnostic criteria7 and the Diag- nostics and Statistical Manual 4th
version (DSM-IV)8. The K-SADS-IVR has six major sections: Major
Depression, Mania, Eating Disorders, Anxiety Disorders, Behavioral
Disorders and Psychoses. The major changes in this current edition are
that diagnoses have been updated to include Generalized Anxiety Disorder
which is new to the DSM-IV for children and adolescence. In addition,
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) also has been added and the
24-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) has been included in
this edition of the K-SADS. DSM-III symptoms were eliminated which were
no longer required by DSM-IIIR or DSM-IV9. The K-SADS has been
translated and its reliability and validity for child and adolescent
psychiatric diagnosis has been established in a number of countries
including Israel, Greece, Korea, Iran and Spain10-14.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

Urdu translation of (K-SADS-P-IV-R)
-----------------------------------

-  **Standard linguistic validation process**

..

   The first step involved a conceptual analysis of the original
   instrument in collaboration with the author of K-SADS-P-IV-R to
   define the notions investigated through each item. The authors were
   in regular commu- nication with Professor Ambrosini via emails who
   was able to offer guidance and advice throughout the lin- guistic
   validation process.

-  .. rubric:: Recruitment and briefing of a panel of experts to assist
      in translation process
      :name: recruitment-and-briefing-of-a-panel-of-experts-to-assist-in-translation-process

..

   Translation panel members were recruited from different professional
   backgrounds. As the panel had to assess the translated instruments
   for use with children in Pakistan it was vital to ensure the panel
   members had experience. The selected translation panel consisted of
   nine members from verity of backgrounds; including a psychiatrist and
   researcher with experience of child psy- chiatry, a psychologist,
   paediatrician, GP, social worker, school counsellor, English and Urdu
   language experts as well as an Islamic scholar.

-  .. rubric:: Translation process
      :name: translation-process

The aim of a linguistic validation process is to ob- tain a translation
of an original instrument in a target language that is both conceptually
equivalent to the origi- nal and easily understood by the people to whom
the translated questionnaire is administered. The transla- tion and
cultural adaptation of instruments is an interna- tionally recognized
method15. Translation consists of ob- taining a version that is
semantically equivalent to the original. Cross-cultural adaptation is
necessary when the instrument is intended for use on a target population
that is culturally different from that of the original ver- sion. In the
present study, the translators had sufficient experience and were fluent
in both languages (original and target), as well as had the cultural
understanding of mental distress and disorder essential for appropriate
cultural adaption of a tool16.

There are many different methods for linguistic vali- dation of a tool.
‘Back translation’ method appears to be the most commonly used method of
translation17; how- ever this procedure that can very costly and time
con- suming especially for more detailed instruments like the K-SADS. An
alternative to the use of back-translation includes ‘Multiple-forward
translation’18.

This is when two or more translators both trans- late the instrument
from the original language to the new language, and the versions of the
instrument in the new language are then compared. For this present study
the ‘Multiple-forward translation’ process was applied. Each section was
translated by two members; the re- searcher then compared the two and
compiled the most suitably translated and culturally accepted items.
Once

   all the three sections of K-SADS-P-IV-R i.e. affective dis- order,
   emotional disorders and behavioural disorders were completed and most
   suitable translation for each items were compiled, the researcher
   mailed the trans- lated instruments to the panel members to rate the
   ap- propriateness of the translation on a three point rating scale
   (disagree, needs amendment, agree). Each panel member was expected to
   rate the appropriateness of the translation on two basic guidelines,
   firstly, does this translation represent the idea that is conveyed by
   the original statement in English. Secondly, does that trans- lated
   item reflect the cultural equivalence rather than linguistic
   equivalence19.

   Those items that failed to achieve consensus in translation were
   amended and reworded/phrased based on unanimous decision of the penal
   members. Proof- reading of the translated Urdu version was carried
   out by two independent consultants who were not part of the original
   translation process. Once again the re- searcher compared the
   suggestions put forward by the independent proof reader and
   incorporated the results into the final draft. A review of the final
   draft of translated Urdu K-SADS was done by a child psychiatrist from
   Pa-

   kistan practicing in the UK, with excellent command over both English
   and Urdu. Suggestions put forward by the reviewer were incorporated
   into the final version of K- SADS Urdu.

RESULTS
=======

Cultural adaptation of K-SADS items
-----------------------------------

-  Translation included changing some of the items to make them
   consistent with the children’s com- munity and their cultural/
   religious background. The changes were derived from the environmen-
   tal surroundings of Pakistani children in Karachi. The various
   provinces of Pakistan have a hugely diverse culture, and adaptations
   made to an in- strument cannot be easily generalized to all re- gions
   within the country. A major challenge was to ensure literal and
   conceptual equivalence of idi- oms and cultural symbols, as each can
   contribute to the latent meanings within any communication. For
   example, ‘feeling blue’ or ‘butterflies in the stomach’ required
   alternative conceptually equiva- lent terms. A table indicating all
   the major adaptions made is presented below.

..

   K-SADS items and a list of the adaptation made in Urdu version.

+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|    **Disorders**  |    **Item**             |    **Changes made**   |
+===================+=========================+=======================+
|    **Genital SXS: |    How has your         |    Items related to   |
|    Loss Of        |    interest in          |    sexual activities  |
|    Libido/**      |    boys/girls           |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|    **Dating**     |    (sex) been this past |    were re-phrased in |
|                   |    week? I’m not        |    order to avoid     |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    asking about dating  |    offending.         |
|                   |    (performance)        |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    but about your       |                       |
|                   |    interest in          |                       |
|                   |    boys/girls           |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    (sex) — how much do  |                       |
|                   |    you think            |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    about it?            |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    Has there been any   |                       |
|                   |    change in your       |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    interest in          |                       |
|                   |    boys/girls (sex)     |                       |
|                   |    from when            |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    you were not         |                       |
|                   |    depressed?           |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    Are you less         |                       |
|  **Anhedonia/Loss |    sexually interested  |                       |
|    Of Interest**  |    than                 |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    you used to be [in   |                       |
|                   |    adolescents]?        |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    [For adolescents] Do |                       |
|  **Anhedonia/Loss |    you enjoy sex        |                       |
|    Of Pleasure**  |                         |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    a much as you used   |                       |
|                   |    to?                  |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|    **Poor         |    At that time, did    |                       |
|    Judgment**     |    you do anything      |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    sexual that you      |                       |
|                   |    usually don’t do?    |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    What happened?       |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|    **Unusually    |    What about in        |    Items referring to |
|    Energetic/**   |    school, in your      |    the child’s social |
|                   |    club,                |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|    **More         |    scouts or gang,      |    activities added   |
|    Active**       |    church, at home,     |    places such as     |
|                   |    with                 |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    friends, hobbies,    |    mosque,            |
|                   |    new projects or      |    Imambargah, and    |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    interests?           |    Jamatkhan apart    |
|                   |                         |    from churches, to  |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |                         |    cater to children  |
|                   |                         |    of all major       |
|                   |                         |    religious          |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |                         |    backgrounds.       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|    **Sleep        |    Do you sleep alone   |    Keeping in view    |
|    Problems**     |    or with your         |    the socioeconomic  |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |    parents?             |    and poor housing,  |
|                   |                         |    this item was      |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |                         |    scored in view of  |
|                   |                         |    the family’s       |
|                   |                         |    living             |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
|                   |                         |    condition.         |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+

+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|    **Non-co     |    Often persistently     |    Items were          |
| nfrontational** |    stealing over          |    converted to        |
|                 |                           |    Pakistani           |
+=================+===========================+========================+
|    **Stealing** |    $10 per week, or       |    rupees in order to  |
|                 |    something valu-        |    understand the      |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|                 |    able once during       |    worth of items      |
|                 |    present episode.       |    stolen.             |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|                 |    Has stolen very        |                        |
|                 |    valuable object (over  |                        |
|                 |    $50).                  |                        |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|                 |    Often vandalizes or at |    Items were          |
|   **Vandalism** |    least once             |    converted to        |
|                 |                           |    Pakistani           |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|                 |    damage was over        |    rupees in order to  |
|                 |    $100.00. Most of time  |    understand the      |
|                 |    will vandalize when    |    worth of items      |
|                 |                           |    destroyed           |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|                 |    the opportunity is     |                        |
|                 |    there, or at least     |                        |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|                 |    once damage over       |                        |
|                 |    $500.00.               |                        |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|    **Substance  |    Were you ever addicted |    For substance       |
|    Abuse/**     |    to alcohol             |    abuse, specific     |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|                 |    or drugs?              |    mention was made    |
|  **Dependence** |                           |    regarding the       |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+
|                 |                           |    most common drugs   |
|                 |                           |    in Pakistan.        |
+-----------------+---------------------------+------------------------+

DISCUSSION
==========

To our knowledge this is the first study that has translated and
culturally adapted a diagnostic interview for children and adolescents
in Pakistan. The main con- cern in this process was to ensure semantic,
conceptual and technical equivalence between the versions of the
instrument20. This study demonstrated the need for cul- tural adaption
of items to ensure appropriate outcomes. One of the major difficulty
also noted in other studies included the translation of local idioms
such as ‘blues’ and ‘feeling on guard’21. Also specific to Pakistani
cul- ture it was essential that the items be worded in a man- ner that
is applicable to all in the society. Pakistan is predominantly a Muslim
country and most of the people practice Islam. It was therefore
important to respect these religious values and for this reason an
Islamic scholar was added to the panel. The scholar reviewed all the
items mainly those dealing with issues of sexual rela- tionship and drug
and alcohol use and provided sug- gestions to ensure that religious
values have been con- sidered.

Another important factor was related to the house- hold environment of
Pakistani families particularly those living in poverty. Pakistan has
the highest growth rate of population world wide; the number of people
increased eight-fold within a century. The Asian Development Bank (ADB)
reports that more than 12 million people were added to the ranks of the
poor in Pakistan between 1993 and 199922. Poverty has a direct effect on
the hosing conditions of people; with people of low social economic
class living is poor housing conditions, on average in Pakistan more
than four persons occupy one room in poor households23. Some items in
the interview were related to the home environment and issues of housing
such as number of occupants and space, as such these items were phrased
and rated within the cultural con- text.

Although this study is first of its kind and is an important
contribution to child psychiatric research in Pakistan, it has some
limitations. While a panel of expert was employed to ensure that the
face and content valid- ity of the instrument during the translation
process was

maintained, there are other methods that can further strengthen the
process such as, pilot studies and con- sultation with community
agencies and in particular fo- cus groups with young people and their
carers to see which items were culturally inappropriate and needed
modification. Our study did not employ such techniques mainly due to
lack of resources. Another important limi- tation is the lack of any
Pre-Testing, using either the Probe Technique or the Bilingual method.

Also the current study aimed to translate and adapt the instrument and
did not establish reliability and valid- ity of the instrument. If the
K-SADS-P-IV-R-U has to be used for diagnostic and research purpose in
Pakistan it is essential that future studies are conducted to estab-
lish its reliability and validity among Pakistani children.

CONCLUSION
==========

The translation and adaptation of the K-SADS-P- IV-R-U represents a
major advance in the process of identifying children with mental health
problems in Pa- kistan. However there is a need to conduct further stud-
ies to establish the reliability and validity in Pakistan. The use of a
diagnostic tool that has been standardized and translated in different
countries will facilitate cross- cultural collaboration and comparison
of diverse popu- lations of children.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
==============

Dr Ehsanullah Syed (Child Psychiatrist), Dr Alvina Ali (Specialist
Registrar, Child mental heath service UK), Sana-e Zehra (Psychologist),
Dr S. Mohamad Aleem (Pediatrician), Dr Tabbssum Syed (GP), Saira Taqi
(Stu- dent Counselor), Rubian Hafeez (NGO, Social worker), Husnara
Ansari & Tahira Baig (Educationalist) and Fatimah Hassan (Islamic
Scholar) contributed to the translation.

The study was conducted by Learning Support Unit (LSU) of Sindh
Education Foundation (SEF) Karachi, Pakistan. We are grateful for the
guidance and support provided by Professor Paul J. Ambrosini, (M.D)
author of K-SADS IVR, and Jon Arcelus, Leicester General Hospi- tal, UK.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Knudsen HC, Vázquez-barquero Jl, Welcher B, Gaite L, Becker T,
   Chisholm D, et al. Translation and cross-cul- tural adaptation of
   outcome measures for schizophre- nia. Br J Psychiatry 2000;177:
   S8-S14.

2. Rahman A, Iqbal Z, Waheed W, Hussain N. Translation and cultural
   adaptation of health questionnaires. J Pak Med Assoc 2003; 53: 142-7.

3. Bullinger MJ, Alonso G, Apolone A, Leplege A, Sullivan S,
   Wood-Dauphine et al. Translating Health Status Ques- tionnaires and
   Evaluation their Quality: The IQOLA Project Approach. J Clin
   Epidemiol 1998; 51: 913-23.

4. Ahmer S, Faruqui R, Aijaz A. Psychiatric rating scales in Urdu: a
   systematic review. BMC Psychiatry 2007; 7: 59-65.

5. Smit J, Van den Berg CE, Bekker LG, Stein DJ, Seedat

..

   S. Translation and cross-cultural adaptation of a mental health
   battery in an African setting. Afr Health Sci 2006; 6: 215-22.

6.  Ambrosini P, Dixon J. Schedule for Affective Disorders and
    Schizophrenia for School Aged Children - Present Version, Version
    IVR. (K-SADS-IVR) Philadelphia: Medi- cal College of Pennsylvania,
    Eastern Pennsylvania Psy- chiatric Institute, 1996.

7.  Spitzer RL, Endicott J, Robins E. Research Diagnostic Criteria for a
    Selected Group of Functional Disorders. New York: New York State
    Psychiatric Institute, 1978.

8.  American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statis- tical
    manual of mental disorders. 4th ed. Washington DC: American
    Psychiatry Association, 1994.

9.  Ambrosini PJ. Historical development and present stud- ies of the
    schedule for affective disorders and schizo- phrenia for school-age
    children (K-SADS). J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2000; 39:
    49-58.

10. Shanee N, Apter A, Weizman A. Psychometric proper- ties of the
    K-SADS-PL in an Israeli adolescent clinical population. Isr J
    Psychiatry Relat Sci 1997; 34: 179-86.

11. Kolaitis G, Korpa T, Kolvin I, Tsiantis J. Schedule for af- fective
    disorders and schizophrenia for school-age chil- dren-present
    episode (K-SADS-P): a pilot inter-rater re- liability study for
    Greek children and adolescents. Eur Psychiatry 2003; 18:374-5.

12. Kim YS, Cheon KA, Kim BN, Chang SA, Yoo HJ, Kim JW, et al. The
    reliability and validity of Kiddie-Schedule for Affective Disorders
    and Schizophrenia-Present and Life- time Version- Korean version
    (K-SADS-PL-K). Yonsei Med J 2004; 45: 81-9.

13. Ghanizadeh A, Mohammadi MR, Yazdanshenas A. Psy- chometric
    properties of the Farsi translation of the kiddie

..

   schedule for affective disorders and schizo- phrenia-present and
   lifetime version. BMC Psychiatry 2006; 6:10.

14. Ulloa RE, Ortiz S, Higuera F, Nogales I, Fresan A, Apiquian R, et
       al. Interrater reliability of the Spanish version of the Schedule
       for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-Age
       Children—Present and Lifetime version (K-SADS-PL). Actas Esp
       Psiquiatr 2006; 34: 36-40.

15. Van Widenfelt BM, Treffers PD, De Beurs E, Siebelink BM, Koudijs E.
       Translation and cross-cultural adaptation of assessment
       instruments used in psychological re- search with children and
       families. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev 2005; 8: 135-47.

16. Jones PS, Lee JW, Phillips LR. An adaptation of Brislin’s
       translation model for cross-cultural research. Nurs Res 2001; 50:
       300-4.

17. Tamanin T, Ancona C, Botega N, Rodrigues-Netto N. Translation,
       Validation and Cross-Cultural Adaptation into Portuguese Language
       of the ‘King’s Health Question- naire.’ Heidelberg: International
       Continence Society Annual Conference.

18. Maxwell B. Translation and cultural adaptation of the survey
       instruments. In: En Martin MO, Kelly DL eds. Third International
       Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) Technical Report, 1996, 1:
       Design and Devel- opment. Chestnut HIll, MA: Boston College,
       1996.

19. Beck CT, Bernal H, Froman RD. Methods to document semantic
       equivalence of a translated scale. Res Nurs Health 2003;
       26(1):64-73.

20. Meadows K, Bentzen N, Touw-Otten F. Cross-cultural issues: an
    outline of the important principles in establish- ing cross-cultural
    validity in health outcome assessment. In: Hutchinson A, Bentzen N,
    König-Zahn C eds. Cross Cultural Health Outcome Assessment; A User’s
    Guide 1997; 34-40.

21. Kleinman A, Good B. Introduction: Culture and depres- sion. In:
    Kleinman A, Good B, eds. Culture and depres- sion: Studies in the
    anthropology and cross-cultural psy- chiatry of affect and disorder.
    Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985: 1–33.

22. Asian Development Bank; Poverty in Pakistan: Issues, Causes, and
    Institutional Responses. [Online] 2003 [Cited on March 25, 2008].
    Available from URL: http://
    `www.adb.org/Documents/news/PRM/2002/ <http://www.adb.org/Documents/news/PRM/2002/>`__
    prm_200203.asp.

23. Arif GM. Recent Rise in Poverty and Its Implications for Poor
    Households in Pakistan. The Pakistan Develop- ment Review, Pakistan
    Institute of Development Eco- nomics 2000; 39: 1153-70.
