JPPS 2007; 4(1): 33–36 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
---------------------------------------

NEUROLEPTIC MALIGNANT SYNDROME: A SIXTEEN YEARS RETROSPECTIVE REVIEW

   **Abul Faizi, Haider A. Naqvi**

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objective:** To study demographic characteristics, psychiatric
   diagnosis, type of neuroleptic drugs ad- ministered, course of
   illness, management and outcome.

   **Design:** Retrospective chart review study.

   **Place and duration of study:** This study was carried out for
   sixteen years (1988-2004) in the Psychiatry unit, Aga Khan University
   Hospital, Karachi.

   **Subjects and Methods:** Sample consisted of 25 cases of Neuroleptic
   Malignant Syndrome in which 13 were males and 12 were females. The
   record was taken from the health information management system which
   keeps a comprehensive chart of each patient. This renders the files
   retrievable through computer generated search. A specific data
   collection form was designed for extraction of relevant data. The
   data was analyzed using SPSS version 13.0.

   **Results:** Twenty five cases were identified, of which thirteen
   were males. Mean age was 45 years (range 20-74 years). Bipolar
   affective disorder was the most common diagnosis followed by
   schizo-affective disorder, schizophrenia, postpartum psychosis,
   dementia and Parkinsonism. 48% of the patients had previous history
   of neuroleptic use, while 28% received neuroleptics for the first
   time. Among neuroleptic users, 20% were on long-acting depot
   antipsychotics. 52% received per-oral dose (PO), while 32% re- ceived
   intramuscular (IM) dose. 56% patients were on other concomitant
   medications among which Lithium was the most common (16%). 96%
   patients had the cardinal symptoms of fever, rigidity and increased
   creatine phosphokinase (CPK). 96% had associated delirium, 80% showed
   autonomic instability with fluctuation in pulse and blood pressure.
   Electrolyte disturbance was seen in 84% and diaphoresis with
   leukocytosis was present in 68% patients. NMS was associated with
   high ambient temperature with mean temperature of 39.20 C (S.E. 0.3).
   Discontinuation of neurolpetic medications and supportive care was
   carried out in all cases. In our case series we observed mortality
   rate of 16%. Out of 25 patients, 21 recovered with early diagnosis
   and adequate management.

   **Conclusion:** Risk of NMS can be minimized by use of low potency or
   atypical antipsychotics, cautious use of concomitant medications and
   depot preparations and initiation of neurolpetics at lower dose with
   careful monitoring. With good supportive medical care mortality can
   be substantially mimimized.

   **Key words:** Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS), neuroleptics,
   creatine phosphokinase (CPK).

INTRODUCTION
============

Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS) is a rare idiosyncratic but life
threatening complication of treat- ment with neuroleptic medications. It
is characterized by high grade fever, whole body rigidity, altered
conscious- ness and signs of autonomic instability1. The syndrome
follows the administration of drugs with anti-dopaminer- gic activity or
more rarely sudden withdrawal of dopam- inergic medications2.

   **Abul Faizi,** Department of Psychiatry, The Aga Khan University,

   P.O. Box 3500, Stadium Road, Karachi 74800, Pakistan. e-mail:
   `abul.faizi@aku.edu. <mailto:abul.faizi@aku.edu>`__ Tel: 493 0051 ext
   4692. Fax: 493 4294

   **Haider A. Naqvi,** Department of Psychiatry, The Aga Khan Uni-
   versity, P.O. Box 3500, Stadium Road, Karachi 74800, Pakistan.

   **Correspondence: Dr. Abul Faizi**

   NMS was first described and so named by Delay and Deniker in 1968.3
   Estimates of incidence ranges from 0.5% - 1% of all patients exposed
   to neuroleptics.4 There is no known sex or age predilection but most
   re- views have shown a male-to-female ratio of 2: 1, with young males
   in age group 16 - 44 years to be over rep- resented5.

Among various hypothesis is dopamine blockade in specific areas of
central nervous system (CNS), par- ticularly meso-limbic and
meso-cortical dopaminergic pathways.5, 6 The additional blockade of
dopaminergic pathways in hypothalamus leads to hyperpyrexia while
blockade in nigro-striatal pathway leads to rigidity.7 The antagonism in
the cortico-limbic tracts leads to altered consciousness. The syndrome
of NMS has also been described following withdrawal of dopaminergic
drugs

   e.g. levodopa2,8,9.

The diagnosis of NMS has been operationalized to improve diagnosis and
for research. It requires pres- ence of three cardinal or alternatively
two cardinal with four associated features4. The cardinal features
include hyperpyrexia, whole body rigidity and raised serum cre- atine
phosphokinase (CPK). Associated features include altered level of
consciousness, autonomic instability and leukocytosis4.

   The evidence from literature points towards in- creased vulnerability
   of patients with affective disorder for developing NMS as they may be
   more likely to be agitated, which in turn results in dehydration and
   exhaus- tion10-12. The clinical state of these patients may also in-
   voke aggressive management from physicians. Com- bined lithium
   carbonate and neuroleptic drug treatment has a controversial history
   of association with NMS. Some retrospective case studies have
   identified a significant number of patients developing NMS while
   receiving a combination of neuroleptic medications and lithium13-15.

On the basis of numerous published case reports it is clear that NMS can
be caused by any type of neuro- leptic medication in both psychiatric
and non psychiat- ric patients5. High potency antipsychotics such as
halo- peridol and fluphenazine are most commonly implicated but cases of
NMS occurring with low potency neurolep- tics such as chlorpromazine are
not uncommon4. NMS usually lasts five to ten days after the
discontinuation of treatment with a neuroleptic. Duration may extend
longer after depot antipsychotic medications.

It is generally accepted that higher doses of neuroleptics is a risk
factor for NMS16,17. In addition to potency and dose the rapid dose
escalation is also a potential risk factor for NMS14. There are case
reports of patients with neurological and organic mental disor- ders
developing NMS even on low doses of antipsychotics15, 18.

The role of temperature though somewhat contro- versial also deserves
attention. There are narrative lit- erature reviews which states that
factors such as distur- bance in thermoregulatory processes and
dehydration could be potential triggers for NMS19. There is an ongo- ing
controversy on whether high ambient temperature plays a causal role in
the development of NMS.

There are very few studies on NMS from Pakistan, a developing country
with poorly established mental health services. There are few reports on
NMS from Pa- kistan. This is despite the fact that neuroleptic drug us-
age in Pakistan is quite high. Sale figures of only one year (2003-2004)
amounted to Rs. 377.02 million (US$6.39 million)20. With such high usage
it is quite likely there would be many more cases of NMS than is cur-
rently known

First ever report of NMS from Pakistan was a case series by Ahmed HS in
198921. They reported seven cases of NMS admitted in the Department of
Nueropsychiatry, Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Center, Karachi. All were
acutely disturbed psychotic patients seen during hot and

humid months of May to October during 1986. Since then NMS has been a
focus of few reports and reviews how- ever specific questions related to
characteristics of pa- tients their predisposing factors and outcome
have re- mained unanswered22. There is therefore a need for more
information on NMS from Pakistan.

Aims and Objectives
-------------------

The aims of this descriptive study were to assess the association of NMS
with psychiatric diagnosis, type of neuroleptic use and concomitant
therapy in patients admitted to the Aga Khan University Hospital between
1988 and 2004. Socio-demographic characteristics, pos- sible seasonal
variations and outcome of management on mortality were also studied.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

The Aga Khan University hospital is a 500-bed ter- tiary care teaching
hospital. The Health Information Man- agement System (HIMS) keeps a
comprehensive chart that documents the details of in-and-out patient’s
clini- cal care. The chart contains information on all prescribed
medications, investigations and progress notes of phy- sicians and
nurses. The diagnosis of NMS is coded sepa- rately based on the clinical
version of International Clas- sification of Disorders (ICD-9). This
renders the files re- trievable through computer generated search. A
specific data collection form was designed for extraction of rel- evant
data. The data was analyzed using SPSS version 13.0.

RESULTS
=======

Socio-demographic characteristics
---------------------------------

   During the study period twenty five cases of NMS were identified.
   Thirteen were males and twelve were fe- males. There was no
   significant gender difference in our sample. The mean age was 45
   years (range 20-74 years). 52 % (n=13) of the sample was above 50
   years of age. 48% were in the age range of 20-50 years while 52% were
   50 years or older.

Diagnosis
---------

   The most common diagnosis was bipolar affective disorder in 24% (n =
   6) of patients. Other diagnosis in- cluded schizoaffective disorder
   (n =3), schizophrenia (n =3), postpartum psychosis (n=1), psychotic
   depres- sion (n=2), dementia (n=2) and Parkinsonism N= 2). There were
   two patients who had co-morbid Parkin- sonism along with bipolar
   disorder and schizophrenia. The primary psychiatric diagnosis was not
   known in the six patients.

Neuroleptic exposure
--------------------

   48% (n= 12) patients had a history of earlier neu- roleptic exposure
   but none had a previous documented episode of NMS. 28% (n=7) patients
   had their first expo- sure to neuroleptics while 12% (n =3) patients
   had a documented escalation of dose from the previous pre- scribed
   drug regimen.

20% (n=5) had received depot antipsychotic (AP) injections alone. These
were either zuclopenthixol decanoate, fluphenazine decanoate or
flupenthixol decanoate on monthly, fortnightly or weekly basis. 16% (n =
4) of the patients were receiving per-oral butyrophenones (haloperidol),
the range of dose (in chlo- rpromazine equivalents) ranged from
100-800mgs daily.

44% patients were receiving two or more neuroleptics concomitantly. 20%
(n = 5) were receiving haloperidol with depot antipsychotic while 24%
(n=6) re- ceived haloperidol in combination with other neuroleptics

i.e. trifluoperazine, chlorpromazine, flupenthixol or meta- clopromide
(an anti-emetic).

Depot antipsychotics and haloperidol were impli- cated in 88% cases.

52% (n = 13) received per oral (PO) dose whereas 32% (n = 8) received
intramuscular injections (IM). The remaining four patients received both
PO and IM doses.

In our sample 66% (n=14) patients were on con- comitant medications
beside an antipsychotic. Among the concomitant medicines lithium was
being used in 16% (n =4) cases while 40% (n =10) patients were taking a
variety of psychotropic medications including antidepres- sants,
benzodiazepines or anticholinergic drugs.

All patients were profoundly ill and required initial intensive care
management. 96% (n=24) had all the car- dinal features of NMS i.e.
fever, rigidity and increased serum CPK. In only 1 patient there was
absence of fever but the associated diagnostic features were present.

23 patients had the associated feature of delirium. 80% (n=19) patients
had documented evidence of fluc- tuation in BP and pulse. Electrolyte
disturbances were also seen in 84% (n=20) of the sample. Diaphoresis and
leukocytosis were noted in 68% n=17) of patients.

Most of our sample (68%; n=17) had these epi- sodes in summer whereas
only 32% (n=8) developed NMS during the winter months (December-
February).

Twelve of the patients (48%) were treated with bromocriptine. One
patient received Dantrolene along with bromocriptine.

Mean length of stay (LOS) or course of illness was 11 + 8 days (Range
2–30 days). There was no statisti- cally significant difference in the
duration of illness in patients who were treated with bromocriptine
compared to those who did not receive bromocriptine.

   In our case series the mortality rate in patients with NMS was 16%
   (n=4). None of these received bromocriptine. Three of them were above
   50 years and 2 had concurrent neurological impairment.

DISCUSSION
==========

This report has a number of limitations. It is a ter- tiary-care
hospital based study and the findings cannot

be generalized to other health care settings in Pakistan. The small
sample size and lack of control group are other limitations.

Despite the limitations, the study highlights some important aspects of
this rare but life-threatening condi- tion. This is highly pertinent in
the context of Pakistan, a developing country with poorly developed
health sys- tems. Mental health fares even worse. While prevalence rates
for mental disorders show very high figures, there is an extreme dearth
of mental health professionals. Im- proper and unsupervised use of
neuroleptics, over-the- counter (OTC) availability of neuroleptics, use
of more than one neuroleptic and lack of timely and proper medi- cal
management puts psychiatric patients at high risk of morbidity and
mortality from NMS in Pakistan.

Eighty eight percent (n=23) patients in our study were on both depot as
well as a high potency neurolep- tic (haloperidol) and almost 50% were
taking two or more anti-psychotics at the same time. Two-thirds of
patients were on other concomitant medications, amongst them serotonin
modulators and lithium.

Although two-thirds of our cases presented during the summer months,
reports of association of NMS with season give conflicting results.
Caroff and Mann reported the syndrome to occur independently of climate
and ambient temperature23. While patents’ inability to main- tain body
temperature in extreme conditions is a recog- nized side-effect of
neuroleptic treatment, this does not fully explain the occurrence of
NMS, which has been reported in cold climates and in different seasons.
While high temperatures and humidity may augment the risk of NMS, they
need not be present for NMS to occur.

NMS is not specific to any neuropsychiatric diag- nosis24. Various
authors have proposed that patients with disorder of mood, catatonia,
schizophrenia, or organic syndromes may be at risk. In our case series
one third of the cases had affective illness.

Risk of NMS can be minimized by use of low po- tency or atypical
antipsychotic, cautious use of concomi- tant medications and depot
preparations, initiation of neuroleptic at lowest possible dose with
careful monitor- ing, careful dose increment and cautious use in elderly
and neurologically impaired.

Our study indicates that with early diagnosis and prompt treatment i.e.
good supportive care, the illness need not be fatal and in fact can have
a good prognosis. This study also highlights the need for more
information on this disorder looking at associated risk factors, com-
plications and mortality rates from other centers in Paki- stan.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Levinson JL. Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome. Am J Psychiatry 1985;
    142:1137-45.

2.  Figa LT, Gulandi C, DiMeo L. Hyperthermia after dis- continuance of
    levodopa and bromocriptine therapy: Impaired dopamine receptors a
    possible cause. Neu- rology 1985;35:258-61.

3.  Delay J, Deniker P. Drug-induced extrapyramidal syn- dromes. In:
    Vinken PJ, Bruyn GW, ed. Handbook of Clinical neurology. Vol 6:
    Disease of basal gan- glia. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing;
    1968: 248-66.

4.  Caroff N, Mann C. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Med Clin of North
    Am 1993; 77: 185-202.

5.  Addonizio G, Susman UL, Roth SD. Neuroleptic ma- lignant Syndrome -
    Review and analysis of 115 cases. Biol Psychiatry 1987; 22:1004-20.

6.  Nisijima K, Ishiguro T. Neuroleptic malignant Syn- drome - A study
    of CS monoamine metabolism. Biol Psychiatry 1990; 27:280-88.

7.  Stourdemire A, Luther JS. Neuroleptic malignant Syn- drome and
    Neuroleptic induced catatonia - Differen- tial diagnosis and
    treatment. Int J Psychiatry 1984; 14:57-63.

8.  Sechi GP, Tanda F, Mutani R. Fatal Hyperpyrexia after withdrawal of
    levodopa. Neurology 1984; 34: 249-51.

9.  Gibb WRG, Griffith DNW. Levodopa withdrawal syn- drome identical to
    Neuroleptic malignant Syndrome. Postgrad Med J 1986; 62:59-60.

10. Twemlow SW, Bair GO. Neuroleptic malignant Syn- drome. J Can Med Soc
    1989; 46:914-18.

11. Bovers MB Jr, Swigar ME. Psychotic patients who be- come worse on
    neuroleptics J. Clin Psychopharmacol 1988; 8:417-21.

12. Itoh H, Ohtsuka N, Ogita K. Malignant Neuroleptic syndrome; present
    status in Japan and clinical prob- lems. Folia Psychiatr Neurol Jap
    1977;31:565-76.

13. Pope HG, Keck PE, McElroy SL. Frequency and pre- sentation of
    neuroleptic malignant syndrome in a large psychiatric hospital. Am J
    Psychiatry 1986; 143: 1227-32.

14. Pope HG, Keck PE, McElroy SL. Frequency and pre- sentation of
    neuroleptic malignant syndrome a pro- spective study. Am J
    Psychiatry, 1987; 144:1344-46.

15. Rosebush P, Stewart T. A prospective analysis of 24 episodes of
    neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Am J Psychiatry 1989; 146:717-25.

16. Kirkpatrick B, Edelsohn GA. Risk factors the neuro- leptic malignant
    syndrome Psychiatr Med 1985;2: 371-81.

17. Gelenberg AJ, Billinghausen B, Wojcik JD. A prospec- tive survey of
    neuroleptic malignant syndrome in a short term Psychiatric hospital.
    Am J Psychiatry 1988; 145:517-18.

18. Caroff SN. The neuroleptic malignant syndrome. J Clin Psychiatry
    1980; 41:79-83.

19. Mann SC, Boger WP. Psychotropic drugs, summer heat, humidity and
    hyperpyrexia - A danger restated. Am J Psychiatry, 1978;
    135:1097-1100.

20. IMS. Pakistan Pharmaceutical Index. Cham, Switzer- land: IMS A.G.
    2004.

21. Ahmed SH, Haq I. Seven Cases of Neuroleptic Malig- nant Syndrome. J
    Pak Med Assoc 1989; 8: 216.

22. Khan HM, Syed NA, Sheerani M, Khealani B, Kamal A, Wasay M.
    Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome: need for early diagnosis and
    therapy. J Ayub Med Coll Abottabad 2006;18:17-21.

23. Caroff S, Mann SC. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Psychopharmacol
    Bull 1988; 24: 25-9.

24. Lazarus A, Mann S, Caroff SN. The neuroleptic malig- nant syndrome
    and related conditions. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press
    Inc: 1989.
