   JPPS 2006; 3(1): 52–53

CORRESPONDENCE
==============

   Contents

-  Indexing the JPPS • JPPS and research in Pakistan

-  Stressful life events in the onset of dissociative disorders

..

   CORRESPONDENCE

INDEXING THE JPPS?
==================

   Dear Sir,

   The launch of the website of the Journal of the Pakistan Psychiatric
   Association marks an important step forward. The editor is to be
   congratulated warmly for his tireless efforts to disseminate
   psychiatric research in Pakistan. I am particularly pleased that the
   full contents of the journal are freely accessible for all readers,
   regard- less of their geographical location. This will make the
   website a valuable resource for mental health practitio- ners and
   researchers in the region, and far beyond. Men- tal health
   professionals in low-income countries are too often deprived from
   evidence that could help them to improve their daily work. Freely
   available peer reviewed information on the internet could be of great
   value for them, while researchers and health policymakers may equally
   benefit from interactive feedback from readers1.

Most (90%) of all published mental health research is being done in high
income countries, with only 13% of the world’s population living in
these countries. Mental health research from countries, representing 87%
of the world’s population countries, counts for less than 10% of
articles in internationally accessible health literature2. There is
growing consensus that active efforts are re- quired to improve the
mental health research situation in low- and middle-income countries3.
One of the recom- mended actions is to increase the number of mental
health journals from low-income countries in international indexing
systems4.

Would it be possible to get the Journal of the Paki- stan Psychiatric
Society indexed, so that the articles can be easily traced from search
engines as PubMed and Psych-Info? I believe the current standard of the
journal would certainly justify such a step. This would greatly
encourage colleagues from Pakistan and abroad con- tribute to your
journal.

REFERENCES
----------

1. Edejer TT. Disseminating health information in devel- oping
   countries: the role of the internet. Br Med J 2006;321:797-800.

2. Saxena S, Paraje G, Sharan P, Karam G, Sadana R. The 10/90 divide in
   mental health research: trends over a 10-year period. Br J Psychiatry
   2006;188:81-2.

3. World Health Organization. Galvanizing mental health research in low-
   and middle-income countries: Role of scientific journals. Bull World
   Health Organ 2004;82:226-8.

4. Saxena S, Sharan P, Saraceno B. Research for change: the role of
   scientific journals publishing men- tal health research. World
   Psychiat 2004;3:66-72.

..

   **Peter Ventevogel**

   HealthNet TPO, Bujumbura, Burundi. E-mail:
   peterventevogel@yahoo.co.uk

JPPS AND RESEARCH IN PAKISTAN
=============================

Dear Sir,

It is indeed a red letter day for the entire commu- nity of psychiatrist
in Pakistan that Journal of Pakistan Psychiatric Society (JPPS) has been
registered with ‘Medlip’ and other regional databases. Journal’s own
website is also quite a remarkable achievement consid- ering the
shambles in which most of our societies are. I feel the editor and his
team can take the credit for good things done so far. Nevertheless they
should not let the praise get to their heads. It does not matter what we
think about ourselves rather what others think about us should concern
us.

Journal of Pakistan Psychiatric Society has a long way to go as far as
international community of sciences is concerned. Indexing in the Index
Medicus or MedLine should naturally be next step. This will require
raising the bar as far as methodological robustness and quality of
scientific publications are concerned.

It is eye opening to note that during a period of 10 years (1993-2004)
only 108 publication have appeared from Pakistan in Indexed journals
(77.8% Medline, 22.2% psychInfo). There were only 43 individuals,
actively in- volved in the research; among these 34 were psychia-
trists. There was only one Randomized Control Trial (RCT) from the whole
country. The mean country based im-

pact factor (IF) of these studies is 2.75. This speaks about the dismal
state of mental health research in Pakistan. It is also evident that
research in high-income countries is not easily transferable or
appropriate for use in low and middle-income countries

If research capacity is to be strengthened than we need to take serious
initiatives at individual, institutional and national levels. Young and
committed bread of re- searchers needs to be developed. Training in
Epidemi- ology, basic Bio-statistics, Research protocol and scien- tific
writing needs to be incorporated in the post-gradu- ate training
programs. The Gaussian ghost needs to be exorcised from the clinicians.
At institutional level re- searchers should be freed from mundane
administrative responsibilities with adequate remunerations and pro-
tected research time. Linkages should be developed with international
research organizations like International Clinical epidemiological
network (INCLEN), Cochrane collaboration etc. These efforts should be
grounded in personal and collective integrity. Stakes are very high with
clinicians facing the dilemma of ‘publish or perish’.

Less than 10% of global spending on health re- search is devoted to
diseases or conditions that account for 90 % of the global disease
burden; so published by the Global forum reports since 19981\ **.** In
order to correct the 10/90 gap efforts are required to focus on diseases
representing the heaviest burden on the world’s health

ing. The articles published in the issue are of high stan- dard and
reflect great efforts on the part of researches and the authors. It is
heartening to know that the quality of articles has improved
tremendously as compared to the previous issues and it is hoped that
under your able editorship and concerted efforts of the other members of
the editorial board, this esteemed journal will soon become the leading
source of publication for the mental health professionals of this
region.

I read with great interest the review article “Stress- ful life events
in the onset of dissociative disorders” by Saddiqua Aamir as it
encompasses all the relevant con- tributory factors in the causation of
this enigmatic disor- der. The author has tried to search and research
various important studies carried out in this field and has put the
major findings in a systematic, concise and understand- able way. I
agree with her that this disorder is now rela- tively uncommon in
industrialized nations: that is why few studies could be found. I think
this disorder is still common in developing countries like ours: more so
in the rural community. This highlights the need to study this condition
further especially in our subjects keeping in view our peculiar
psychosocial stressors and life events.

Ahmad Farjam
------------

Lt. Col.

CMH Lahore Cantt.

and facilitating collaboration between partners in both the public and
private sectors besides a unified National

research agenda.

REFERENCE
---------

   1 Nuyens Y. No development without research, Global forum for health
   research 2005.

Haider Naqvi
------------

   FCPS, D. Clin. Epi Department of Psychiatry Aga Khan University
   Hospital, Karachi 74800, Pakistan

   E-mail: `haider <mailto:haider.naqvi@aku.edu>`__\ .naqvi@aku.edu

STRESSFUL LIFE EVENTS IN THE ONSET OF DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS
============================================================

   Dear Sir,

   I have gone through the current issue of the Jour- nal of Pakistan
   Psychiatric Society (Vol 2 Number 2, July 2005) and found it very
   informative and thought provok-

Reply
-----

These letters raise important issues in relation to the journal. It is
indeed gratifying to note that the journal is being ‘noticed’; something
which every editor wants. That it is being appreciated and the contents
are relevant to the readers’ interest, is very much heartening for all
of us in the editorial board. The editorial team deserves the praise.

However, we at the editorial board realize that the journal has still a
long way to go. We have initiated the process for indexation of the
journal in other major inter- national databases. However, it is a slow
process. (It appears we are progressing at the rate of one database per
month !) You will soon have more good news.

The authors also point to a now well known 10/90 divide in medical
literature. Journal of Pakistan Psychiat- ric Society is committed to
bridge this gap. This is evi- dent from the articles from India and
other developing countries. However, this needs more concerted effort.
Being encouraged by the experience of Journal of Paki- stan Psychiatric
Society (and also having been at the receiving end of the divide
personally many times), I throw the challenge to the academicia in
developing countries, why not a journal of Mental Health in Developing
Coun- tries (JMHDC)!
