The Relationship Between Self-Efficacy and Depression in Physically Handicapped Children
========================================================================================

   Uzma Tabassum, Dr. Ghazala Rehman

Running Head: Self-Efficacy And Depression
==========================================

   **ABSTRACT**

**Objectives:** To determine the relationship between self-efficacy and
depression in physically handicapped children.

   **Design:** Descriptive Study.

**Place and duration of study:** This study was conducted at different
institutes of physically handicapped children of twin cities of
Rawalpindi and Islamabad.

**Subjects and Methods:** The sample consisted of 42 physically
handicapped children (both boys and girls in equal number).The age range
of the sample was between 13 to 17 years.

The data was collected with the help of Urdu translation of Generalized
Self Efficacy Scale: GSES and Beck Depression Inventory.

**Results:** The results showed inverse correlation between the scores
of self-efficacy and depression. The correlation of scores of GSES with
items of BDI pertaining to Emotional, Cognitive, Motivational and
Somatic symptoms of depression showed significant inverse correlation
with Emotional and Cognitive symptoms of depression (*r* = -.35\* &
-.34*).

**Conclusion:** From these findings it can be concluded that high
generalized self-efficacy in children may serve as a protective factor
against depression, whereas, low self-efficacy can lead them to
depression.

   **Key words:** Self-efficacy, Depression.

INTRODUCTION
============

“Self-efficacy is the belief in one's capabilities to organize and
execute the courses of action required to produce given attainments”
(Bandura, 1997). These courses of action may include behavior, thoughts
and emotions (Miller, 2002). Individuals form their self-efficacy
beliefs interpret information primarily from mastery experience,
vicarious experience, learning or observation, social and verbal
persuasions, and physical and affective states. Self-efficacy beliefs
produce diverse effects on human functioning through four major
psychological processes. These psychological processes include: (1)
cognitive processes, (2) motivational processes, (3) selection
processes, and (4) affective processes” (Bandura, 1997).Researchers have
also supported that mood affects people's judgments of their personal
efficacy. Positive mood enhances perceived self-efficacy; despondent
mood diminishes it (Bandura, 1999). Physiological indicators are
considered as important sources of self-efficacy information. Similarly,
the effects of self-efficacy on cognitive processes take a variety of
forms as much of human behavior is purposive and regulated by
forethought and goal setting, which is influenced by self-appraisal of
capabilities (Bandura, 1999)\ *.*

By influencing affective processes, self-efficacy plays highly important
role in physical and mental health of an individual. High self-efficacy
helps create feelings of serenity in approaching difficult tasks and
activities. Conversely, people with low self-efficacy may believe that
things are tougher than they really are, a belief that fosters anxiety,
stress, depression, and a narrow vision of how best to solve a problem
(Pajares, 2002).

Similarly, individual’s belief in his coping capabilities affect how
much stress and depression a person experiences in threatening or
difficult situations. Depression is believed to be cognitively generated
by dejecting ruminative thoughts. A low sense of efficacy in order to
exercise control over these ruminative thoughts tends to contribute to
the development of depression (Bandura, 1999).

Substantial amount of research (Bandura, Pastorelli, Barbaranelli, &
Caprara, 1999; Dieserud, Roysamb, Ekeberg, & Kraft, 2001; Ehrenberg,
Cox, & Koopman, 1991; Maciejewski, Prigerson, & Mazure, 2000; Makaremi,
2000; McFarlane, Bellissimo, & Muris, Schmidt, Lambrichs, & Meesters,
2001) have shown a significant inverse correlation between self-efficacy
and depression. Relationship between self-efficacy and depression is
explored among different samples, for instance on patients of different
disorders (Kurlowicz, 1998; Robinson, Johnston, & Allen, 2000) people
suffering from some type of injury or pain, (Arnstein, Caudill, Mandle,
Norris, & Beasley, 1999; Shnek, Foley, LaRocca, Gordon, DeLuca,
Schwartzman, Halper,

Lennox, & Irvine, 1997) or elderly people (Davis, 1988, 1990; Holahan &
Holahan, 1987). These studies identified factors affecting self-efficacy
and vulnerability to depression.

Studies on physically handicapped children maintain that children having
some type of physical disability show low self-efficacy while facing the
challenges of life ahead. Besides, these children also show high
feelings of hopelessness and depression. Independent studies on
self-efficacy (Schieman, & Campbell, 2001) and depression in physically
disabled children are enormous (Prince, Harwood, Blizard, Thomas, &
Mann, 1997; Tate, Forchheimer, Maynard, & Dijkers, 1994; Van & Schieman,
2001). However, none of these studies have explored the relationship of
self efficacy with depression in physically handicapped children. With
this back ground, present study is planned, which focuses on exploring
the relationship between the two variables for the sample of handicapped
children.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

**Sample:** Sample includes 42 physically handicapped children of age
range between 13-17 years (*M* = 14.17, *SD*

= 2.70). These included both boys and girls (in equal number). They were
taken from different institutes for physically handicapped children of
Rawalpindi and Islamabad city. All the children who presented themselves
on the dates of testing were included in the study. The mentally
retarded children were excluded.

   **Instruments:** Following instruments were used in this study.

I. *Generalized Self Efficacy Scale*

Urdu Translation of “Generalized Self-Efficacy Scale” (Tabbassum,
Rehman, Schwarzer, Jerusalem, 2003) originally developed by Schwarzer &
Jerusalem (2000) was used in this research (Schwarzer, 2001). GSES is a
10-item, 4-point Likert type scale. GSES assesses a broad and stable
sense of personal competence or a general sense of perceived
self-efficacy to cope or deal efficiently with a variety of stressful
situations and novel or difficult demands in life. It assesses the
strength of an individual's belief in his or her own ability, to predict
coping with daily hassles and to deal with any associated obstacles or
setbacks, as well as adaptation after experiencing all kinds of
stressful life events (Schwarzer, 2001; Schwarzer & Jerusalem, 1993 &
2000).

II. *Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)*

BDI (Beck, Ward, Mendel son, Mock & Erbaugh, 1961) is a self
administered 21 items self-report inventory, presented in multiple
choice formats. It purports to measure and assess supposed
manifestations, presence, degree, intensity, severity, characteristic
attitudes and symptoms of depression in clinical and normal patients
(Beck, 1971, 2002).

For the present research Urdu adaptation (Khan, 1996) of Beck Depression
Inventory (BDI) was used. Item number 21 of BDI was dropped because of
its sexual connotation, which inhibits a true response in our culture
setting.

**Procedure:** The participants were approached in their institutes
individually after having formal permission from principals of the
institutes. Respective school teachers helped in selecting the sample.
The tests compiled in the form of test booklet along with demographic
information sheet were individually administered to the physically
handicapped children by the researcher, who read out each item herself.

RESULTS
=======

Correlation of scores of physically handicapped children on GSES with
BDI is shown in the table 1. The Pearson Product Moment correlation of
GSES and BDI scores was found to be -.25 (p .12). Although the scores of
GSES and BDI are inversely correlated, however, the value of correlation
is not statistically significant. Further analysis was performed by
calculating correlation of scores of GSES with the scores of the items
of BDI pertaining Emotional, Cognitive, Motivational and Somatic
symptoms of depression. The table 1 below shows the correlation of
scores of GSES with the scores of items of subcategories of BDI:

   **Table 1:** *Pears\ on Product Moment Correlation of GSES scores
   with the scores of 4 categories of item\ s of BDI*

   Emotional Symptoms

   Cognitive Symptoms

   Motivational Symptoms

   Somatic Symptoms

   GSES -.348\* -.343\* -.015 .080

   *\* p<.05*

The findings in the table show that scores of GSES are significantly
inversely correlated with the scores of emotional and cognitive symptoms
of BDI.

DISCUSSION
==========

It was hypothesized that "self-efficacy will be inversely correlated
with depression in physically handicapped children”. The results show
that scores of GSES are inversely correlated with scores of BDI. These
findings are in line with some earlier studies (Bandura et al., 1999;
Davis, 1988, 1990; Dieserud et al., 2001; Ehrenberg et al., 1991;
Maciejewski et al., 2000; Makaremi, 2000; McFarlane et al., 1995; Muris
et al., 2001; Robinson et al., 2000) indicating an inverse correlation
between self-efficacy and depression. Our findings is also supported by
Bandura (1994) and Pajares (2002), who maintain that Physical and
affective states such as anxiety, stress, arousal, and mood states
provide information about efficacy beliefs. Mood has significant effect
upon people's judgments of their personal efficacy. Positive mood
enhances perceived self-efficacy and despondent mood diminishes it
(Bandura, 1994).

Results further indicate that the scores of GSES are significantly
inversely correlated with the scores of BDI on items measuring Emotional
and Cognitive symptoms of depression. These findings suggest that impact
of low self efficacy is more upon emotional and cognitive symptoms of
depression compared to the motivational and somatic symptoms of
depression. Our findings get support from the findings of Pajares (2002)
who maintains that self-efficacy beliefs influence an individual's
thought patterns and emotional reactions. Bandura (1994) also maintains
that much human depression is cognitively generated by dejecting
ruminative thoughts and a low sense of efficacy to exercise control over
these ruminative thoughts also contributes to the development of
depression.

CONCLUSION
==========

Findings of this study indicate that there exists an inverse correlation
between generalized self-efficacy and depression in physically
handicapped children. It can thus be concluded from these findings that
high generalized self-efficacy of these children may serve as a
protective factor against depression, whereas, low self-efficacy can
lead them to depression. The results of this study can be used for
developing intervention strategies, training and intervention programs
for handicapped children, for their parents and teachers. Efforts should
be made to make these children learn to face the challenges of life with
courage. The present research can serve as a preliminary study for
future prospective researches in the area. Future researches should
focus upon exploring the relationship of social and familial support and
attitudes with self efficacy and depression on a larger sample of
handicapped children.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Acosta DW, Martinez JH, Martinez JP, Martinez L, Roper P, Chandler
    S, Cyr T. (2002). Self efficacy [Online] available:
    `http://www.positivepractices.com/Efficacy/SelfEfficacy.html. <http://www.positivepractices.com/Efficacy/SelfEfficacy.html>`__
    Last accessed 3rd Oct 2002.

2.  Arnstein P, Caudill M, Mandle CL, Norris A, & Beasley R. (1999,
    April). Self efficacy as a mediator of the relationship between pain
    intensity, disability and depression in chronic pain patients. Pain,
    80 (3), 483- 491.Retrieved December 9, 2002 from
    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&listuids=10342410&dopt=Abstract

3.  Bandura A. (1994). Self-efficacy. [Online] available:
    `http://www.emory.edu/EDUCATION/mfp/BanEncy.html. <http://www.emory.edu/EDUCATION/mfp/BanEncy.html>`__
    Last accessed 3rd Oct 2002.

4.  Bandura A, Pastorelli C, Barbaranelli C, & Caprara GV. Self-efficacy
    pathways to childhood depression. Journal of Personal Social
    Psychology (1999); 76 (2), 258-69.

5.  Beck AT.(1971). Beck depression inventory. [Online] available:
    `http://www.cps.nova.edu/~cpphelp/BDI.html. <http://www.cps.nova.edu/~cpphelp/BDI.html>`__
    Last accessed 3rd Oct 2002.

6.  Beck AT. (2002). Beck depression inventory II. [Online] available:
    `http://mail.med.upenn.edu/~abeck/scales.html. <http://mail.med.upenn.edu/~abeck/scales.html>`__
    Last accessed 3rd Oct 2002.

7.  Davis BJ. Self-efficacy and depressive symptomatology in older
    adults: an exploratory study. International Journal of Aging Human
    Development (1988); 27 (1), 35-43.

8.  Davis BJ. Physical self-efficacy, perceived physical status, and
    depressive symptomatology in older adults. Journal of
    Psychology(1990); 124 (2), 207-15.

9.  Dieserud G, Roysamb E, Ekeberg O, & Kraft P. (2001).Toward an
    integrated model of suicidal attempt: a cognitive psychological
    approach. Pakistan Scientific and Technological Information Center.

10. Eastin MS, LaRose R. (2000). Internet self efficacy and psychology
    of the digital divide. [Online] available:
    `http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol6/issue1/eastin.html. <http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol6/issue1/eastin.html>`__
    Last accessed 22nd Jan 2003.

11. Ehrenberg M F, Cox DN, & Koopman RF. The relationship between
    self-efficacy and depression in adolescents. Adolescence (1991); 26
    (102), 361-74.

12. Holahan CK, & Holahan CJ. Self-efficacy, social support, and
    depression in aging: a longitudinal analysis. Journal of Gerontology
    (1987); 42 (1), 65-8.

13. Khan J. (1996). Validation and Norm Development of Salma Shah
    Depression Scale (SSDS). Unpublished M.Sc Research Report.
    Department of Psychology, Peshawar University.

14. Kurlowicz LH. Perceived self-efficacy, functional ability, and
    depressive symptoms in older elective surgery patients. Nursing
    Research (1998); 47 (4), 219-26.

15. Maciejewski PK, Prigerson HG, & Mazure CM. Self-efficacy as a
    mediator between stressful life events and depressive symptoms:
    Differences based on history of prior depression. British Journal of
    Psychiatry (2000); 176, 373-8.

16. Makaremi A. Self-efficacy and depression among Iranian college
    students. Psychology Rep (2000); 86 (2), 386-8.

17. McFarlane AH, Bellissimo A, & Norman GR. The role of family and
    peers in social self-efficacy: links to depression in adolescence.
    American Jounal of Orthopsychiatry(1995); 65 (3), 402-10.

18. Miller PH. (2002). Theories of developmental psychology. USA: Worth
    publishers.

19. Muris P, Schmidt H, Lambrichs R., & Meesters C. Protective and
    vulnerability factors of depression in normal adolescents. Behavior
    Residual Therapy (2001); 39 (5), 555-65.

20. National Institute of Mental Health. (2001). The Invisible Disease:
    Depression. [Online] available:
    `http://www.nimh.nih.gov/publicat/invisible.cfm. <http://www.nimh.nih.gov/publicat/invisible.cfm>`__
    Last accessed 17th Oct 2002.

21. Pajares. (2002). Overview of social cognitive theory and of
    self-efficacy. [Online] available:
    `http://www.emory.edu/EDUCATION/mfp/eff.html. <http://www.emory.edu/EDUCATION/mfp/eff.html>`__
    Last accessed 3rd Oct 2002.

22. Prince MJ, Harwood RH, Blizard RA, Thomas A, & Mann AH. Impairment,
    disability and handicap as risk factors for depression in old age:
    The Gospel Oak Project V. Psychology Medicine (1997); 27 (2), 311-21

. 23. Rawlin RP, & Heacock PE. (1993). Clinical manual of psychiatric
nursing (2\ :sup:`nd` .Ed). London: Moseby.

24. Robinson SG, Johnston MV, & Allen J. Self-care self-efficacy,
    quality of life, and depression after stroke. Arch Phys Med
    Rehabilitation (2000); 81 (4), 460-4.

25. Schieman S, & Campbell JE.Age variations in personal agency and
    self-esteem: the context of physical disability. Journal of Aging
    Health (2001); 13 (2), 155-85.

26. Schwarzer R , & Jerusalem M. (2000) General perceived self efficacy.
    [Online] available:
    http://www.fu-berlin.de/gesund/skalen/Language_Selection/Turkish/General_Perceived_Self-
    *Efficac/hauptteil_general_perceived_self-efficac.htm.* Last
    accessed 3rd Oct 2002.

27. Schwarzer R. (2001). Generalized perceived self efficacy. [Online]
    available: `http://userpage.fu- <http://userpage.fu-/>`__
    *berlin.de/~health/selfscal.htm.* Last accessed 3rd Oct 2002.

28. Schwarzer R, & Jerusalem M, (1993). The General Self-Efficacy Scale.
    [Online] available:
    `http://userpage.fu-berlin.de/~health/engscal.htm. <http://userpage.fu-berlin.de/~health/engscal.htm>`__
    Last accessed 3rd Oct 2002.

29. Shnek ZM, Foley FW, LaRocca NG, Gordon WA, DeLuca J, Schwartzman HG,
    Halper J, Lennox S, & Irvine J. Helplessness, self-efficacy,
    cognitive distortions, and depression in multiple sclerosis and
    spinal cord injury. Annual Behavioral Medicine (1997); 19 (3),
    287-94.

30. Tabassum U, Rehman G, Schwarzer R, & Jerusalem M. (2003). Urdu
    Adaptation of the General Self- Efficacy Scale. [Online] available:
    `http://userpage.fu-berlin.de/~health/urdu.htm. <http://userpage.fu-berlin.de/~health/urdu.htm>`__
    Last accessed 5th Nov 2004.

31. Tate D, Forchheimer M, Maynard F, & Dijkers M.. Predicting
    depression and psychological distress in persons with spinal cord
    injury based on indicators of handicap. American Journal of Phys Med
    Rehabilitation (1994); 73 (3), 175-83.

32. Van G K, Schieman S. Looking inward: introspectiveness, physical
    disability, and depression across the life course. International
    Journal of Aging Human Development (2001); 53(4), 293-310.
