JPPS 2008; 5(2): 86-89 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

A CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY OF QUALITY OF LIFE AND PSYCHIATRIC MORBIDITY IN
PATIENTS

   WITH ACNE VULGARIS

   S. Srivastava, Manjeet S. Bhatia, P. Das, S.N. Bhattacharya

ABSTRACT
========

**Objective**: The objectives of the study were: (i) To assess the
psychiatric morbidity and quality of life of patients with acne
vulgaris.(ii) to evaluate the relationship between acne severity,
anxiety, depression and disease specific quality of life in patients
with acne vulgaris.

   **Design:** Cross sectional study.

**Place and duration of study**: The study was conducted in the
psychiatry outpatient department of a teaching medical institution in
New Delhi, India during January to September 2006.

**Subjects and Methods**: Forty six patients of Acne vulgaris were
studied in dermatology department of general hospital jointly by
psychiatrists and dermatologists. Acne severity was graded by dermatolo-
gists using Global Acne Grading System, Psychiatric morbidity and
Quality of life were assessed by psychiatrists. All patients were
administered a General Health Questionnaire (GHQ) (12 item), a 17 item
HAM-D Scale, a Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAM-A) and Dermatology
specific quality of life (DSQL) Scale.

**Results**: Showed existence of clinically significant depression in
39.1% and anxiety in 4.35%. There were statistically significant
differences between males and females with respect to GHQ but not with
HAM-D and HAM-A. There was positive correlation between mean GHQ scores
and perceived severity (r =0.327, p =0.02). We found no correlation
between acne grading and HAM-D, HAM-A or DSQL.

**Conclusion**: The present study has clearly depicted higher
psychiatric morbidity in patients with acne vulgaris. We found no
correlation between disease severity, anxiety, depression and quality of
life in patients with acne vulgaris. Patients’ perception of their
disease might be important consideration in the evaluation and treatment
of acne vulgaris.

**Key words:** Acne vulgaris, Quality of life, Anxiety, Depression.

INTRODUCTION
============

*Acne vulgaris items* is commonly referred to as *acne*, is a chronic
inflammatory disorder of the piloseba- ceous unit. Acne vulgaris affects
atleast 85% of adoles- cents and young adults1,2. Acne can probably be
exac-

   **S. Srivastava,** MD, Department of Psychiatry, U.C.M.S. and

   G.T.B. Hospital, Dilshad Garden, Delhi-110095, India.

   **Manjeet S.Bhatia,** MD, D-1 Naraina vihar, New Delhi-110028, India.
   E-mail: manbhatia1@rediffmail.com

   **P. Das MD,** MBBS, U.C.M.S. and G.T.B. Hospital, Dilshad Gar- den,
   Delhi-110095, India.

   **S. N. Bhattacharya,** MD, Department of Dermatology, U.C.M.S. and
   G.T.B. Hospital, Dilshad Garden, Delhi-110095, India.

   **Correspondence: Dr. Manjeet S. Bhatia**

erbated by psychological stress3. The influence of acne on body image is
believed to be the main factor associ- ated with psychological
morbidity. As the face is almost always site of involvement by acne, its
presence can alter one’s perception of body image.

Psychiatric disorders can develop secondary to acne vulgaris4-8.
Clinical depression, social phobia and anxiety disorders have been
associated with acne. Ear- lier studies have suggested that acne may be
associ- ated with decreased self - esteem / self - confidence,
interpersonal difficulties, unemployment and increased prevalence of
depression and anxiety. Cotterill and Cunliffe6 have described sixteen
cases of completed suicide among dermatology patients, seven of whom had
acne. The impact of acne upon the quality of life is a very important
component of assuring its overall mor- bidity and often is the primary
consideration in deciding

whether or not to institute therapy. Mallon et al7 reported that acne
patients reported levels of social, psychologi- cal and emotional
problems that were as great as those reported by patients with bronchial
asthma, epilepsy, diabetes, back pain or arthritis.

MATERIAL AND METHODS
====================

Sample:
-------

The cross-sectional study consisted of 46 new, consecutive patients of
acne vulgaris reporting to the dermatology out patients department of a
tertiary care teaching hospital. The acne severity was graded by
Dermatologists using Global Acne Grading Systems (GAGS)8.

Inclusion Criteria:
-------------------

(1) All patients of acne vulgaris from 14-30 years of age.

(2) Patients who gave informed consent.

Exclusion Criteria:
-------------------

(1) All patients with comorbid skin conditions like Pso- riasis, Lichen
       planus were excluded.

(2) All patients with chronic medical, surgical condi- tions were
       excluded from the study.

(3) All patients with organic brain syndrome, chronic mental illness
       were excluded from the study.

Informed consent was taken from the patient for their inclusion into the
study. The sociodemographic pro- file of the sample was noted on the
performa specially designed for the purpose of the study. Relevant case
history including Psychiatric and dermatological history was also noted
on the performa.

Assessment of Psychiatric morbidity
-----------------------------------

1. 12-item General Health Questionnaire (GHQ)9.

2. 17- item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D)10.

3. Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety (HAM-A)11.

Assessment of Quality of Life
-----------------------------

   *Dermatology – Specific Quality of Life (DSQL) Instru- ment12 :*

In this instrument, QOL items form 5 general groupings

(I)   Physical symptoms and somatic complaints.

(II)  Activities of daily living (including functional status, personal
         care and grooming).

(III) Social activities and functioning.

(IV)  Experiences at work or school or both.

(V)   Self-perception.

DSQL is intended as a self administered QOL pro- file which can be
completed in 15 minutes or less. It assesses bothersome symptoms,
quality of life and per- ceived severity in patients of acne vulgaris on
a global item scale from 1 to 10.

The aims of this study were to assess psychiatric morbidity and quality
of life in patients of acne vulgaris and also to evaluate the
relationship between acne se- verity, anxiety, depression and disease
specific quality of life in patients with acne vulgaris.

Apart from Psychiatric morbidity and Quality of Life of patients, their
Socio-Demographic Profile was also assessed.

Statistical Analysis
--------------------

Data were analyzed by using a statistical package for the computer.
Scores obtained from the scales were compared by using the t-Test,
correlations were exam- ined by Pearson’s Correlation Analysis.

RESULTS
=======

The study group consisted of 26 males and 20 fe- males. No patient
dropped out from the study. 52% of patients had their age group in the
range of 14-18 years which is representative the clinical population of
acne vulgaris. 54% of total patients were students (Table1).

   Table 1

Socio demographic profile of patients with Acne vulgaris (N = 46)

+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    **Age Group      |    **Number**     |    **Percent-   |
|  **1.** |    (Years)**        |                   |    age**        |
+=========+=====================+===================+=================+
|         |    14-18            |    24             | 52.10           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    19-24            |    16             | 34.70           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    25-30            |    6              | 13.20           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    **Sex**          |                   |                 |
|  **2.** |                     |                   |                 |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    Male             |    26             | 56.50           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    Female           |    20             | 43.50           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    **Literacy**     |                   |                 |
|  **3.** |                     |                   |                 |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    Literate         |    40             | 86.90           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    Illiterate       |    6              | 43.50           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    **Occupation**   |                   |                 |
|  **4.** |                     |                   |                 |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    Employed         |    12             | 26.00           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    Unemployed       |    9              | 19.70           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+
|         |    Student          |    25             | 54.30           |
+---------+---------------------+-------------------+-----------------+

Mean GHQ of the study sample was 3.56. The num- ber of patients with
clinically significant depression was eighteen and mild, moderate and
severe depression was noted in six patients each respectively,
clinically

significant anxiety symptoms were noted in two patients. A score of 14
has been suggested as threshold for clini- cally significant anxiety in
Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety (HAM-A). A score of 8-13 for mild
depression, 14-18 for moderate depression, >18 for severe depres- sion
has been suggested for 17- item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression
(HAM-D) (Table 2).

Table 2

   Psychiatric Morbidity in patients with Acne Vulgaris

+------------------------+-----------------------------+---------------+
|    **Rating Scale**    |    **Number of patients     |    **Percent- |
|                        |    with clinically          |    age (%)**  |
|                        |    significant scores**     |               |
+========================+=============================+===============+
|    HAM-D (N = 46)      |    18                       |    39.1       |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+---------------+
|    HAM-A (N = 46)      |    2                        |    4.35       |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+---------------+
|    GHQ (N=46)          |    25                       |    54.35      |
+------------------------+-----------------------------+---------------+

When the male and female patients of acne were grouped according to
HAM-D, HAM-A scores and GHQ, statistically significant differences were
observed be- tween males and females with respect to GHQ, though no such
differences were observed with respect to HAM-D and HAM-A (Table 3).

Table 3

The Mean Scores of Male and Female Patients on the Psychiatric

Morbidity Rating Scales

+------------+------------+------------+----------+---------+---------+
|            |            |    **Male  |    **    |         |         |
|            |   **Female |    N=26**  | t-Test** |         |         |
|            |    N=20**  |            |          |         |         |
+============+============+============+==========+=========+=========+
|            |            |            |    **T** |         | **p**   |
|            |            |            |          |  **df** |         |
+------------+------------+------------+----------+---------+---------+
|    GHQ     |            |            |    3.016 |         |         |
|            |  5.50\ *+* |  2.08\ *+* |          |   28.63 |   0.005 |
|            |            |            |          |         |         |
|            |    4.52    |    2.62    |          |         |         |
+------------+------------+------------+----------+---------+---------+
|    HAM-D   |            |            |    1.080 |    37.6 |         |
|            | 10.75\ *+* |  7.77\ *+* |          |         |   0.287 |
|            |            |            |          |         |         |
|            |    9.85    |    8.49    |          |         |         |
+------------+------------+------------+----------+---------+---------+
|    HAM-A   |            |            |    1.661 |    40.2 |         |
|            |  5.05\ *+* |  3.12\ *+* |          |         |   0.104 |
|            |            |            |          |         |         |
|            |    3.98    |    3.83    |          |         |         |
+------------+------------+------------+----------+---------+---------+

Quality of Life had negative correlation with GHQ (r=-0.412,p=0.004) and
perceived severity (r=0.327, p=0.02). Positive correlation was found
between mean GHQ scores and perceived severity (r=0.327, p=0.02). No
relationship were found between acne Grading and HAM-D, HAM-A scores and
DSQL items.(Bothersome symptoms, Quality of life and per- ceived
severity).

DISCUSSION
==========

Quality of life(QOL) has been defined as a useful measure which assesses
the functioning, well-being, and life satisfaction of an individual. QOL
refers to , not only the subjective sense of well-being but also objec-

tive indicators such as health status and external life situations.QOL
is emerging as one of the recent trends in assessing treatment response
from the patient’s point of view.

The present study has reiterated the fact that the patient’s perception
of acne might be an important indi- cator for the treatment. Our study
found out that patient’s perception of severity did correlate with
psychiatric mor- bidity. Interestingly, we found no correlation was seen
between clinician rated acne severity and perceived severity as noted on
DSQL

We reported no correlation between acne vulgaris severity, DSQL, HAM-D,
HAM-A, GHQ . Similarly, the pre- vious study by Aktan et al. of 2657
high-school students, also reported no correlation between acne severity
and HAM-D or HAM-A scores.13

The patients’ perception of acne might include fac- tors other than the
size and number of lesions. Patients’ perception of their disease might
be important consider- ation in the evaluation and treatment of acne
because facial acne is highly visible and carries a certain degree of
social negativity, it has been hypothesized that even mild acne can
decrease a person’s self confidence, body image, willingness to be seen
in public and social inter- actions.14 Martin et al15 observed that
quality of life scores correlated more strongly with patient reported
severity than with physician reported severity.

Dermatology outpatients had a higher prevalence of psychiatric disorder
than the general population. Our findings are similar to previous
studies which also re- ported higher depression and anxiety scores in
patients of acne. The previous studies also made comparisons with other
dermatological conditions.13,16-19

Gupta and Gupta5 examined depression and sui- cidal ideation in
dermatology patients and found that patients with mild to moderate
clinical significant gen- der differences were seen on mean scores of
GHQ. This was also reported by Hughes et al20 and Rubinow et al21

.We also found that female patients of acne had signifi- cantly higher
mean scores of GHQ. We found no gender differences in HAM - D, HAM – A
scores. Previous study by Yazici et al. also found no gender differences
in acne quality of life scale and hospital anxiety and depression
scale.16

The major strengths of the study is sound method- ology including the
use of a disease specific measure for the assessment of QOL of patients
with acne vul- garis, collaborative work of psychiatrist and dermatolo-
gist in throwing light into this relatively recent area for research
which has direct treatment implications.

The major limitation for the study were absence of a control group,
larger sample size, longitudinal follow up of the study sample both
before and after treatment, the use of a generic QOL instrument which
makes com- parison with other disease group easier.

Future work in the area needs to use a control group, bigger sample size
and longitudinal follow up of acne vulgaris patients.

CONCLUSIONS
===========

Some conclusions can be drawn from this study. First, patients with acne
vulgaris has clearly depicted higher psychiatric morbidity and positive
correlation between GHQ scores and perceived severity. Hence, treatment
needs to be addressed both the primary skin condition and psychiatric
manifestations. Second, acne negatively affects quality of life. We
could not find any relationship between acne severity, anxiety,
depression and disease specific quality of life in patients with acne
vulgaris. Third, patient’s perception of the disease has emerged as an
important factor which is associated with increase in anxiety and
depressive symptoms.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Weiss JS. Current opinions for the topical treatment of acne
    vulgaris. Paediatr Dermatol 1997;14;480-88.

2.  Knowchuck RP. Managind acne in adolescents. Pediatr Clin N Am 2000;
    47:841-57.

3.  Lasek RJ, Chren MM. Acne Vulgaris and the quality of life of adult
    dermatology patients. Arch Dermatol 1998;134:454-8.

4.  Kellet SC, Gawkrodger DJ. The Psychological and emo- tional impact
    of Acne and the effect of treatment with Isotretinoin. Br J Dermatol
    1999;140:273-82.

5.  Gupta MA, Gupta AK. Depression and suicidal ideation in dermatology
    patients with acne, alopecia areata, atopic dermatitis and
    psoriasis. Br J Dermatol 1998; 139:846-50.

6.  Cotterill JA, Cunliffe WJ. Suicide in dermatological pa- tients. Br
    J Dermatol 1997;137:246-50.

7.  Mallon EM, Newton JN, Klassen A, Stewart-Brown SL, Ryan TJ, Finlay
    AY. The quality of life in acne: a compari- son with general medical
    conditions using generic ques- tionnaires. Br J Dermatol
    1999;140:672-6.

8.  Doshi A, Zaheer A, Stiller MJ. A Comparison of current acne grading
    systems and proposal of a novel system. Int J Dermatol 1997; 36:
    416-8.

9.  Goldberg DP. Rating Scale for General Health Questionnaire.
    (GHQ-12). Windsor: NFER-Nelson, 1992.

10. Hamilton M, Rating scale for Depression. J Neurol Neurosurg
    Psychiatr 1960; 23:56-62.

11. Hamilton M, Diagnosis and Rating of Anxiety. Studies of Anxiety, Br
    J Psychiatr Spec Publication 1969;3: 76-9.

12. Anderson RT, Rajgopalan U, Salem W. Development and Validation of a
    quality of life instrument for cutane- ous disease. J Am Acad
    Dermatol 1997;37:41-50.

13. Aktan S, Ozman E, Sanli B. Anxiety, Depression and nature of acne
    vulgaris in adolescents. Int J Dermatol 2000 : 39 : 354-7.

14. Koo JY, Smith LL. Psychological Aspects of Acne. Pediatr Dermatol
    1991;8:185-8.

15. Martin AR, Lookingbill DP, Botek A, Light J, Thiboutot D, Girman CJ.
    Health related quality of UJC among pa- tients with facial
    ache-assessment of a new specific ques- tionnaire. Clin Exp Dermatol
    2001; 26; 380-5.

16. Yazici K, Baz K, Buturak V. Disease specific quality of life is
    associated with anxiety and depression in patients with acne. J Eur
    Acad Dermatol Venerol 2004; 18: 435-9.

17. Vander-Meren, Van der Schaar W W, Vander Hub CM. The Psychological
    impact of severe acne. Cutis 1985 ; 36: 84-6.

18. Wu SF, Kinder, BN, Trunnell TN, Pulton JE, Role of anxi- ety and
    anger in acne patients: a relationship with the severity of the
    disorder. J Am Acad Dermatol 1988 :18 : 325-32.

19. Koo JY. The psychosocial impact of acne : patients per- ceptions. Am
    Acad Dermatol 1995; 32: 26-30.

20. Hughes JE, Barrelough BM, Hamblin White JE, Psychi- atric Symptoms
    in dermatology patients. Br J Psychia- try 1983;143:51-4.

21. Rubinow DR, Peck GL, Squillace KM, Gantt GG. Re- duced anxiety and
    depression in cystic Acne and pa- tients after successful treatment
    with oral Isotretinoin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1987;17:25-32.
