   JPPS 2008; 5(1): 3-7 GUEST EDITORIAL

REVERSE GENDER PATTERN FOR SUICIDE IN ASIAN POPULATION? A PERSPECTIVE
FROM UK

   George Tadros

INTRODUCTION
============

Suicide is believed to exist in all cultures and it has been wrapped
with mystery since early civilizations. Suicide as a form of human
behaviour is probably as ancient as man himself 1. In the UK, suicide
and attempted suicide were decriminalised in 1961 2. This was followed
by a sharp increase in the prevalence of attempted suicide. There has
been a genuine desire in the UK to promote suicide prevention by setting
specific targets 3 and appointing strategies 4.

Attitudes toward suicide have been affected by waves of condemnation and
tolerance throughout the different ages and cultures. It is possible
that moral and cultural views on suicide have had an effect on the inci-
dence of suicide and statistics data. Therefore, it is es- sential to
understand the meaning of suicide to people of different backgrounds,
cultures, generations and ex- periences. It is important to study
suicide within ethnic groups in the UK to understand the attitude of
different cultures to suicide that could support efforts to reduce
suicide rates in ethnic minorities. Despite the rapid in- crease in
scientific publication on suicide research 5, there is paucity in
studies addressing the issue of Asian suicide in the UK. Most of those
studies were designed to study deliberate self-harm (DSH) and based on
hos- pital samples that are not necessarily representative of suicide in
the total population.

*The challenge of defining suicide and its* effect on suicide data:
-------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the main reasons to try to look into coun- tries of origin in
studying suicide in migrants is to at- tempt to learn lessons that could
be useful in designing suicide prevention strategies for some ethnic
groups. However, it is not a straightforward comparison for many
reasons. To carry out such a study, the condition in question should be
clearly defined which is not easy, especially with different systems and
definitions adopted by different countries. Farmer stated that “the
first prob- lem encountered in the study of suicide is its defini-
tion”6. The UK uses the Coroner’s Court to determine the cause of death
especially in cases of unnatural death

   **Correspondence:**

   **Professor George Tadros**, Consultant in Old Age Psychiatry,
   Birmingham,, Professor of Mental Health and Ageing, Stafford- shire
   University

such as suicide. The UK legal definition is based on a pragmatic
approach which concentrates on finding a proof for deceased’s intention
and process of action, but does not give any clear understanding of
suicide. It does not give any consideration to related phenomenon such
as suicidal behaviour, which would be classified under misadventure or
accidental death. Under the le- gal definition an unspecific number of
cases, which cli- nicians consider to be suicide, will be classified
differ- ently. However, those cases that were classified as sui- cide
are more likely to be suicide. This means that the legal definition
provides a framework with a high speci- ficity but its main failure is
its potential low sensitivity. The Coroner’s verdicts that related to
suicide are sui- cide verdict, open verdict, misadventure verdict or
acci- dental verdict. It appears that suicide verdict and open verdict
are more likely to be ‘true’ suicides than the acci- dental or
misadventure verdicts. The accidental and misadventure verdicts lack two
main pre-requisites: the intention of self-killing and the proof that
the act was self-inflicted.

It is widely believed that most cases of open ver- dicts are in fact
suicides 7. A study examined cases of open verdicts and suicide verdicts
in Newcastle-upon- Tyne found that cases of open verdicts and cases of
suicide verdicts shared the same characteristics 8. A re- port from the
Australian Bureau of Census and Statistics declared that probably 90% of
the open verdicts were suicide 9. For all those reasons, Barraclough and
Hughes suggested that the true suicide rate is more likely to be the sum
of the suicide verdict and the open verdicts 10. The sum of the suicide
verdict and open verdict was used in a large number of epidemiological
research stud- ies into suicide e.g. comparing suicide rates between
different countries 11, examining differences between dif- ferent
immigrant groups 12 and the effect of social isola- tion 13. The
government used the sum of suicide verdict and open verdict as a
performance indicator and a mea- sure for the health of the nation 3. It
was also recently recommended that the sum of both of suicide verdict
and open verdict should be used for the purpose of epi- demiological
studies 8.

Barraclough wanted to examine whether interna- tional suicide data could
stand scrutiny or would only reflect the different practices and systems
in different countries 7. Therefore, he studied the suicide rates and
the rates of undetermined deaths in 22 countries. He found that the rank
order of the suicide rates of

   these countries correlated highly (r = 0.89, P<0.001) with the sum of
   the suicide rates and the undeter- mined deaths of these countries.
   This finding demon- strates that the differences between official
   suicide rates are independent of their individual ascertainment pro-
   cedures.

   The World Health Organisation (WHO) proposed a definition that was
   formulated by Van Egmond and Deikstra (1989). They defined suicide
   as: “an act with a fatal outcome, which the deceased, with the
   knowledge and expectation of a fatal outcome, had himself planned and
   carried out with the object of bringing about the changes desired by
   the deceased”. However, the Inter- national Statistical
   Classification of Diseases – Version 10 (ICD-10, 1992) was published
   without a clear defini- tion for suicide.

*The Epidemiological challenge of gender* differences in suicide in Asian population
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In England & Wales the national and regional sui- cide data are compiled
from the annual Coroners re- ports returned to the home-office 2. In
England and Wales, suicide rate reached a post-war peak in the early
1960’s (15/100,000 male population & 9/100,000 female popu- lation).
But, McClure showed that suicide rates for both genders declined between
1963 and 1975 14. This de- cline was associated with the detoxification
of the do- mestic gas in the U.K. Suicide rates rose again between
1975-1980 due to an increase in suicide rates for males of all age
groups particularly in 25- 54 year age group 15. Although the suicide
rate is not high compared to other countries in the European Union, the
figures raise con- cern as on average a person dies every two hours in
England as a result of suicide 4.

Almost 30% of all cases of suicide worldwide oc- curred in China and
India, although suicide rate in China is similar to the global average
and that of India is about half of the global suicide rate 16. There is
a large in- crease in suicide rates in South-East Asia and slight
decrease in the Far East. The main concern in Asia is the rapidly
increasing suicide rate in Sri Lanka, where suicide rates showed an
eight-fold increase over the last 50 years 17.

Worldwide suicide rates for men are higher than those for women, with
the exception of China Mainland where suicide rates for women are higher
than those for men; male: female suicide ratio is 0.77:1. In Europe and
the U.K. male: female suicide ratio is about 3:1, but in Ireland it is
5:1.

In Asia suicide rates are still higher in men than in women, but the
difference is lower than that elsewhere17. The male: female suicide
ratio in India is 1.3:1. The predominance of suicide among men is
thought to be because men tend to use more lethal methods and have a
greater propensity to impulsive violence 18. Hawton in an editorial
highlighted the universally known consider-

able gender differences in suicidal behaviour 19. He also gave some
possible reasons for the higher male suicide rates. In females, acts of
deliberate self-harm are often based on non-suicidal motivations e.g.
communicating stress, modify behaviour and reaction to others’
behaviour, while in males deliberate self-harm is more often associated
with greater suicide intent. However, in community samples, suicidal
ideation is reported far more often by females than males. Males tend to
use violent methods while females appear to be more con- cerned about
bodily disfigurement. Increased occupa- tional instability could be
another factor behind the higher male suicide rates, as occupational
factors are particu- larly important in suicide by males. More females
than males seek help from general practitioners for mental health
problems. Consequently more females are treated for depression and
benefit from educational programmes.

Kelly & Bunting explained that, in England & Wales, suicide trends for
men and women followed the same pattern from 1911 until the early 1980s
20. In 1982 sui- cides amongst men accounted for 63% of all suicides. In
1996 suicides amongst women accounted for just 25% as the number of
women suicides fell continuously from 1982 till 1996. The
age-standardised suicide rate, for women, decreased steadily from
9.8/100,000 women population/year in 1982, to 5.6/100,000 women popu-
lation/year in 1996. This constituted a reduction of 43%. Suicide rates
for elderly women above the age of 75 did not show any reduction over
the same period of time. The age-standardised suicide rate for men
decreased from 19.1/100,000 men population/year in 1982 to 17.4/ 100,000
men population/year in 1996. This constituted a reduction of 9%.
However, the age-standardised suicide rate for men showed a peak in 1988
when it rose to 20.7/100,000 men population/year.

*Ethnic background and suicide rates in*
----------------------------------------

   *UK. Experience in Birmingham and Solihull*

The coroners’ statistics in UK provide one of the most robust data on
suicide. The epidemiological data from many Asian countries such as
India suffers from many methodological limitations, most notably those
related to the definition of suicide as discussed as above. It would
therefore be interesting to examine the suicide data from Asian ethnic
minorities in UK. This will have obvious limitations most notably that
related to general- izing data from migrant population but can provide
some insight into the epidemiological challenge pointed out earlier.

Birmingham is a cosmopolitan city with multi-eth- nic constitution.
Census 2001 `(www.statistics.gov.uk/ <http://www.statistics.gov.uk/>`__
census2001) shows that Birmingham has a population of 977,087 persons.
People who were born outside the UK and Republic of Ireland constitute
14% of the popu- lation. Almost 65% of the population described their
eth-

   nic origin as white British, 3.2% Irish, 10.7% Pakistani, 8.9% other
   Asians, 1.5% other white, 1.6% black Carib- bean and 0.5% Chinese
   (www.birmingham.gov.uk). Bir- mingham also has multi-faith
   representation: 59.1% Christian, 14.3% Muslim, 2.9% Sikh, 2% Hindu,
   0.3%

   Buddhist, 0.2% Jewish, 12.4% had no religion and 8.4% did not state
   their religion. Faith representation was similar to the national
   figures with two main exceptions; a higher percentage of Muslims
   (14.3% Vs 3.1% for En- gland) and a lower percentage of Christians
   (59.1% Vs 71.7% for England). Solihull has a different population
   construction, census 2001 shows that the total popula- tion of
   Solihull is 199,517 persons (96,683 males & 102,834 females). People
   from White British background form the vast majority of the Solihull
   population (94.5%) and people from Indian background formed the
   largest ethnic minority (1.8%). Regarding religion, 78% of the
   population considered themselves Christians, 0.9% Hindu, 0.8% Muslim,
   0.8% Sikh, 0.2% Jewish, 12.5% had no religion and 6.7% did not state
   their religion.

Burke studied attempted suicide in the Asian popu- lation in Birmingham
between 1969 and 1972 and re- ported that rates among the Asian
population were less than those of the native population 21. However
rates of DSH among Asian women were higher than those of their peers in
their countries of origin. He also commented that inter-personal dispute
preceding DSH was a com- mon theme. During the same period of time, DSH
was also less prevalent among West Indians in Birmingham compared to the
native population 21. Soni et al studied suicide among immigrants from
the Indian Subcontinent in Britain between 1970 and 1978, and found an
excess of suicide among young Indian women, especially among married
women, while suicide rates were low in Indian men 22. They did not give
any explanations for their findings. However, in India, male suicide
rate (11.4/ 100,000 male population/ year) was higher than female
suicide rate (8/100,000 female population/ year). Pre- viously Tadros
and Jolley (2001) argued that stigma at- tached to suicide is more
likely to hinder people with suicidal thoughts to seek help.

A study in Birmingham, UK showed a reversed gender pattern among the
Asian community 23. Details of all cases of suicide verdict and open
verdict, which were returned in inquests, held at the Coroner’s Court of
Birmingham and Solihull, between January 1995 and December 1999 were
reviewed using a standard form. There is only one Coroner’s office for
the city of Birming- ham, Solihull and their boroughs. Excluded from the
data collection sheet were; persons who died under the age of 18, people
who did not have a regular abode in Birmingham or Solihull, and those
who came from out- side the study area.

The study showed that the vast majority of the sui- cide cases (89.2%)
were from white ethnic background. The Asian (from the entire Indian
subcontinent) consti- tuted only 6.8% of the sample while black people
formed

3.2% of the sample. Others such as Chinese, Japanese, Arabs and
Africans, and people from mixed race consti- tuted 0.8% of the sample.
The suicide rate for the White population (12/100 000 population/ year)
is higher than that of the total population (10.8/100 000 population/
year). The second highest suicide rate was for Black people (8.4/100 000
population/year). The suicide rate for Asians (5.4/ 100 000 population/
year) is half that of the total population. The lowest suicide rate
(4/100 000 population/ year) is for people from mixed and other races.
The difference between males and females was statistically significant,
(Chi-square= 17.80, d.f.= 3, P=0.001). Male representation is more than
female rep- resentation in all the different ethnic origins with the ex-
ception of Asians. In the Asian group, more female (56.3%) than males
(43.7%) committed suicide. Among White people, the male to female ratio
in the sample was almost 3:1 (2.9:1), while among Asians the male to
female ratio was 0.8:1. In the total population and all the different
races, with the exception of Asians, suicide rate for the male
population is higher than that for female population. In the total
population, the White ethnic popu- lation and Black ethnic population
male suicide rates are almost 3 times the female suicide rate. In
Asians, the female suicide rate (5.8/ 100 000/ year) is higher than the
male suicide rate (4.9/ 100 000/ year), Figure (1).

The study also showed that there are more Asians and Black people in the
younger adults group than in the older adults group, and more white
people in the older adults group than in the younger adults group. The
difference in the ethnic structure between older people and younger
adults was statistically significant, (Chi-square= 10.15, df = 3, P=
0.03). In the white popu- lation both the older people and younger
adults have the same suicide rate (12/ 100 000/ year), while in the
Asian population suicide rate for younger adults (5.5/ 100 000/ year)
was higher than that of the older adults (4.5/ 100 000/ year).

.. image:: media/image1.png

   Fig. 1: Suicide rates in the whole sample by ethnic origin andgender

   .. image:: media/image2.png

   Fig. 2: Suicide rate by ethnicity and gender in the older people and
   younger adults

Suicide rate by ethnicity and gender in the older people and younger
adults is shown in Figure (2). In the total population, the highest
suicide rate was in the younger males followed by older males, older
females and lastly younger females. In the white population sui- cide
rate showed the same rank order as for the total population as far as
ethnicity and gender distribution was concerned. In the Asian
population, the highest suicide rate was for younger females followed by
younger males, older females and lastly older males. In the Black
population and people of mixed and other races, results did not show a
complete picture because of small or absent figures.

CONCLUSION
==========

The situation has not changed since the early 1970’s 21. White people
are over-represented in the sample while Asian people are
under-represented. The suicide rate for white people was the highest
(12/100,000/ year) among the ethnic groups, while sui- cide rate for
Asian people was one of the lowest (5.4/ 100,000/ year). However, Asians
are the only ethnic group in the UK which shows a similar pattern to
that of China i.e. the female suicide rate is higher than the male
suicide rate for both younger adults and older people groups.

*Future research*
-----------------

There is a great need for more studies addressing the possible reasons
for the gender reversed pattern in Asian suicide in the UK,
psychological autopsy studies would be the ideal solution though they
need strong financial and academic support and infrastructure. Most of
the studies, including Tadros 23, are usually not de- signed to give a
satisfactory explanation for this finding as they tend to focus on
epidemiological and published figures. Certainly, researches should look
back at the countries of origin in their attempts to understand mi-
grants’ suicide but they should be aware of the great methodological
challenges. Also, countries of origin should continue to have interest
in the safety and well- being of their citizens who migrated to other
parts of the world.

REFRENCES
=========

1. Tadros G, Jolley D. The stigma of suicide. Br J Psychia- try 2001;
   179: 178.

2. Levine M, Pyke J. Levine on Coroners Court. London: Sweet & Maxwell,
   1999.

3. Department of Health. Saving Lives: Our Healthier Na- tion. London:
   HMSO, 1999.

4. Department of Health. National Suicide Prevention Strat- egy for
   England, Consultation Document. London: De- partment of Health, 2002.

5. De Leo D. Suicide in late life at the end of 1990s: a less neglected
   topic? Crisis 1997; 18:51-2.

6. Farmer RDT. Assessing the epidemiology of suicide and parasuicide. Br
   J Psychiatry 1988; 153: 16-20.

7. Barraclough B. Differences between national suicide rates. Br J
   Psychiatry 1973; 122: 95-6.

8. Linsley KR, Schapira K, Kelly TP. Open verdict v. suicide

..

   – importance to research. Br J Psychiatry 2001; 178: 465-8.

9.  Oliver RG, Hetzel BS. An analysis of recent trends in suicide rates
    in Australia. Int J Epidemiol 1973; 2: 91- 101.

10. Barraclough BM, Hughes J. Suicide: Clinical and Epi- demiological
    Studies. London: Croom Helm, 1987.

11. Barraclough B. Are the Scottish and English suicide rates really
    different? Br J Psychiatry 1972; 120: 267- 73.

12. Sainsbury P, Barraclough BM. Differences between sui- cide rates.
    Nature 1968; 220:1252.

13. Sainsbury P. Suicide in London. London: Chapman &. Hall, 1955.

14. McClure GMG. Changes in suicide in England and Wales, 1960-1997. Br
    J Psychiatry 2000; 176: 64-7.

15. McClure GMG. Suicide in England and Wales, 1975 – 1984. Br J
    Psychiatry 1987; 150: 309-14.

16. Bertolote JM. Suicide in the world: an epidemiological overview
    1959-2000. In: Wasserman D editor. Suicide an unnecessary death,
    London: Martin Dunitz Ltd, 2001; p.3-10.

17. Cheng ATA, Lee C. Suicide in Asia and the Far East. In: Hawton K,
    Heeringen K editors. The International Hand- book of Suicide and
    Attempted Suicide. England: Wiley, 2000: p.29-48.

18. Brent DA, Moritz G, Bridge J, Perper J, Canobbio R. The impact of
    adolescent suicide on siblings and par- ents: a longitudinal
    follow-up. Suicide Life Threat Behav 1996; 26: 253-9.

19. Hawton K. Sex and suicide; Gender differences in suicidal behaviour.
    Br J Psychiatry 2000; 177: 484-5.

20. Kelly S, Bunting J. Trends in suicide in England and Wales,
    1982-1996. Population Trends 1998; 92: 29-41.

21. Burke AW. Attempted suicide among Asian immigrants in Birmingham. Br
    J Psychiatry 1976; 128: 528-33.

22. Raleigh SV, Bulusu A, Balarajan R. Suicide among immi- grants from
    the Indian sub-continent. Br J Psychiatry 1990; 156: 46-50.

23. Tadros G. Suicide in Birmingham and Solihull: a descrip- tive study
    of older people and younger adults. Keele University, MD degree,
    2004.
