   **An Audit of Electro Encephalography (EEG) Referral In Tertiary Care
   Teaching Hospital**

   Zahid Nazar, Saeed Farooq, Syed Muhammad Sultan, Munir Ahmed, Inayat
   Ur Rehman, Khalid A Mufti

ABSTRACT:
=========

**Objective:** The aim of the study is to describe the various findings
of electroencephalography in assessing diseases encountered in clinical
practice, to audit the use of EEG in a tertiary teaching hospital, and
to describe the diagnostic categories in which EEG can be helpful as
diagnostic tool.

   **Design:** Descriptive study

**Place & Duration of Study:** This study has been carried out at
Department of Psychiatry Khyber Teaching Hospital, Peshawar. Cases were
examined retrospectively over a period of one year from January to
December 1998.

   **Subjects and Methods:**

All the record of the patients who had EEG during one year period i.e.
from January to December 1998 was examined. Relevant informations were
recorded on a performa prepared for this study.

   **Result:**

The total number of request during year 1998 were 971, out of which 570
(59%) were male and 401 (41%) were female. In 588 (61%) cases result was
positive and in 383 (39%) was negative. Electroencephalography was
helpful in assessing the diagnosis of epilepsy in 344 cases (58%) and
delirium in 181 cases (31%).

   **Conclusion\ :**

This paper highlights the importance of EEG is an important
electrophysiological investigation especially in cases of delirium and
epilepsy. It is recommended that it should be available in every
tertiary teaching hospital.

**Key words:** Electro Encephalography (EEG), Delirium, Epilepsy

INTRODUCTION
============

Electroencephalography (EEG) has a wide application in the field of
clinical medicine and research. It is an important tool for evaluation
of epilepsy, trauma, cerebral tumors, degenerative conditions and
disordered metabolic states causing delirium\ **1**. The distinction of
making the first observations of electrical activity of the brain goes
to Caton who, in 1875, reported that he had detected currents from
electrodes placed on the skull or exposed brain in rabbits and monkeys.
However it was Hans Berger (1929), who recorded the first human
electroencephalogram (EEG) from electrodes on the scalp. Today the
clinical application of electroencephalography is universally accepted
and it therefore seems all the more surprising that Berger’s original
publications were received with skepticism\ **1**. It was not until some
five years later that Adrian and Matthews, in 1934, obtained
confirmation of his findings and by a demonstration to the physiological
society ensured their recognition\ **2**.

Epileptic seizures were found to be accompanied by major electrical
disturbances and Walter (1936) was the first to demonstrate an
association between the presence of focal slow waves in the EEG and a
cerebral tumour.\ **3** The EEG is now a days used by doctors in nearly
every department. The neurologists employ it as an aid to diagnosis and
assessment particularly in patients with epilepsy. The general
physicians find prognostic help in unconscious patients after cardiac
arrest, and it can be sensitive indicator of impending hepatic
encephalopathy in patients with liver disease. The psychiatrists employ
it for patients in whom he believes there is an organic basis for a
mental disorder. Similarly it has wide applications in the field of
Pediatrics, where it can be used for diagnostic and prognostic
assessment in cases of epilepsy and brain damage. There are also a wide
variety of researches used for EEG in neuropharmacology\ **4,5**. Due to
resource constraints in developing countries EEG is available mostly in
teaching hospitals only. Due to limited resources it use has to be cost
effective **6,7**. The present study aims to describe the various
findings of EEG in assessing diseases encountered in clinical practice
and to audit the use of EEG in a tertiary teaching hospital and to
describe the diagnostic categories in which EEG can be helpful as
diagnostic tool.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

This is a retrospective study which, has been carried out in department
of Psychiatry Khyber Teaching Hospital. The records of all EEG requested
during one year period i.e. between first of January to thirty first
December 1998 were examined. Relevant information needed was recorded on
a Performa prepared for this study. Only those records were included
where informations about all the variables to be recorded in this study
were available. Following information was extracted form the notes: age
distribution of EEG request, clinical findings on history, EEG diagnosis
and differentiation of various types of seizure. Seizures were
classified according to the International Classification of Epileptic
seizures and International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10). The EEG
was recorded on

16 channel machine with paper and pen recording methods. The electrodes
were placed according to international standards on scalp. The
interpretations were done by senior resident and consultant in the
psychiatry department.

RESULTS:
========

The total number of EEG requested during one year period i.e. between
January to thirty first December 1998, were 971 out of which 570 (59%)
were male patients and 401 (41%) were female patients. In 588 (61%) of
cases result was positive and in 388 (39%) cases no pathology was found.
Forty percents of all referrals were from Department of Psychiatry,
Khyber Teaching Hospital while other hospital and private clinic
referrals contributed 17%. The total referral from paediatric unit
comprised of about 15% approximately. The number of referral from
medical units of Khyber Teaching Hospital and other hospitals
constituted 8%. The numbers of requests from intensive care unit were 7
%. About two third of the patients were in the range of 16-69 years. The
detailed breakdown of age distribution is given in table I. In more than
half of the cases epilepsy was the main diagnosis followed by deliriums.
Detailed diagnostic findings are shown in table II. Details of diagnosis
of various types of seizure are shown in table III. **DISCUSSION:**

In this study the main source of referrals for EEG was from Psychiatry
Department followed by Paediatrics and medical units. The psychiatrists
were interested in diagnosis of seizure disorders, differentiating its
various types and differentiating between epileptic and non epileptic
fit. From paediatric unit the main reason for referral was diagnosing
and differentiating various type of epilepsy. Similarly from medical
unit the main reason of referral was assessment of epilepsy, delirium
and encephalopathy (especially hepatic).

In this study the most frequent question asked was to exclude epilepsy.
It is stressed here that diagnosis of epilepsy is essentially a clinical
one. We would also like to stress here that to get the best out of an
EEG requires a dialogue between the referring doctors and the EEG
staff\ **4**.

The age distribution of EEG referrals found in this study is in general
similar to other studies **8,9, 10**. Lam et al\ **4** reported that the
clinical situations most commonly associated with abnormal EEGs were a
seizure disorder, suspicion of organic mental disease based on history
or physical or mental status examination. Similarly in this study
seizure disorder (58%) and delirium (31%) were the two most prominent
diagnoses. As Lam et al pointed out the EEG is best in diagnosing
seizures disorder and delirium and has much less specificity for other
brain diseases such as dementia, strokes, tumours or sub-dural
haematomas **11, 12.** It appears that EEG is helpful in identifying
seizures disorders and discriminating in various types of seizures,
which have bearing on management and final outcome of the disease. The
wide spectrum of the diagnosis and age group in which EEG ha been used
shows that investigation in helpful in almost all the specialty. EEG is
mainly employed by the neurology as a diagnostic tool. However, this
study shows that it is also very helpful diagnosis tool which should be
available to the psychiatry department. This is mainly due to fact that
psychiatrist have been dealing the epilepsy in our country. In view of
the fact that a significant proportion of patients with conversion
disorder present mostly in the form of pseudosiezures, the value of EEG
as a diagnostic tool in psychiatry is further enhanced. The wide
acceptance of the service of EEG provide by the Psychiatry Department is
reflected in the wider sources of referrals in this study.

   **Table –I: Age Distribution of EEG Requests:**

+--------+----------------------+------------------+------------------+
|        |    Age In Years      |    No. of        |    PERCENTAGE    |
|   S.NO |                      |    patients      |    (100)         |
|        |                      |    (971)         |                  |
+========+======================+==================+==================+
|    1.  |    0-1 Years         |    39            |    4%            |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    2.  |    2-5 Years         |    49            |    5%            |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    3.  |    6-15 Years        |    117           |    12%           |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    4.  |    16-69 Years       |    709           |    73%           |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+------------------+
|    5.  |    70 and above      |    57            |    6%            |
+--------+----------------------+------------------+------------------+

..

   **Table II: Diagnostic findings on EEG**

+-----+----------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| S   |    Diagnosis                           |    No. of   | %AGE   |
| .No |                                        |    patients |        |
+=====+========================================+=============+========+
| 1.  |    Epilepsy                            |    344      | 58%    |
+-----+----------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 2.  |    Delirium (infections)               |    181      | 31%    |
+-----+----------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 3.  |    Cerebral tumour                     |    21       | 04%    |
+-----+----------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 4.  |    Sub-acute Sclerosing                |    16       | 03%    |
|     |    Panencephalitis (S.S.P.E)           |             |        |
+-----+----------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 5.  |    Encephalopathies                    |    12       | 02%    |
+-----+----------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 6.  |    Brain Death                         |    07       | 01%    |
+-----+----------------------------------------+-------------+--------+

+-----+----------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 7.  |    Head injury                         |    07       | 01%    |
+=====+========================================+=============+========+
|     |                                        |    **588**  | **     |
| **T |                                        |             | 100%** |
| ota |                                        |             |        |
| l** |                                        |             |        |
+-----+----------------------------------------+-------------+--------+

..

   **Table III: Diagnostic break Down of Various Types of Epilepsies**

+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| S.  |    Diagnosis                          |    No. of   | %age   |
| No. |                                       |    patients |        |
+=====+=======================================+=============+========+
| 1.  |    Generalized Tonic Clonic seizures  |    180      | 52%    |
|     |    (Grand- Mal                        |             |        |
|     |                                       |             |        |
|     |    Epilepsy)                          |             |        |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 2.  |    Absence seizures (Petit –Mal       |    40       | 12%    |
|     |    Epilepsy)                          |             |        |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 3.  |    Febrile convulsions                |    40       | 12%    |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 4.  |    Temporal Lobe Epilepsy             |    30       | 09%    |
|     |    (Psychomotor Epilepsy)             |             |        |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 5.  |    Neonatal Epilepsy                  |    26       | 07%    |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 6.  |    Post-Traumatic Epilepsy            |    20       | 06%    |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 7.  |    Jackosonian Epilepsy               |    20       | 06%    |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
| 8.  |    Infantile spasms                   |    04       | 01%    |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+
|     |                                       |    344      | 100%   |
| **T |                                       |             |        |
| ota |                                       |             |        |
| l** |                                       |             |        |
+-----+---------------------------------------+-------------+--------+

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
===============================

   The total numbers of referrals in one year period were one thousand.
   This reflects the high demand for EEG in tertiary teaching hospital.
   It is also obvious that EEG has been requested from almost all the
   disciplines and for a large number of diagnostic decisions. In this
   context it is unfortunate that most teaching hospitals including the
   index hospital in which the study has been carried out there is no
   provision for dedicated EEG services.

   The result of present study highlights that EEG is an important
   electrophysiological investigation and should be provided in by an
   electrophysiology department equipped wit facilities for various
   electrophysiological studies.

REFERENCE
=========

1.  Kiloh L.G et al. Clinical Electroencephalography, 4\ :sup:`th`
    Edition 1981 Butterworth.

2.  Donalt Scott. Understandng EEG 1975 Gerald Duckwarth and Con Ltd.

3.  Driever M.V and Mac Gillivray B.B. Electroencephalography. In
    Laidlaw J. and Richens A. (eds). A Text Book of epilepsy London
    1982. Churchill Living stone.

4.  Lam RW, Hurwitz TA, WADA. J. A: The clinical use of EEG in a general
    psychiatric setting: Hospital Community Psychiatry 1988. 39:533-6.

5.  Nunez P.L. Electircal fields of the brain. The Neurophysis of EEg.
    New York Oxford University Press 1981.

6.  Nasar M, Khan S, Akhtar M. A. Epilepsy in rural community of
    Pakistan: A description of one hundred patients J Coll Physicians
    Surgeon Pakistan 2002. 12 (12): 728-30.

7.  Akhtar I A, Lannaccone S T, Ilyas M S, Abdullah M, Saleem S,.
    Epidemiology of Epilepsy in Pakistan: review of literature. J Pak
    Med Assoc 2003. 53, (12):594-6.

8.  Adeuja AO, Aderanti CO. Utilization of the electroencephalographic
    (EEG) service in a tertiary health care institution: a six year
    study. Afr J Med Med Sci 1999. 28(1-2):91-6.

9.  Mohammad Imtiaz, Tahira S Lzhar, Noreen Akmal. Electro-
    Encephalographic findings and clinical sympthomatology in 50 cases
    of complex partial seizures. Paksitan Paediatric Journal 1997. 21
    (2):81-5.

10. Smith D Bartolo, R. Pickles PM, Tedman BM. Request for
    electroencephalography in a district general Hospital: Retrospective
    and prospective audit BMJ 2001. 322 (7292) 954-7.

11. Nicolaides P, Appleton RE, Beirne M. EEG requests in paediatrics:an
    audit Arch Dis Child 1995.72(6):522-3

12. Heath J, Thomas B. Requests for EEG services in a district general
    hospital. Distinction needs to be made between audit and value
    judgment BMJ 2001. 13; 323 (7317):865-6.

13. Stagass et al. Psychiatric diagnostic discriminations with
    combinations of quantitative EEG variables. Br.J. Psychiatry 1984.
    144-581.

14. Grabb J.A., Weinbrger Dr. Morihisa J.M: Electroencephalogram and
    evoked potential studies of schizophrenia, in Hand Book of
    Schizophrenia Vol. The neurology of schizophrenia. 1986. New York,
    Elsevier.

15. Fenwick P. EEG studies in: Reynolds E.H and Trmble E.R (eds).
    Epilepsy and Psychiatry 1981, London, Churchil Living Stone.

16. Scott D.F and Schwartz M.A. The EEG in Schizophrenia and Depressive
    States. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1975. 126-408.
