   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 70-73 SPECIAL ARTICLE

PROVIDING EVIDENCE FOR MEDICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH PRACTICE THROUGH
SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS

   Fazal Ghani, Muhammad Irfan

INTRODUCTION
============

Because patients, each day, present with a range of unpredictable and
untimely conditions, clinicians these days are faced by an ever
increasing uncertain- ties. On the other hand clinicians face much more
diffi- culty in accepting the uncertainty, especially in the health
services. Therefore, they have to acquire the skills to recognize,
understand and master the uncertainty sur- rounding them1. This they can
do by recognizing their own skills, experience, and knowledge base. The
criti- cal appraisal skills, core skills of evidence based medi- cal
practice when acquired will help individuals under- stand and deal with
the uncertainty in practice2.

   Concurrently, the ever increasing interest in tak- ing health-care
   decision that are based on evidence from a variety of health
   professional groups has made the topic of Evidence Based Medicine
   (EBM) a global phenomenon taking place at a variety of speeds in dif-
   ferent countries3-4. With the idea already widely wel- comed by all,
   the scope of EBM has become very broad. This can be seen from the
   increased collaboration be- tween individuals and organizations in
   their effort to ex- ploit their potential for improved patient’s
   care6-11. Now we see an increasing number of randomized controlled
   trials (RCT), systematic reviews (SSRs), increased links between
   researchers and organizations and number of position statements and
   development of clinical prac- tice guidelines2,3,5,12-16.

The aims of this paper are; first to explain what is evidence based
medical practice and to give a brief overview of the design of a
systematic review and high- light their importance in the practice of
evidence based medicine. This is in no way exhaustive review of the
subject but is basically intended to increase awareness and interest of
the reader in the subject.

EVIDENCE BASED MEDICINE (EBM)
=============================

Evidence based medicine is employing a consci- entious, explicit and
judicious use of current best evi-

   **Fazal Ghani,** PhD, FDSRCPSGlasg, FRSM, MSc, CMP, BDS, BSc.
   Department of Prosthodontics, Khyber College of Dentistry, University
   Campus, Peshawar, Pakistan..

   E-mail: fazalg55@yahoo.co.in

   **Muhammad Irfan,** Department of Psychiatry, PGMI, Lady Reading
   Hospital, Peshawar. E-mail: mirfan78@yahoo. com.

   **Correspondence: Dr. Fazal Ghani**

dence in making decisions about the care of individual patients. It is
basically an approach to medical care through integration of systematic
assessment of clini- cally relevant scientific evidence relating to the
patient’s medical history with the health-care providers clinical
expertise and the patients treatment needs10,16-20. It is a subject and
philosophy of care that seeks to ensure that all involved in
patients-care and even the patients them- selves are equipped with
unbiased up-to-date knowl- edge about a clinical decision and the best
treatment alternative for a contemporary clinical problem.

*Sources of Evidence*
---------------------

The evidence for EBM is searched through elec- tronic retrieval of
papers, critical appraisal of original studies, reports and reviews
based on research. How- ever, identifying and finding this research is
not easy. It can not only be costly and time-consuming but also not
easily understood by the busy practitioners. Most of the resources may
be beyond the ordinary practitioners in almost all developing countries.
For this purpose, they are being helped, by others, making this search
easy, fast and affordable to explore evidence for their clinical
decisions, through the establishment of special libraries and
publication of systematic reviews (SSRs). At all lev- els, there is,
also, now a considerable emphasis put on the importance of using robust
study designs that ensure conducting good quality primary research
trials7,9,10,15,16,21-27.

*Quality of Evidence*
---------------------

Broadly, research may be categorized as primary research or it may be a
secondary research in the form of literature reviews25. Primary research
being new and based on individual studies when of good quality is the
best source for finding evidence about a problem2,5,18,24. In the
presence of a wealth of high quality research stud- ies addressing some
health questions, pertaining to treat- ment, diagnosis, relevant to the
management of an indi- vidual case, the potential for evidence will be
good. But when there is a patchy coverage of the area in question with
little generalizable evidence relating to the problem, the uncertainty
has to be acknowledged, rationally man- aged or a good clinical judgment
has to be used1,28.A problem is that all areas of health-care services
and all questions have never received the attention of primary research
with some areas particularly neglected, espe- cially those in developing
counties. It is also very time- consuming to design, fund and publish
high quality pri-

   mary research in clinical disciplines. Even when the evi- dence from
   good quality trials is available from a coun- try, it could not be
   applicable to the populace in other countries. Lastly, in many
   countries including specifically Pakistan, high quality primary
   research could not be done for problems of funding, infrastructure
   and recruit- ment, training and retention of clinical academic staff.

*Problems of Using Published Material For* Evidence
---------------------------------------------------

The driving force for searching the evidence is the ongoing tension
between what is known and that is yet to be known and what is certain
and what is to be ascer- tained. Even if an individual clinician is
trained in the skills of critical appraisal of research, he or she
usually faces difficulty in practicing these skills due to many rea-
sons5,13,14,17,19,24. One may be the problem of prompt and convenient
access to relevant research publications in the work place. Another may
be the time restraint. It usually requires sifting through huge volume
of work available on a problem or question. Even after manag- ing all
the above, the more frequent and common expe- rience of much work
available falling short of modern standards of objectively structured
methodological qual- ity is highly frustrating to many.

Keeping the above in mind, the clinician is required to be able to
constructively critique the primary re- search2,6,17,18,20. Only then he
or she will be able to inte- grate useful research conducted to the
standards of the day. All that is necessary to do this is that the
clinician has adopted a constructive and professional mindset in making
own assessment of published work. During the appraisal of a research
study, primarily one will look for the presence of quality and relevance
in relation to the clinical case or question with reference to the
character- istics of population studied, study setting or environment,
the procedure or intervention assessed and the degree to which the
findings of the study should influence an individual clinical
practice2,15,17.

SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS
==================

Evidence based medical practice starts with the critical appraisal of
primary research29. The findings of relevant primary research trials are
synthesized in Sys- tematic Reviews (SSRs). In systematic reviews, the
strength of evidence is established across a number of studies. This is
done by a systematic synthesis, using robust and comparable analyses of
the findings. Ide- ally, in systematic reviews, a number of randomized
con- trolled trials are reviewed6,8,15,17,22. Then a rigorous, com-
posite overview of the degree of success of a particular intervention or
treatment is made through a meta-analy- sis2,5,8,20,24,25.

Usually, the quality and reliability of systematic reviews is considered
good if these are produced by organization like Cochrane Collaboration.
The Cochrane Collaboration is an international organization helping

people make informed decisions about health-care by preparing,
maintaining and promoting the accessibility of systematic reviews and
the effects of health-care in- terventions (For further details please
visit www.cochrane.org).

The conduct and interpretation of the findings of systematic reviews may
be easy where the evidence is plentiful, and coming from a reasonable
number of high quality randomized controlled trials. Interpretation of
find- ings of SSRs may become difficult in situations where the evidence
is different, limited and when it of very vari- able quality.

*Quality and limitations of Systematic Reviews*
-----------------------------------------------

Systematic reviews are the cornerstones of evi- dence based medical
practices. It involves a thorough, unbiased, explicit and systematic
process whereby all the evidence to specific well-defined review
question is sought and appraised in terms of quality and relevance. The
utility and quality of the resultant systematic review is influenced by
the review question and literature re- view conducted.

Most clinicians having the experience of reading systematic reviews
would have realized the inherently unpredictable nature of SSRs. The
outcome of an SSR is certainly dependent on the objective analyses of
the only those studies that meet the specific inclusion crite-
ria2,6,12,13,16-19,27. On many occasions and to many research- ers and
policy makers, recognition of these criteria re- mains unknown before
the start of an SR. Another prob- lem is that many studies, despite
being oft-cited and popular, unexpectedly fail to pass the pre-set
threshold of methodological quality. There are many other prob- lems
which affect the quality of a systematic review. These include:

-  Use of inadequate search strategies.

-  Inadequate inclusion and exclusion criteria.

-  Use of inadequate screening and quality as- sessment of papers.

-  Pooling of data.

-  Subjective bias in interpretation of findings.

-  The way of reporting SSRs8,13,15,18,20,25. Guidelines for conducting,
   reporting and improve-

ment of the quality of SSRs have been laid down by ex-

pert groups and organizations and their consideration have been shown to
have beneficial effects10, 17.

*Foundations of Evidence Based Medical* Practice
------------------------------------------------

There is a need for joint effort from the research- ers, sponsors and
health-service organization for a planned dissemination of research
findings. An effective and sincere coalition among researchers,
industry, care-

   providers and professional organizations is a need of the time. With
   the establishment of close links between researchers, teachers and
   professional research asso- ciations evidence based practice could be
   promoted by raising awareness about the use of SSRs in routine clini-
   cal practice.

   Well planned SSRs have the potential to change the practice of helath
   professional for the benefit of their patients . For example Cochrane
   reviews that demon- strated that adding artesunate, a new
   antimalarial drug, to existing drug regimens dramatically reduces the
   risk of treatment failure29 can help to to save thousands of lives in
   developing countries.

   However, in the presence of now well-documented 90/10 gap in medical
   research (less than 10% of global funding is allocated for the
   research that affect over 90% of the world population30, SSRs cannot
   help to identify the answers to these questions on their own because
   the randomized trials answering the questions for most of the
   conditions we face in this part of the world simply do not exist.
   Increasing the proportion of systematic re- viewers from the
   developing world can improve this situ- ation which is only possible
   if we can demonstrate in our practice that the evidence base for the
   intervention we need in this part of the world is inadequate. SSRs
   can also help to identify the relevant research questions that need
   to be answered for effective health care provision in these
   countries, one of the most important but unfor- tunately commonly
   ignored steps in conducting research. Properly conducted SSRs should
   be able to inculcate a spirit of critical approach to the scientific
   literature, which at present is blind spot in our training and
   practice.

   Specialty organizations such as Pakistan Psychi- atric Society can
   play a vital role in this. Publication of abstracts of systematic
   reviews in the Cochrane Corner, a regular feature of JPPS is an
   example which other jour- nal can follow. It is important to identify
   gap in our knowl- edge areas and to instill funding in to those.
   Research funding bodies such as PMRC, Pakistan Science Foun- dation
   and the Federal and Provincial Health Ministries must consider only
   the funding of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and systematic
   reviews (SSRs) that aim to answer the question which are relevant to
   our settings. The professional associations also need to be aware of
   the benefits of the EBM by promoting the high quality research that
   is directly relevant to practice and care.

   There is also a need for establishing a close link between medical
   education and research to redesign and initiate undergraduate,
   postgraduate and professional de- velopment programmes so that
   teaching is done effec- tively and ethically to prepare the doctors
   who are well equipped with the skills to appraise and apply the evi-
   dence needed in their practice. They should be able to understand
   both the basic and applied science, able to manage the uncertainty
   and understand the importance of knowledge development. The young
   doctors must be willing to remain updated and willing to change
   clinical

   procedures over their lifetime clinical practice. This, they can
   easily do when they are taught critical appraisal skills (CAS) which
   unfortunately is rarely part of the medical curricula in Pakistan at
   present.

CONCLUSION
==========

   It is need of the hour to focus on conducting good quality research
   and conducting randomized controlled trials and systematic reviews.
   This will then establish cred- ible evidence for the practice of
   medicine.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Richards D. Accepting uncertainty. Evidence Based Dent 2004: 5; 59.

2.  Guyatt D, Sackett D, Sinclair J, Hayward R, Cook D, Cook R. User’s
    guide to the medical literature. IX. A method for grading the
    health-care recommendations. J Am Med Assoc 1995; 274: 1800 - 4.

3.  Slavin B. Best evidence synthesis. An intelligent alterna- tive to
    meta-analyses. J Clin Epidemiol 1995; 48: 9 -18.

4.  National Institutes for Clinical Excellence Guidelines [Online] 2006
    [Cited on October 20, 2006] Available from:
    `URL://http://www.nice.org.uk/nice-web. <http://www.nice.org.uk/nice-web>`__

5.  Cook DJ, Sackett DL, Spitzer WO. Methodological guidelines for
    systematic reviews of randomized con- trolled trials in health care
    from the potsdam consulta- tion on meta-analyses. J Clin Epidemiol
    1995; 48: 167 – 71.

6.  Clark M, Oxman M. Locating and selecting Studies. In: Clark M, Oxman
    M editors\ **.** Cochrane Reviewer’s Hand- book. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press.

7.  Britton A, McKee M, Black N, McPherson K, Sanderson C, Bain C.
    Choosing between randomized and non ran- domized studies. A
    systematic review. Health Technol Assess 1998; 2: 1- 24.

8.  Clark MJ, Stewart IA. Obtaining data from randomized controlled
    trials. How much do we need for reliable and informative
    meta-analyses. BMJ 1994; 309: 1007-10.

9.  Cook RJ, Sackett DL. The number needed to treat (NNT). A clinical
    useful measure of treatment effect. BMJ 1995; 310: 452- 4.

10. Drunning M, Abi-Aad G, Gilber D, Gillam S, Levitt H. Experience,
    evidence and every day practice. London: King’s Fund Publishing
    1999.

11. Counsell C. Formulating the question and locating stud- ies for
    inclusion in systematic reviews. In: Mulrow C, Cook D, editors.
    Systematic reviews- synthesis of the best evidence for health-care
    decisions. Philadelphia: Am Coll Physicians 1998: 67 - 79.

12. Sackett D, Wennberg J. Choosing the best research design for each
    question. BMJ 1997; 315: 1636.

13. Vickers A, Guyal N , Harlands R, Rees R. Do certain countries
    produce only positive results. A systematic review of controlled
    trials. Control Clin Trial 1998; 19: 159 - 66.

14. Goodman C. Specify inclusion criteria for studies. Swed- ish Council
    on Technology Assessment in Health-care (SCTAHC). [Online] 2005
    [Cited on May 12, 2006] Avail- able from: URL://http://
    `www.sbu.se/sbu-site/report. <http://www.sbu.se/sbu-site/report>`__

15. Squires BP. Structured abstracts of original research and review
    articles. Can Med Assoc J 1990; 143: 619- 22.

16. Sackett DL. Bias in analytical research. J Chron Dis 1979; 32: 51 -
    63.

17. Tramer MR, Reynolds DJ, Moore RA, McQuay MJ. Im- pact of covert
    duplicate publication on meta-analyses. A case study. BMJ 1997; 315:
    635 -40.

18. Walter S. Method of reporting statistical results for medi- cal
    research studies. Am J Epidemiol 1995; 141: 896 - 906.

19. Pitts N. Understanding the jigsaw of Evidence based dentistry. Part
    II: Dissemination of research results. Evid Based Dent 2004; 5: 33 -
    5.

20. Evans D, Hains A. Implementing evidence based changes in
    health-care. Oxford: Redcliffe Medical Press; 2000.

21. Pitts N. Understanding the jigsaw of evidence based dentistry. Part
    III: Implementation of research findings in clinical practice. Evid
    Based Dent 2004; 5: 33 - 5.

22. Ghani F. The authors, reviewers and editors triad: Its impact on
    quality of papers, contents of journal and image of science. J Pak
    Dent Assoc 2006; 16: in Press.

23. Niederman E, Richards D, Matthews D, Shugars D, Worthington H, Shaw
    W. International standards for clini-

..

   cal trial conduct and reporting. J Dent Res 2003; 82: 415 - 6.

24. Moher D, Schulz KF, Altman D. The CONSORT state- ment: revised
    recommendations for improving the qual- ity of reports of
    parallel-group randomized trials. J Am Med Assoc 2001; 285:1987- 91.

25. Moher D, Jones A, Lepage L. Use of the CONSORT statement and quality
    of reports of randomized trials: a comparative before-and-after
    evaluation. J Am Med Assoc *2001;* 285:1992 - 5.

26. Moher D, Cook DJ, Eastwood S, Olkin I, Rennie D, Stroup DF.
    Improving the quality of reports of meta- analyses of randomised
    controlled trials: the QUOROM statement. Quality of Reporting of
    Meta- analyses. *Lancet* 1999; 354:1896–1900.

27. Richardson WS, Wilson MC, Nishikawa J, Hay- ward RS. The well-built
    clinical question: a key to evidence-based decisions. ACP J Club
    1995; 123: A12–A13.

28. Moher D, Jones A, Lepage L. Use of the CONSORT Statement and quality
    of reports: A Comparative Be- fore-and-After Evaluation. J Am Med
    Assoc 2001;285:1992-5.

29. Olliaro P, Mussano P. Amodiaquine for treating malaria. Cochrane
    Database Syst Rev 2003; 2: CD000016 .

30. WHO. Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Health Re- search relating to
    future intervention options. Investing in health research and
    development. Geneva: WHO,1996.
