   JPPS 2006; 3(1): 1–2

FREE PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENT FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
– CASE FOR A PUBLIC HEALTH INTERVENTION

   Saeed Farooq

EDITORIAL

Schizophrenia ranks 6th in the league of causes of disability worldwide
as measured by Years of Life lived with Disability\ **1.** Consequently
in many developed coun- tries it has been target of major service
initiatives such as early intervention for psychosis\ **2.** The
treatment of severe mental illness, particularly schizophrenia has not
received much attention in developing countries mostly due to focus on
high prevalence disorders such as de- pression. This is unfortunate.
These countries have pre- dominantly younger population, an age of high
risk for schizophrenia. It has been estimated that about 45% of those
suffering from schizophrenia worldwide by the year 2000 were living in
the developing world\ **3.**

Two important articles in this issue, both from In- dia, highlight the
issues we face in the care for this disor- der in our countries. While
Grover et al in an exhaustive review on the cost of treatment for
schizophrenia show that schizophrenia results in high cost for the
health sys- tems, Prathap in his insightful guest editorial highlights
an often-neglected issue of putting the evidence in proper context.
These articles should help us to think innova- tive strategies to
provide care for those suffering from this chronic disorder.

The care for schizophrenia in developing countries is characterized by
the following:

-  Treatment limited mostly to the acute epi- sodes.

-  Lack of continuity of care.

-  Lack of legislation or its implementation where it exists for the
      care of those who refuse treatment.

-  The sole responsibility of the family to pro- vide the care due to
      almost total absence of formal social, psychological or
      rehabilitation services.

Most individuals are, therefore left to cope with this devastating
illness on their own\ **4**. A great majority of pa- tients are simply
not able to afford even the basic treat- ment which results in high
untreated prevalence of

   Correspondence:

   Dr. Saeed Farooq, MCPS, FCPS

   Associate Professor and Head Department of Psychiatry. PGMI Lady
   Reading Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan.

   E-mail: sfarooqlrh@yahoo.com

schizophrenia in the form of undetected as well as inad- equately and
partially treated cases\ **5**. While the progno- sis of schizophrenia
in developing countries has gener- ally been found to be better than
that in developed coun- tries, the great burden of untreated cases does
put a huge burden on the families of the sufferers. Besides, this
untreated prevalence results in enormous public health consequences
which are now well documented in context of literature on duration of
untreated psycho- sis These include increased co-morbid substance abuse,
suicide, increased treatment resistance and perhaps a steep decline in
treatment response, impairment in cog- nitive and neuropsychological
functions, offending be- havior, vocational failure and overall poor
outcome\ **6.**

This pattern of care and its consequences are not much different from
the care of other chronic diseases in developing countries. The present
situation of care for chronic disorders such as Diabetes Mellitus in
develop- ing counties has been succinctly described by the WHO as RADAR
syndrome7. The RADAR syndrome is charac- terized by following: the
patient appears in acute epi- sode, is treated, discharged from the care
and then dis- appears from radar screen of caregivers, only to reap-
pear in the case of another relapse. However, there are two important
differences which make the care of schizo- phrenia even worse when
compared to other chronic medical conditions. These are:

1. Almost a complete lack of involvement of primary care physicians in
      the care of those suffering with a psychotic disorders. (In con-
      trast to even other psychiatric disorders such as depression in
      which the general practi- tioners are now getting increasingly
      involved, though not optimally).

2. Inability of the caregivers and those who suf- fer from the disorder
      to influence policy mak- ers and the health professionals for the
      allo- cation of appropriate resources.

While there are major policy initiatives for the care of other chronic
disorders even in resource poor coun- tries there is hardly any concern
for schizophrenia. This is unfortunate in view of not only the huge
burden of dis- ease caused by the disorder but also the fact that the
cost effective interventions for schizophrenia are avail- able and can
be easily implemented in the community. Out of 20 recommendations for
optimal treatment sug- gested by Schizophrenia Patient Outcome Research

Team (PORT), 14 relate to the pharmacological interven- tions and ECT.
The researchers in this project were also asked to rate all the
interventions available for schizo- phrenia in their ease of
implementation. Pharmacologi- cal interventions were rated highest on
the ease for imple- mentation compared to the other non-pharmacological
interventions\ **8.**.

Fortunately, the pharmacological treatment for schizophrenia is not
expensive. Grover et al in their re- view in this issue point out that
the monthly cost of treat- ment in India with chlorpromazine is Rupees
55, an equivalent dose of trifluperazine amounted to Rs. 25/ month,
risperidone Rs 60 and clozapine Rs. 225 per month. Based on our own
experience with a pilot project in which we are providing free
pharmacological treatment in defined catchment area (district Peshawar),
the aver- age cost for 6 months treatment with the cheapest avail- able
local brands of atypical antipsychotics is Rs.8640.

The major problem, however, is to ensure the ac- cess to the treatment
and adherence to it. One of the major reasons for the poor compliance in
most resource poor countries including our own is the inability of the
patient to afford the treatment although as discussed earlier it is
relatively inexpensive.

What can be done to cope with this situation? As mentioned earlier the
situation is generally not different from other chronic diseases like
Diabetes Mellitus. It would be appropriate to look at the solutions
which have been suggested in other chronic conditions. A cursory look at
the interventions for these disorders would sug- gest a sharp contrast
with schizophrenia. In almost all of the chronic disorders the emphasis
is now on a public health approach to combat the burden of disease
caused by non communicable diseases particularly in develop- ing
countries. Various public health approaches have been tried and
implemented. These range from early de- tection and aggressive public
health campaigns to ad- dress the high risk factors, to providing free
access to the treatment. In case of schizophrenia we have consis- tently
lagged behind in advocating a public health ap- proach. With the
exception of efforts to reduce the stigma for mental disorders in
general, the public health inter- ventions have rarely been described in
schizophrenia.

There may be genuine reasons for lack of this ap- proach. Schizophrenia
is a low prevalence disorder. It is not easy to diagnose or screen with
tools which can be applied at the populations’ level. The primary
prevention is practically not feasible. The effective interventions
which could be applied at the community level were not available till
recently. However, I believe the case for sec- ondary prevention has
generally been not advocated well at least in developing countries where
the treatment gap is very wide mainly due to poor access to the
treatment.

It is now time that the mental health professionals in developing
countries advocate a public health ap- proach for coping with the
disorder. The cornerstone for this strategy should be provision of free
pharmacologi-

cal treatment for those who can not afford it. In Pakistan many health
initiatives are based on improving the ac- cess to the treatment for
poor patients. For example, the provincial government of North West
Frontier Province has established an endowment fund which will help to
provide free treatment for Hepatitis for those who can not afford it.
Six months treatment of oral drugs for a single case of Hepatitis C on
average would costs Rs.45000. There are similar other initiatives for
Diabetes Mellitus, Tuberculosis and many other chronic disorders
requiring long term treatment. The drugs costs for the treatment of all
these disorders are much higher than that needed for schizophrenia.

Providing pharmacological treatment either free or at subsidize rates to
the poor families will only help to meet less than 5% of the total cost
these family have to bear. The rest would still be born by the families,
not to mention the emotional and social costs they are doomed to pay for
the care of their dear ones. It can not be over- emphasized that the
family is already subsidizing the treatment of schizophrenia for society
and the state at large by providing the social, psychological,
residential and occupational support which constitutes the major
proportion of the total cost of treatment by the state spon- sored
institutions in the West. Providing free access to the treatment for
those who suffer from schizophrenia needs to be advocated forcefully,
not as a charity mea- sure but as a cost effective public health
intervention.

   REFERENCES

1. Mathers CD, Bernard C, Iburg KM, Inoue M, Fat DM, Shibuya K, et al
   .Global burden of disease in 2002: data sources, methods and results.
   Geneva: World Health Organization 2003.

2. Shiers D, Lester H..Early intervention for first episode psychosis
   needs greater involvement of primary care professionals for its
   success [editorial]. Br Med J 2004;328:1451-2.

3. Goldberg D, Mubbashar M, Mubbashar S. Develop- ment in mental health
   services – a world view. Int Rev Psychiat 2000; 12: 240-8.

4. World Health Organization. Investing in mental health. Geneva: World
   Health Organization 2003.

5. Jablensky. Prevalence and incidence of schizophre- nia spectrum
   disorder :implications for prevention. Aust NZ J Psychiat 2000; 34:
   S26-38.

6. Hambrect M, Hafner H. Substance abuse and the onset of schizophrenia.
   Biol Psychiat 1996; 40: 1155-63.

7. Lehman AF, Kreyenbuhl J, Buchanan RW, Dickerson FB, Dixon LB,
   Goldberg R, et al. The schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team
   (PORT): updated treatment recommendations 2003. Schizophrenia Bull
   2004; 30:193-217.

8. WHO. Observatory on health care for chronic condi- tions. Chronic
   conditions: current systems of care. [Online]. Available from URl: //
   `http://www.who.int. <http://www.who.int/>`__
