JPPS 2007; 4(1): 50–51 CASE REPORT
----------------------------------

MOTHER WHO KILLS HER CHILDREN: A CASE REPORT
############################################


   **Abdul Malik Achakzai, Pashtoon Murtaza Kasi**

ABSTRACT
========

   Puerperal psychosis is not uncommon in women passing through
   postnatal period, while neglect and harm to the baby is an important
   complication of this psychiatric disorder. We report a case, in which
   a mother in her postnatal period killed two children consecutively.
   The psychopathology, cultural beliefs and the legal aspects of this
   serious psychiatric problem are discussed.

:Keywords:** Postpartum Psychosis, Postpartum depression, Infanticide.

INTRODUCTION
============

Puerperal psychosis are more frequent in primiparous women, usually
within the first 1-2 weeks after delivery. Puerperal illnesses are very
common in developing countries and mostly with an organic aeti- ology.

Here we present a rare but tragic complication of post partum psychosis
i.e. infanticide. “Since 1858, when Marce wrote a treatise on puerperal
psychosis, the prob- lems that some women experience in the postpartum
period have been the subject of much confusion”1. Es- pecially with
respect to postpartum psychosis and the very important and tragic
consequences of neglect and harm to the baby, there is dearth of data2.

   CAS\ **E** HISTOR\ **Y**

A 27 year old woman presented to the psychiatry department of our
hospital after having seen multiple ‘faith healers’/’Religious healers’
and a few local general prac- titioners.

According to the family and the husband who ac- companied the lady, the
history dated back 5 years ago when they had their first born child. The
delivery was normal and there were no associated complications.

Soon after the delivery, the family noted a change in her behavior but
this was ignored and taken to be the usual postpartum blues. However,
when the husband re- turned home he found the newborn killed by a knife
with the lady sitting beside the child. She was beaten up, abused and
labeled as cursed. Since then she was taken to multiple faith healers
and it was stated the particular

 .. admonition:: About the Authors
   **Abdul Malik Achakzai,** MBBS., MRCPsych, MCPS (Psych),
   Principal Bolan Medical College, Head Department of Psychia- try,
   Bolan Medical College, Quetta, Pakistan.

   **Pashtoon Murtaza Kasi,** M.B.,B.S. Aga Khan University, 8-13/ 36,
   Kasi Road, Quetta, Pakistan. Phone: 92306-3737347
   pashtoon.kasi@gmail.com

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. Pashtoon Murtaza Kasi**

‘devil’ responsible is now gone. The couple was practic- ing
contraception but seeing that the lady was now nor- mal, they had
another child. Similarly but tragically, the second child also succumbed
to similar circumstances. The first born was a female but the second
born was a male child. There was no previous history of any psychi-
atric disorder in the lady.

The patient was admitted in the psychiatry ward and received
electroconvulsive therapy and was put on several medications as well.
She was doing well till discharge and the later follow-up visit, but the
tragic episodes still scar her and her family’s minds.

DISCUSSION
==========

In a prospective study done on 50 patients admit- ted during the
postpartum period for severe mental ill- ness, “nearly half (43%) of the
mothers reported infanti- cidal ideas, 36% reported infanticidal
behavior, and 34% reported both infanticidal ideas and be-havior” 3.

Several risk factors have also been identified2. In the Indian study,
‘having a female infant’, ‘psychotic ideas towards the infant’, and
‘adverse mental reaction towards the separation from the infant’ were
significantly associ- ated with infanticidal behavior4 .

There is need to integrate postpartum psychiatric care, especially at
the primary care level, so that a large number of people can be screened
for these disorders in the postpartum period, so as to avoid the tragic
complications later. Mental health services for postpar- tum period and
for the public in general need to be improved. The liaison between
obstetricians and gynecologists and psychiatrists will also have to be
strengthened to correctly identify and prevent the com- plications of
postpartum disorders. Training of Lady Health Visitors (LHVs) in the
country in identifying dan- ger signs and symptoms may be an option
worth con- sidering.

Along with this, there are three other issues that need attention and
need to be reiterated. Firstly, are there specific laws and do our
legislations recognize this in-

fanticide as a complication of postpartum psychosis? And secondly, do we
need to regulate these faith-healers or even integrate them into
psychiatric care, because as seen mostly, religious healers are often
the first level of contact for psychiatric disorders in the country?4
And fi- nally, can we help reduce the disparity against our women? As
said very nicely by Spinelli, “we as a world society can do a far better
job of protecting moth- erhood.”5

REFERENCES
==========

1. Robinson GE, Stewart DE. Postpartum psychiatric dis- orders. Can Med
   Assoc J 1986; 134: 31-7.

2. Chandra PS. Post-partum psychiatric care in India: the need for
   integration and innovation. World Psy- chiatry 2004; 3: 99-100.

3. Chandra PS, Venkatasubramanian G, Thomas T. In- fanticidal ideas and
   infanticidal behaviour in Indian women with severe postpartum
   psychiatric disorders. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2002;190:457–61.

4. Gilani AI, Gilani UI, Kasi PM, Khan MM. Psychiatric health laws in
   Pakistan: from lunacy to mental health. PLoS Med 2005; 2: e317.

5. Spinelli MG. Infanticide: contrasting views. Arch Womens Ment Health
   2005y; 8: 15-24.
