   M. S. Bhatia, Lakshmi Vaid

ABSTRACT
========

**Objectives:** The present study was conduced with aims to find out the
pattern of symptoms and drug abuse in patients suffering from
psychogenic cough.

**Design:** A cross sectional descriptive study

   **Place and duration of study**: A tertiary care teaching hospital

   **Subjects and methods:** In the present study, a series of thirty
   two cases of psychogenic cough is reported.

**Results:** Of 32 cases, there were 19 females (59.4%) and 13 males
(40.6%). A majority of patients had cough for more than one month.
School phobia (in children) and fear of rejection and need for attention
were the commonest precipitating or perpetuating factors. Seventeen
patients (53.1%) had a psychiatric disorder, the commonest being
conversion disorder (21.9%) followed by mixed anxiety and depressive
disorder (12.5%). Drug therapy and/or psychotherapy were used as
treatment with, 12 cases (37.5%) showing remission, 16 cases (50.0%)
having improvement and 4 cases (12.5%) continuing with the complaint.

**Conclusion:** Psychogenic cough needs timely recognition and
appropriate treatment to avoid drug abuse. Further studies are warranted
to study the treatment and outcome of this important psychiatric
disorder.

**Key words:** Psychogenic cough, Symptoms, Comorbidity, Drug abuse

*INTRODUCTION*
==============

Psychogenic or “nervous” cough has generally been viewed as a clinical
oddity and largely ignored by specialists text-books of medicine,
psychiatry and otorhinolaryngology :sup:`1-3`. The different names given
to it are listed in Table-1.

An automatic cough is a vagal sensory reflex occurring when irritant
receptors located in the larynx, trachea or large bronchi are
stimulated\ :sup:`4`. It is classified as a tic disorder which is
defined as sudden, quick involuntary and frequently repeated movements
of a physiological group of muscles that serve no apparent
purpose\ :sup:`5,6`. Psychogenic or barking cough is defined as a
respiratory tic. This nervous laryngeal cough or cry is emitted on an
expiratory spasmodic contraction of the glottic adductors, repeated at
frequent intervals during the day and generally ceasing during sleep. It
consists of a short sharp, usually grating explosive cough that
resembles the bark of a dog or the squeal of a puppy and as a rule can
be resisted only for a time at the expense of painful emotion. There is
no expectoration, no subsequent breathlessness or fatigue and no change
in the voice. Great anger exercises a controlling influence, as does
distraction, such as may be occasioned by a laryngeal examination.
Spraying the larynx with a topical anaesthetic does not seem to affect
the condition. The patient claims to be unable to repeat the cough when
requested to do. A central feature in differentiating psychogenic from
ordinary coughing is its unusual loudness\ :sup:`7`. It is usually
croupy, barky and explosive and disappears during sleep. It is resistent
to antitussive medications. A typical ‘chin on chest’ posture with the
hand held to the neck while coughing may be noticed in some of the
patients. The physical examination of the respiratory system as well as
various routine investigations do not reveal any relevant abnormality.
It may be precipitated by various factors such as social distress and
withdrawal, dissatisfaction in family, an expression of hostility or
self-punishment, an upward displacement of genital conflicts, a plea for
assorted secondary gains, conflicts, over closeness, fear of rejection
and need for attention\ :sup:`8,9`\ To control psychogenic cough,
different types of remedies are tried by the physicians as well as
patients themselves putting them at the risk of adverse effects of
medicines and at times abuse and dependence on them. Since there is
paucity of literature on psychogenic cough but none on the pattern of
drug abuse in it, the present study was undertaken with the aims to
study the sociodemographic and clinical details of patients diagnosed as
suffering from psychogenic cough and developed drug abuse or dependence
on different cough suppressants.

*SUBJECTS AND METHODS*
======================

The present study was conducted in a tertiary care teaching hospital.
All 25 consecutive cases of psychogenic coughing were studied over a
period of three years (August 1999 to July 2002). The patients

were screened by the Otorhinolaryngologist and then referred to the
Psychiatry outpatient department. All the patients were subjected to
detailed history (on a semistructured proforma), physical examination
and mental status examination (independently by two psychiatrists). The
relevant blood and radiological investigations were done wherever
required to assess physical status. Examination of the throat, nose and
ear was done in every case to rule out the organic disease.The
precipitating or exacerbating factors were also recorded. Patients
having unreliable history and doubtful organicity were excluded. The
nature of drugs abused by these patients was recorded. Comorbid
psychiatric disorder was diagnosed and classified as per ICD-10 by
WHO(1992). Sociodemographic and clinical details along with
precipitating factors of psychogenic cough were analysed at the end of
the study period.

*RESULTS*
=========

   During the study period, 25 cases were diagnosed as suffering from
   psychogenic cough.Mean age was

28.2 years in males and 23.4 in females. There were 20 males (80.0%) and
5 females (20.0%) and majority of patients had the cough for more than
six months (60%) (Table 2). Stress of work, fear of performance in
examinations and interpersonal problems were the common precipitating or
perpetuating factors.

The types of drug abuse seen were Dextromethorphan (32%), codeine
(16%),noscapine(12%), promethazine (8%), diphenhydramine (8%),
xylometazoline nasal drops(4%) and polydrug abuse(20%)(Table 2).Sixteen
cases(64%) started drug abuse on the over-the-counter drugs and 9 cases
due iatrogenic factors. The reasons given by the patients for
continuation of these drugs are given in Table 2.

Six patients(24%) had conversion disorder, 6(24%) had mixed anxiety and
depressive disorder,5(20%) had generalized anxiety disorder, 2(4%) had
adjustment disorder with depression, 1(4%) had phobic disorder and 5
cases(20%) did not have any comorbid psychiatric disorder.

*DISCUSSION*
============

Although ‘psychogenic cough’ is not rare, very few detail descriptions
are available in the published reports\ :sup:`7,8,10`. In most of the
cases, diagnosis is delayed several weeks to several months because the
physicians do not know about this psychogenic entity\ :sup:`11`. In the
present study, majority of the patients (60%) had the duration of
psychogenic cough of six months or more.

Psychogenic cough is usually regarded as a type of respiratory tic, that
can be precipitated by various psychological problems\ :sup:`10`. In the
present study, Stress of work, fear of performance in examinations and
interpersonal problems were the main precipitating or perpetuating
factors. These factors have also been reported in some of the previous
studies\ :sup:`11`. In a study by Shuper et al\ :sup:`5` in 27% of the
patients, there was a history of upper respiratory infection preceding
the cough but in the present study, only four patients (16%) had a
history of preceding upper respiratory tract infection.

Twenty patients (80%) had a psychiatric disorder. The commonest being
conversion disorder (24%) followed by mixed anxiety and depressive
disorder (24%) and generalized anxiety disorder (20%) Five cases (20%)
did not have any overt psychiatric disorder(according to ICD-10).

Tranquilizers and cough suppressants are required only in complicated
cases.At times, their withdrawal can precipitate coughing and provoke
the patient to continue the drugs on chronic basis.There is no report of
pattern of drug abuse in patients suffering from psychogenic cough.

Dextromethorphan was the commonest type of drug abuse (one patient was
taking about 30-40 tablets containing
dextromethorphan.).Dextromethorphan abuse and dependence has also been
reported in previous studies\ :sup:`12,13`.The abuse of other compounds
used in cough syrups, tablets and nasal drops e.g. codeine, noscapine,
antihistaminics and nasal drops had been reported :sup:`14,15`.

The pattern of drug abuse indicates that the socalled safer drugs are
not without abuse and dependence potential and needs control over the
availability and prescription. Physicians and patients should be
familiar with the possibility of psychogenic factors in the etiology of
persistent cough. Early recognition and appropriate treatment can
minimize the secondary complications and eliminate troublesome
unnecessary extensive and expensive investigations and inappropriate
prolonged treatment.

   **Table-I. Different names for Psychogenic Cough**

+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Psychogenic Cough    |    Nervous Cough     |    Tussis nervosa     |
| tic                  |                      |                       |
+======================+======================+=======================+
| Habit Cough          |    Operant Cough     |    Barking Cough of   |
|                      |                      |    puberty            |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Honking              |    The bark of       |    Expiratory tic     |
|                      |    hysteria          |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Dora’s cough         |                      |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+

..

   **Table 2 : Pattern of Drug Abuse in Patients with Psychogenic
   cough**

+----------------+--------+------------------+------------------------+
|    **Drug      | **N    |    **Du          | **Reasons for          |
|    abused**    | (%)**  | ration(months)** | continuation (given by |
|                |        |                  | patients)**            |
+================+========+==================+========================+
|    De          | 6 (32) |    3 -12         | Cough;fear of          |
| xtromethorphan |        |                  | withdrawal             |
|                |        |                  | cough;anxiety          |
+----------------+--------+------------------+------------------------+
|    Codeine     | 4 (16) |    6 -15         | Irritation in throat;  |
|                |        |                  | anxiety                |
+----------------+--------+------------------+------------------------+
|    Noscapine   | 3 (12) |    1 – 9         | Irritation in throat;  |
|                |        |                  | fear of                |
|                |        |                  |                        |
|                |        |                  | withdrawal cough       |
+----------------+--------+------------------+------------------------+
|                |    2   |    3 – 12        | Fear of withdrawal     |
|   Promethazine |    (8) |                  | cough;Sedation         |
+----------------+--------+------------------+------------------------+
|    D           |    2   |    1 – 6         | Sedation;fear of cough |
| iphenhydramine |    (8) |                  |                        |
+----------------+--------+------------------+------------------------+
|                |    1   |    10            | Sne                    |
| Xylometazoline |    (4) |                  | ezing;cough;withdrawal |
|                |        |                  |                        |
|    nasal drops |        |                  |    nasal dripping      |
+----------------+--------+------------------+------------------------+
|    Poly drug   | 5 (20) |    8 – 30        | Anxiety;fear of        |
|    abuse(      |        |                  | withdrawal             |
| codeine,dextr- |        |                  | cough;throat           |
|    omet        |        |                  | irritation             |
| horphan,prome- |        |                  |                        |
|                |        |                  |                        |
|    thazine)    |        |                  |                        |
+----------------+--------+------------------+------------------------+

..

   **REFERENCES**

1.  Fauci AS, Braunwald E, Isselbacher KJ, Wilson JD, Martin JB, Kasper
    DL, Hauser SL, Longo DL. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,
    14th edition. New York : McGraw Hill, 1978.

2.  Kaplan HI, Sadock BJ. Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry, 6th
    edition. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1995.

3.  Maran AGD. Logan Turner’s Diseases of the Nose, Throat and Ear.
    Oxford : Wright, 1996.

4.  Cohlan SQ, Stone SM. The cough and the bedsheet. Pediatrics 1984; 74
    : 11-5.

5.  Brescta MA. Tics in childhood. Arch Pediatr 1938;55:703

6.  Mamford PR, Reardson D, Liberman RP, Allen L. Behavioural treatment
    of hysterical coughing and mutism : a case study. J Consult Clin
    Psychol 1976; 44 : 1008-14.

7.  Lindenbaum S, Clark D. Toward an integrative approach to
    psychotherapy with children. Am J Orthopsychiatr 1983; 53 : 449 -
    59.

8.  Erenberg G . Psychogenic cough . Pediatrics 2001;108:819-20.

9.  Malhotra S , Chakrabarti S. Psychogenic cough – a case report .
    Indian J Med Sci 1999;53:127-9.

10. Bernstein IA. A respiratory tic : “The barking cough of puberty”.
    Laryngoscope 1963; 73 : 315-9.

11. Weinberg EG. “Honking”-Psychogenic Cough tic in children. South Afr
    Med J. 1980; 57: 198- 200.

12. Noonan WC, Miller WR, Feeney DM. Dextromethorphan abuse among youth.
    Arch Fam Med 2000;9:791-2.

13. Darboe MN, Keenan GR Jr, Richards TK .The abuse of
    dextromethorphan-based cough syrup : a pilot study of the community
    of Waynesboro , Pennsylvania. Adolescence 1996;31:633-44.

14. Perera I . What you need to know : addiction – cough mixture.
    Singapore Med J 1997;38:136-137.

15. Javis JR . The nasal drop addict . South Afr Med J 1969;43:486-8.
