   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 108-110

   COCHRANE CORNER

ABSTRACTS OF COCHRANE SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS

In Cochrane Corner this time we highlight three issues which are subject
of interesting systematic re- views. These, it is hoped will help to
promote evidence based approach and identify the limited evidence we
have about problems we face commonly.

1. Deliberate self harm (DSH) is defined as harming oneself
   intentionally, with or without suicidal intent. Pre- vious history of
   DSH is a strong predictor of future sui- cide, which is found in
   40-60% of suicides. The WHO estimates that for every suicide, there
   are at least 10-20 DSH acts. Despite this the efficacy of
   psychosocial inter- vention in cases presenting with DSH remain is
   not well established. This also highlights an important advan- tage
   of the systematic reviews which help us to identify gaps in our
   knowledge. Systematic review by K Hawton et al. on Psychosocial and
   pharmacological treatments for deliberate self harm is an excellent
   endeavor.

2. History of psychiatry is replete with examples of initial enthusiasm
   followed by dismay. This is particu- larly true for drug treatment of
   schizophrenia. The dis- coveries of chlorpromazine in 1951 led to
   initial enthusi- asm and community care of patients with schizophre-
   nia. However this was followed by gruesome realization of
   irreversible side-effects like Tardive dyskinesia and Tardive
   dystonias. Atypical antipsychotics (AP) were received with similar
   fervor in the 90’s. Their side effects profile is different and
   undoubtedly better in some re- spects e.g extrapyramidal side effects
   and tardive dyskinesis... However, issues like metabolic syndrome,
   new onset Type-II diabetes mellitus surfaced as more and more
   longitudinal data become available.

Aripiprazole is one of the latest in series of atypi- cal
antipsychotics.. This drug is claimed to have novel mechanism of action.
Unlike dopamine receptor (D\ :sub:`2`) antagonism by conventional AP and
D\ :sub:`2` and 5-HT\ :sub:`2` re- ceptor antagonism by atypical AP,
Aripiprazole has a D\ :sub:`2` agonist effect. The recent systematic
review in Cochrane database of Systematic review by HG El-Sayeh and C
Morganti helps to review the evidence related to this drug.

3. Depression has been described as a comorbid of various
      neuropsychiatric conditions. In stroke, depres- sion has been
      described in at least third to half of patients. There is ample
      literature to indicate that inci- dence of stroke is on the rise
      particularly among Asians. Pakistan is no exception to this trend.
      Rising pre- valence of hypertension is implicated as one of the
      major risk factors. The management of Post-stroke Depression (PSD)
      is complicated by the comorbid physi-

..

   cal conditions, age group in which it commonly presents and
   neurological injury. However despite the high preva- lence of Post
   Stoke Depression (PSD) there is dearth of evidence on its prevention.
   The last systematic review presents some interesting findings in this
   regards.

   **Edited by: Dr. Haider A. Naqvi,** MBBS, FCPS, DCE, Senior
   Instructor, Department of Psychiatry, Aga Khan University Hospital,
   Karachi.

PSYCHOSOCIAL AND PHARMACOLOGICAL TREATMENTS
===========================================

   FOR DELIBERATE SELF HARM

   K Hawton, E Townsend, E Arensman, D Gunnell, P Hazell, A House,

   K van Heeringen

ABSTRACT
--------

   **Background:** Deliberate self-harm is a major health prob- lem
   associated with considerable risk of subsequent self-harm, including
   completed suicide.

   **Objectives:** To identify and synthesise the findings from all
   randomised controlled trials that have examined the effectiveness of
   treatments of patients who have delib- erately harmed themselves.

   **Search strategy:** Electronic databases screened: MEDLINE (from
   1966-February 1999); PsycLit (from 1974-March 1999); Embase (from
   1980-January 1999); The Cochrane Controlled Trials Register (CCTR)
   No.1 1999. Ten journals in the field of psychiatry and psychol- ogy
   were hand searched for the first version of this re- view. We have
   updated the hand search of three spe- cialist journals in the field
   of suicidal research until the end of 1998. Reference lists of papers
   were checked and trialists contacted.

*Selection criteria*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All RCTs of psychosocial and/or psychopharma- cological treatment versus
standard or less intensive types of aftercare for patients who shortly
before enter- ing a study engaged in any type of deliberately initiated
self-poisoning or self-injury, both of which are generally subsumed
under the term deliberate self-harm.

*Data collection and analysis*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Data were extracted from the original reports in- dependently by two
reviewers. Studies were catego-

   rized according to type of treatment. The outcome mea- sure used to
   assess the efficacy of treatment interven- tions for deliberate
   self-harm was the rate of repeated suicidal behaviour. We have been
   unable to examine other outcome measures as originally planned (e.g.
   com- pliance with treatment, depression, hopelessness, sui- cidal
   ideation/thoughts, change in problems/problem resolution).

*Main results*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A total of 23 trials were identified in which repeti- tion of deliberate
self-harm was reported as an outcome variable. The trials were
classified into 11 categories. The summary odds ratio indicated a trend
towards re- duced repetition of deliberate self-harm for problem-solv-
ing therapy compared with standard aftercare (0.70; 0.45 to 1.11) and
for provision of an emergency contact card in addition to standard care
compared with standard aftercare alone (0.45; 0.19 to 1.07). The summary
odds ratio for trials of intensive aftercare plus outreach com- pared
with standard aftercare was 0.83 (0.61 to 1.14), and for antidepressant
treatment compared with pla- cebo was 0.83 (0.47 to 1.48). The remainder
of the com- parisons were in single small trials. Significantly reduced
rates of further self-harm were observed for depot flupenthixol vs.
placebo in multiple repeaters (0.09; 0.02 to 0.50), and for dialectical
behaviour therapy vs. stan- dard aftercare (0.24; 0.06 to 0.93).

*Authors’ conclusions*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There still remains considerable uncertainty about which forms of
psychosocial and physical treatments of self-harm patients are most
effective, inclusion of insuf- ficient numbers of patients in trials
being the main limit- ing factor. There is a need for larger trials of
treatments associated with trends towards reduced rates of repeti- tion
of deliberate self-harm. The results of small single trials which have
been associated with statistically sig- nificant reductions in
repetition must be interpreted with caution and it is desirable that
such trials are also repli- cated. *Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews* 2006 Issue 4.

Copyright © 2006 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

ARIPIPRAZOLE FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA
==============================

   HG El-Sayeh and C Morganti

.. _abstract-1:

ABSTRACT
--------

   **Background:** Treatment of people with schizophrenia using older
   typical antipsychotic drugs such as halo- peridol can be problematic.
   Many fail to respond to these older antipsychotics and more people
   experience dis- abling adverse effects. Aripiprazole is said to be
   one of

a new generation of atypical antipsychotics with good antipsychotic
properties and minimal adverse effects.

**Objectives:** To evaluate the effects of aripiprazole for people with
schizophrenia and schizophrenia-like psy- choses.

**Search strategy:** We searched the Cochrane Schizo- phrenia Group’s
Register (September 2005) which is based on regular searches of BIOSIS,
CENTRAL, CINAHL, EMBASE, MEDLINE and PsycINFO. We in-

spected references of all identified studies for further trials. We
contacted relevant pharmaceutical companies, the FDA and authors of
trials for additional information.

.. _selection-criteria-1:

*Selection criteria*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All clinical randomised trials comparing aripiprazole with placebo,
typical or atypical antipsy- chotic drugs for schizophrenia and
schizophrenia-like psychoses.

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-1:

*Data collection and analysis*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We extracted data independently. For homog- enous dichotomous data we
calculated random effects, relative risk (RR), 95% confidence intervals
(CI) and, where appropriate, numbers needed to treat (NNT) on an
intention-to-treat basis. For continuous data, we cal- culated weighted
mean differences (WMD).

.. _main-results-1:

*Main results*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Despite the fact that 7110 people participated in fifteen randomised
aripiprazole studies, we were un- able to extract any usable data on
death, service out- comes, general functioning, behaviour, engagement
with services, satisfaction with treatment; economic out- comes or
cognitive functioning. Study attrition was very large and data reporting
poor. Compared with placebo, aripiprazole significantly decreased
relapse in both the short and medium term (n=300, 1 RCT, RR 0.66 CI 0.5
to 0.8, NNT 5 CI 4 to 8). It also produced better compliance with study
protocol (n=2271, 8 RCTs, RR 0.72 CI 0.5 to 0.97, NNT 26 CI 16 to 239).
Aripiprazole may decrease prolactin levels below that expected from
placebo (n=305, 1 RCT, RR 0.32 CI 0.1 to 0.8, NNT 14 CI 11 to

50). Compared with typical antipsychotics there were no significant
benefits for aripiprazole with regards to global state, mental state,
quality of life or leaving the study early. Both groups reported similar
rates of ad- verse effects, with the exception of akathisia (n= 955 RR

0.31 CI 0.2 to 0.6, NNT 20 CI 17 to 32) and the need for antiparkinson
medication (n=1854, 4 RCTs, RR 0.45 CI

0.3 to 0.6, NNT 4 CI 3 to 5) which were lower in those receiving
aripiprazole. When compared with olanzapine and risperidone,
aripiprazole was no better or worse on outcomes of global state and
leaving the study early. The rates of adverse effects were also similar,
with the exception of less elevation of prolactin (n=301, 1 RCT, RR 0.04
CI 0.02 to 0.1, NNT 2 CI 1 to 2.5) and less prolongation of the average
QTc (30 mg/day) (n=200, 1

   RCT, WMD -10.0, CI -16.99 to -3.0) compared with risperidone. When
   compared with standard care (mixed group receiving typical and
   atypical antipsychotics) one aripiprazole study did have
   significantly less people not responding to treatment (n=1599, RR
   0.70 CI 0.7 to 0.8, NNT 5 CI 4 to 6 ), not satisfied with care
   (n=1599, RR

   0.62 CI 0.6 to 0.7, NNT 4 CI 4 to 5) and less people leaving the
   study early (n=1599, 1 RCT, RR 0.81 CI 0.7 to 0.9, NNT 13 CI 8 to
   39). Results from the five new papers identified from the updated
   review search, did not significantly alter the main results or
   conclusions of the original review.

.. _authors-conclusions-1:

*Authors’ conclusions*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Aripiprazole may be effective for the treatment of schizophrenia, but it
does not differ greatly from typical and atypical antipsychotics with
respect to treatment re- sponse, efficacy or tolerability. In comparison
with typi- cal antipsychotics, aripiprazole may have a lower risk of
akathisia, and in comparison to atypical antipsychotics, less risk of
raised prolactin and prolongation of the QTc interval. Clearly reported
pragmatic short, medium and long term randomised controlled trials
should be un- dertaken to determine its position in everyday clinical
practice.

   *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews* 2006 Issue 4.

Copyright © 2006 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

INTERVENTIONS FOR
=================

   PREVENTING DEPRESSION AFTER STROKE

   CS Anderson, ML Hackett, AO House

.. _abstract-2:

ABSTRACT
--------

   **Background: Abnormal mood is an important conse- quence of
   str**\ oke and may affect recovery and outcome. However, depression
   and anxiety are often not detected or inadequately treated. This may
   in part be due to doubts about whether anti-depressant treatments
   commenced early after the onset of stroke will prevent depression and
   improve outcome.

   **Objectives:** To determine if pharmaceutical or psycho- logical
   interventions can prevent the onset of depres- sion, including
   depressive illness and abnormal mood, and improve physical and
   psychological outcomes, in patients with stroke.

   **Search strategy:** We searched the Cochrane Stroke Group trials
   register (June 2003). In addition we searched the following
   electronic databases: Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials
   (*The Cochrane Li- brary,* Issue 3, 2002), MEDLINE (1966 to September

   2002), EMBASE (1980 to September 2002), CINAHL

(1982 to September 2002), PsychINFO (1967 to Sep- tember 2002), Applied
Science and Technology Plus (1986 to September 2002), Arts and
Humanities Index (1991 to September 2002), Biological Abstracts (1969 to
September 2002), General Science Plus (1994 to September 2002), Science
Citation Index (1992 to Sep- tember 2002), Social Sciences Citation
Index (1991 to September 2002), and Sociofile (1974 to September 2002).
Reference lists from relevant articles and text- books were searched,
and authors of known studies and pharmaceutical companies who
manufacture psycho- tropic medications were contacted.

.. _selection-criteria-2:

*Selection criteria*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Randomised and quasi-randomised controlled tri- als comparing different
types of pharmaceutical agents (eg selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors) with placebo, or various forms of psychotherapy against
standard care (or attention control), in patients with a recent clinical
diagnosis of stroke, where the treatment was undertaken with the
explicit intention of preventing depression.

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-2:

*Data collection and analysis*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The primary analyses focussed on the proportion of patients who met the
standard diagnostic criteria for depression applied in the trials at the
end of follow-up. Secondary outcomes included depression or mood scores
on standard scales, disability or physical func- tion, death, recurrent
stroke, and adverse effects.

.. _main-results-2:

*Main results*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Twelve trials involving 1245 participants were in- cluded in the review.
Data were available for nine trials (11 comparisons) involving different
pharmaceutical agents, and three trials of psychotherapy. The time from
stroke onset to entry ranged from a few hours to six months, but most
patients were recruited within one month of acute stroke. The duration
of treatments ranged from two weeks to one year. There was no clear
effect of pharmacological therapy on the prevention of depres- sion or
on other measures. A significant improvement in mood was evident for
psychotherapy, but this treatment effect was small and from a single
trial. There was no effect on diagnosed depression.

.. _authors-conclusions-2:

*Authors’ conclusions*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This review identified a small but significant effect of psychotherapy
on improving mood, but no effect of either pharmacotherapy or
psychotherapy on the pre- vention of depressive illness, disability, or
other out- comes. More evidence is therefore required before any
recommendations can be made about the routine use of such treatments to
improve recovery after stroke.

   *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews* 2006 Issue 4.

Copyright © 2006 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
