   JPPS 2008; 5(2): 55-57 GUEST EDITORIAL

GENE DISCOVERY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA AND BIPOLAR DISORDER

   Muhammad Ayub, Douglas Blackwood

   Over the past few years there have been encouraging advances
   identifying genetic risk factors in schizophrenia and bipolar
   disorder and these may be the first steps towards understanding the
   biology of the disorders leading to novel treatment and preventative
   strategies. Recently the pace of discovery has increased as new
   microarray and DNA sequencing technologies now make it possible to
   survey very large cohorts of patients using many DNA markers to
   identify some of the many common and rare genetic variants
   contributing to the disorders. Douglas Blackwood, pro- fessor of
   psychiatric genetics at the University of Edinburgh has been working
   with Dr Muhammad Ayub, carrying out genetic linkage studies with
   families from Pakistan with bipolar disorder and depression.

INTRODUCTION
============

A remarkable series of recent studies, described as genome-wide
association studies (GWAS), represent- ing some of the largest
collaborations so far undertaken in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
may at last be providing clues about the nature of the genetic risk fac-
tors and are giving direction to discovering the underly- ing
neurobiology to these heterogeneous disorders1-7. Genome wide
association studies (GWAS) are designed to detect genetic association
between an illness and genetic markers, usually single nucleotide
polymor- phisms (SNPs), distributed across all chromosomes. Many genetic
association studies in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder have been
carried out over the past two decades and candidate genes identified but
recent de- velopments in microarrays have provided the technol- ogy to
genotype individuals from large cohorts of cases and controls using many
markers giving power to detect genes that make only small contributions
to genetic risk (odds ratio <1.5). Recently published GWAS involving
cohorts of several thousand cases and controls brought together in large
international collaborations, using over 1 million SNP markers have
identified novel genes, high- lighted the involvement of some previously
identified candidate genes and delivered unexpected findings on the role
in disease of rare micro deletions and duplica- tions , termed copy
number variants (CNVs). These dis- coveries signpost the functional
pathways involved in the pathogenesis of illness. GWAS promises to be an
important step towards an eventual understanding of

   **Muhammad Ayub**, Tees Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foun- dation Trust,
   Flatts Lane Centre, Flatts Lane, Normanby, Middlesborough TS6 OSZ,
   United Kingdom.

   E-mail: ayubawan@hotmail.com

   **Douglas Blackwood**, Division of Psychiatry, University of
   Edinburgh, Royal Edinburgh Hospital, Morningside Park, Edinburgh EH10
   5HF.

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. Muhammad Ayub**

   the neurobiology of disease by identifying some of the genes involved
   and providing initial indications of the total number and classes of
   genes contributing to these complex heterogeneous disorders. Further
   develop- ments are now likely in several directions: the discov- ery
   of individual genes will be followed by pathway analysis to uncover
   functional links between candidate genes and to identify the
   underlying biological changes in neurons and glia cells. This in turn
   will direct the search for novel drug targets and new treatment and
   preventa- tive strategies. Secondly an understanding of genetics may
   form the basis for a biological classification of the psychoses which
   at present relies on patients’ reports of symptoms. Thirdly, there is
   now need for careful debate about how novel genetic discoveries can
   best be ap- plied for the benefit of individuals and their families
   af- fected by illness. Predictive testing and accurate assess- ment
   of risk in a clinical context is not currently feasible but cannot be
   entirely ruled out in the future raising im- portant ethical issues.
   Genetic markers could also have a future role identifying sub groups
   of patients respon- sive to particular treatments and interventions
   permit- ting more targeted treatments.

The Inheritance of Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder
-----------------------------------------------------

Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder often run in families and the
classical studies of twins showing greater concordance in identical
compared with non iden- tical twins have confirmed that genetic factors
are re- sponsible with an estimated heritability of around 80%. These
findings from population genetics underpinned the substantial investment
made by many research groups into genetic linkage and association
studies in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder over the past two decades.
The discovery of different types of genetic markers coupled with
improved genotyping technolo- gies made these approaches possible on an
increas- ingly large scale. Many chromosomal locations strongly
implicated in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder were

detected and in a few cases including *DISC1* and *NRG1* evidence was
accumulated supporting the involvement of specific genes. However there
is still much uncer- tainty about the nature of the genetic risk factors
in psy- choses, the number of genes involved and the neuro- biological
pathways disrupted. While it is clear that the genetic risks for
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder can- not be explained by the actions
of one or a few major genes a genetic model that adequately accounts for
the diversity of genetic findings in these disorders has not been
defined. As with other complex disorders such as diabetes and
inflammatory bowel disease it seems likely that a large proportion of
the genetic risk factors in the psychoses are common genetic variants
present in a large proportion of the population. Common variants each
contribute only a very small risk of illness to an individual (odds
ratios <1.5) but their contribution to the prevalence of illness in the
population (population at- tributable risk) becomes substantial. Illness
is presumed to develop in an individual who has inherited multiple risk
factors just as a person’s height is determined by the interaction of
many contributing factors none of which has a major affect by itself.
However common risk fac- tors do not explain several things we know
about the genetics of psychoses. It is clear that in some individu- als
and families the disruption of a single gene is ac- companied by a high
risk of illness. For example the gene *DISC1* when disrupted in some
individuals was found to increase the risk of major mental illness about
50 fold8. In individuals who inherit the microdeletion on chromosome 22
associated with the velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS) , about 30% will
develop psychotic illness9. The recent discovery of the important role
of rare copy number variants (CNVs) in schizophrenia con- firm an
important role in schizophrenia of genes whose disruption is a major, or
indeed the main cause of illness in some individuals3,6. A model of
genetic risk in schizo- phrenia and bipolar disorder is only complete
when it includes the influence of environment on genes. How and at what
stage of development gene- environment interactions are most influential
are questions remain- ing largely unanswered.

The contribution of genome wide association studies
---------------------------------------------------

Genetic association studies, designed to compare the frequencies of
genetic markers in groups of cases and controls are simple in concept.
When a genetic marker lying within or near a gene is observed signifi-
cantly more often in cases than controls the gene is assumed likely to
have some role in disease. Many significant associations between genetic
markers and schizophrenia or bipolar disorder have been published from
studies involving relatively small numbers of mark- ers and several
hundreds of patients and controls. How- ever these studies have had
limited power to detect com- mon risk factors (OR<1.5) and are very
unlikely to de- tect rare variants. The increased marker density avail-

able on microarrays containing over 1 million SNPs and greatly expanded
cohorts of several thousand cases and controls established by pooling
clinical resources in international collaborations has now made it
possible to identify some of these important risk variants.

Recent genome wide association studies in bipolar disorder
----------------------------------------------------------

GWAS studies recently reported1,5,7 a combined analysis of over four
thousand bipolar cases and six thousand controls all of European
ancestry where two novel genes were identified showing significant
association with bipolar disorder, Ankyrin-3 gene (*ANK3)* on chromosome
10 and a calcium channel gene *CACNA1C* on chromosome 122. This analysis
clearly demonstrated the importance of assembling large data sets since
neither of the genes *ANK3* or *CACNA1C* had reached levels of genome
wide significance in the indi- vidual smaller studies making up the
larger set. These two genes are also of interest for understanding the
bi- ology of bipolar disorder as Ankyrin-3 belongs to a fam- ily of
membrane proteins that have roles in many cellu- lar functions and are
part of the structure of voltage gated sodium channels. It is
interesting that both ANK3 and CACNA1C proteins are a part of ion
channels, supporting further studies of synaptic proteins in bipolar
disorder. However this study of three thousand cases and six thousand
controls still has limited power to detect other genes contributing
small genetic risks and much larger case control cohorts in bipolar
disorder are required. Progress is now likely in two main direc- tions:
future association studies will involve even larger cohorts and secondly
by pathway analysis using data from very large numbers of SNPs in
thousands of cases it may be possible to identify groups of related
genes and link their roles to particular biological processes creating a
picture of the brain processes disrupted in illness.

Genome wide associations in schizophrenia
-----------------------------------------

Data analysis from genome wide association stud- ies involving large
cohorts of patients with schizophre- nia and controls has recently
highlighted the important role of a type of variation detected in genes
called copy number variation (CNV) which are small chromosomal deletions
and duplications3,6. The best described ex- ample connected with
schizophrenia is in patients with velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS) who
have a dele- tion approximately 1.5Mb in length, across a region of
chromosome 22 where the disruption of a number of genes causes
dysmorphic features and psychosis will develop in about 30% of cases.
Recent studies have also identified large rare CNVs on chromosome 15 and
chromosome 1 causing schizophrenia in a small but significant number of
cases. Across the genome small CNVs are also present, many in the size
range of

   1-500kb and these may be related to disease when the function of
   particular genes is disrupted. CNVs found within genes are common in
   all individuals but are sig- nificantly more frequent in patients
   with schizophrenia and further studies are expected to identify more
   of these variants. A major aim of genetic research is to catalogue
   these novel sources of genetic variation and to describe the clinical
   phenotypes associated with the disruption of genes harbouring CNVs.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
=================================

Initial discoveries from GWAS even with relatively small cohorts of
patients and controls, have produced a rich harvest of novel findings
and we can expect further gene discoveries when combined analyses are
per- formed on increasingly large sets of data. A start has been made in
finding common and rare variations in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
and some broad conclusions are emerging: 1) a variety of different types
of genetic variation including rare and common variants

, large and small chromosomal deletions and duplica- tions are
contributing to the genetic risk in these disor- ders and there is more
diversity and heterogeneity than previously known; 2) Individual genes
have been iden- tified in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and we can
begin to study the biological pathways linking these genes. 3) There is
much overlap in genetic factors con- tributing to schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder and the identification of further genes may provide the
tools to develop biologically based classifications of the psy- choses.
Genetic discoveries may also have a future role in the design of
treatment studies by identifying sub popu- lations of these highly
heterogeneous disorders. 4) Most studies published to date are on
patients of European ancestry. It is likely that some rare variants will
be popu- lation specific and the role of common variants may dif- fer
between different ethnic groups. Large cohort stud- ies in a variety of
ethnic groups are required to find popu- lation specific risk factors
and environmental interac- tions. Genome wide association studies have
very lim- ited power to detect rare variations causing illness be- cause
the sample sizes required are unrealistically large. There is a strong
case for continued family studies and studies of rare chromosomal
rearrangements associ- ated with unusual phenotypes in families as these
offer a powerful route to discovering rare genes. The popula- tion and
family structure in Pakistan is suited to these studies aimed at
detecting major genes some of which may be population specific and cause
illness in rela- tively few individuals but which nevertheless can pro-
vide crucial new insights into the pathology of these illnesses10,11.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Baum AE, Akula N, Cabanero M, Cardona I, Corona W, Klemens B, et al.
    A genome-wide association study im- plicates diacylglycerol kinase
    eta (DGKH) and several other genes in the etiology of bipolar
    disorder\ *.* Mol Psy- chiatry 2008; 13: 197-207.

2.  Ferreira MA, O’Donovan MC, Meng YA, Jones IR, Ruderfer DM, Jones L,
    et al. Collaborative genome-wide association analysis supports a
    role for ANK3 and CACNA1C in bipolar disorder\ *.* Nat Genet 2008;
    40: 1056-8.

3.  International Schizophrenia Consortium. Rare chromo- somal deletions
       and duplications increase risk of schizo- phrenia\ *.* Nature
       2008; 455: 237-41.

4.  O’Donovan MC, Craddock N, Norton N, Williams H, Peirce T, Moskvina
    V, et al. Identification of loci associated with schizophrenia by
    genome-wide association and follow-up\ *.* Nat Genet 2008; 40.
    1053-5.

5.  Sklar P, Smoller JW, Fan J, Ferreira MA, Perlis RH, Chambert K, et
    al. Whole-genome association study of bipolar disorder\ *.* Mol
    Psychiatry 2008; 13: 558-69.

6.  Stefansson H, Rujescu D, Cichon S, Pietiläinen OP, Ingason A,
    Steinberg S, et al. Large recurrent microdeletions associated with
    schizophrenia\ *.* Nature 2008; 455: 232-6.

7.  Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. Genome-wide association
    study of 14,000 cases of seven common diseases and 3,000 shared
    controls\ *.* Nature 2007; 447: 661-78.

8.  Blackwood DH, Fordyce A, Walker MT, St Clair DM, Porteous DJ, Muir
    WJ. Schizophrenia and affective disorders—cosegregation with a
    translocation at chromosome 1q42 that directly disrupts
    brain-expressed genes: clinical and P300 findings in a family\ *.*
    Am J Hum Genet 2001; 69: 428-33.

9.  Murphy KC, Jones LA, Owen MJ. High rates of schizo- phrenia in
    adults with velo-cardio-facial syndrome\ *.* Arch Gen Psychiatry
    1999; 56: 940-5.

10. Ayub M, Irfan M, Maclean A, Naeem F, MacGregor S, Visscher PM, et
    al. Linkage analysis in a large family from Pakistan with depression
    and a high incidence of consanguineous marriages\ *.* Hum Hered
    2008; 66: 190-8.

11. Knight HM, Maclean A, Irfan M, Naeem F, Cass S, Pickard BS, et al.
    Homozygosity mapping in a family presenting with schizophrenia,
    epilepsy and hearing impairment\ *.* Eur J Hum Genet 2008; 16:
    750-8.
