   JPPS 2006; 3(1): 3–5 GUEST EDITORIAL

EVIDENCE BASED GUIDELINES AND THE CONTEXT OF CARE: THE CASE OF E.C.T FOR
PEOPLE WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA

   Prathap Tharyan

Practice guidelines that are based on best evidence are useful for
clinicians and consumers. The guidelines published from time to time by
the National Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE) in the UK have a
reach far beyond their intended sphere of influence in the UK. Un-
fortunately, the NICE guidelines on Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) do
not recommend that ECT be used for people with schizophrenia (except
catatonia, which may be also result from other disorders).1 This
guidance was based on the results of two systematic reviews2, 3, one of
which has subsequently been updated4. This guidance contrasts with the
recommendations of professional bod- ies that cite schizophrenia as an
indication for ECT5,6 and the results of surveys of practice that
demonstrates that schizophrenia continues to be a common indication for
the use of ECT in India7.

   The NICE guidelines are based on the results of systematic reviews
   and meta-analysis of randomized con- trolled trials (RCTs) and as
   such are superior to the rec- ommendations published by the American
   Psychiatric Association5, and the Royal College of Psychiatrists6,
   that based recommendations only from a search of Medline and did not
   attempt a quantitative synthesis. The results of the survey of
   practice7 suggests that the NICE guide- lines have not rung a death
   knell for the use of ECT for people with schizophrenia, either
   because people in India (and possibly Pakistan) have not heard of the
   NICE guidelines or are less influenced by them then their own
   clinical experience or other recommen- dations.

   The reasons for this disconnection between guide- lines and practice
   may lie in the belief in the former that more evidence may be needed
   before ECT is recom- mended for those with schizophrenia or the
   conviction in the latter instance that the context of care in the
   coun- tries producing these guidelines differs from those where ECT
   continues to be commonly used for those with

   Correspondence:

   Dr. Prathap Tharyan, MD, MRCPsych

   Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry Coordinator, South Asian
   Cochrane Network Professor Bhooshanam V Moses Centre for Clinical
   Trials & Evidence Based Medicine Christian Medical College, Vellore
   632002, Tamil Nadu, INDIA

   E-mail: prathap@cmcvellore.ac.in

schizophrenia. It is my contention that both reasons are involved.

The Cochrane systematic review on ECT in schizo- phrenia4 concluded
that, “The evidence in this review sug- gests that ECT, combined with
treatment with antipsy- chotic drugs, may be considered an option for
people with schizophrenia, particularly when rapid global im- provement
and reduction of symptoms is desired. This is also the case for those
with schizophrenia who show limited response to medication alone. Even
though this initial beneficial effect may not last beyond the short
term, there is no clear evidence to refute its use for people with
schizophrenia. The research base for the use of ECT in people with
schizophrenia continues to expand, but even after more than five decades
of clinical use, there remain many unanswered questions regarding its
role in the management of people with schizophrenia”. The NICE
guidelines were based on earlier versions of this review3 that had
included fewer studies and that had not clearly endorsed the use of ECT
in schizophrenia; these guidelines are to be updated soon and it is
hoped that the revised NICE guidelines will reflect the recommen-
dations of the updated review. Science is cumulative and evidence based
guidelines ought to reflect this.

   Contextualizing research evidence is at the heart of evidence
   informed clinical practice and the NICE guidelines rejected evidence
   from trials where people with schizophrenia who had not responded to
   antipsychotc medication were given ECT before a trial of clozapine;
   in the UK people schizophrenia who do not respond to antipsychotics
   are likely to be tried on clozapine before ECT is considered (if at
   all). In our clini- cal context the reverse is likely to be true,
   underscoring the need to develop treatment algorithms that are ap-
   propriate to clinical situations where ECT may be pre- ferred in
   people for whom clozapine is not a viable op- tion or who had limited
   options to begin with.

However, the fact remains that in spite of contin- ued clinical use in
the Indian subcontinent, more research evidence from RCTs is required if
the continued use of ECT is to rest on the secure research base that
exists for its use in depressive disorders8. The latest update of the
Cochrane review on ECT for those with schizophrenia3 included 50 reports
of 26 trials conducted in eight coun- tries on four continents (Africa,
Asia, Europe and North America), with the majority of the trials
originating in two Asian countries, India and Thailand; these trials
random-

   ized 798 participants to ECT. Trials in this review spanned five
   decades, and it is not surprising that there was con- siderable
   variation in research design, trial quality, qual- ity of reporting,
   and methods of administering ECT.

   When ECT, with or without antipsychotic drugs, was compared with
   placebo or sham ECT, meta-analysis of data from 10 RCTs involving 392
   people showed that more people improved in the real ECT group (pooled
   weighted relative risk 0.76; 95% confidence intervals

   0.59 to 0.98). This indicates that 6 people would need to be given
   ECT to demonstrate improvement in one per- son over sham ECT (NNT 6;
   95% CI 4 to 12). This advan- tage of ECT appears largely to lie in a
   more rapid im- provement in symptoms, but there is insufficient
   evidence to indicate that this advantage over sham ECT, with or
   without concurrent antipsychotics, persists beyond the initial six to
   eight weeks. However, this is similar to the effect of ECT in the
   treatment of depressive disorders, where ECT is recommended for short
   term improvement in acute symptoms,1,2,5 and prevention of relapses
   re- quires continued medication that may not always pre- vent
   relapses, especially in those with prior medication resistance.9

When ECT was directly compared with antipsy- chotic drug treatments,
meta-analysis of data from 3 RCTs involving 175 participants favored the
medication group (RR 2.18; 95% CI 1.31 to 3.63). Limited evidence from
one RCT of 40 participants suggested that ECT com- bined with
antipsychotic drugs results in greater improve- ment in mental state
than with antipsychotic drugs alone. The review noted the dearth of good
evidence on the role of ECT in combination with antipsychotics (conven-
tional and atypical) when antipsychotics alone have failed.

There is also surprisingly little evidence regarding the use of long (>
12 treatments) versus short courses (<12) of ECT, in spite of assertions
that schizophrenia is a condition that requires longer courses of
treatment that does depression. The review contained data from one small
but well conducted RCT that suggested that when continuation ECT was
added to antipsychotic drugs, the combination was superior to the use of
antipsychotics alone or continuation ECT alone; this certainly needs
replication considering the difficulties in preventing re- lapses in
some people with schizophrenia prescribed ECT. Other intriguing findings
in the review in need of replication include faster recovery when
stimulus inten- sities 4 times over the threshold required to elicit an
ad- equate seizure are used compared to threshold or twice threshold
stimuli.

It may surprise clinicians to note that there is only one RCT on the use
of ECT in people with catatonia.10 This small RCT reported that people
with catatonic schizo- phrenia who do not show rapid improvement
following an initial trial of a benzodiazepine, improve faster with a
course of ECT than with the newer antipsychotic risperidone. The review
noted the irony that the frequently

quoted assertion that catatonia is an important indica- tion for ECT in
people with schizophrenia1,5,6 is currently supported by data of the
highest level of evidence from a single trial of only 14 participants,
eight of whom were given ECT and four of whom were required to continue
with ECT beyond the period of the trial.10

The place of ECT in treatment resistant schizophre- nia is unclear. The
review included trials where people referred for ECT had, to various
extents, failed to respond to treatment with conventional
antipsychotics. However, since people in the trials were not stratified
before ran- domization based on prior response to antipsychotics, this
review was unable to report clear data for this popu- lation. However,
data in the review from the only trial that directly studied the effects
of ECT versus sham ECT in people with stringently defined treatment
resistant schizo- phrenia on concurrent antipsychotics, did not support
the use of ECT. Lower levels of evidence from phase I of a continuation
ECT trial from Thailand11 for people with treatment resistant
schizophrenia referred for ECT re- ported that 58/101 patients treated
with ECT met pre- stated criteria for remission after seven to 25
treatments. While these results approximate or better those obtained in
trials of clozapine in treatment resistant schizophre- nia12, the lack
of a control group and randomization lim- its their strength. The
Cochrane review is due to be up- dated in 2007 and hopefully will
include the results of the ongoing trial of ECT in people with
schizophrenia who have exhausted all other established treatment op-
tions other than ECT.13 This important trial will, however, still not
provide an answer to whether ECT, when added to conventional or newer
antipsychotic drugs, would benefit those who show an insufficient
response to se- quential trials of available drugs, but for whom
clozapine may not be a viable option. Unfortunately, this is the case
with the majority of people with treatment resistance in developing
countries.

The introduction of ECT in clinical practice began with its use in
schizophrenia and if ECT is to outlive its obituary for this indication
in the NICE and other guide- lines, more appropriate and robust research
is called for to support its use. Since ECT seems to be used for people
with schizophrenia largely in developing coun- tries, where more
expensive options like clozapine are a limited option, it is necessary
that such research should originate from within these settings. This is
an area where high-quality collaborative research from the subcontinent
could inform practice in the rest of the world.

   REFERENCES

1. National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Guidance on the use of
   electroconvulsive therapy. NICE Technol- ogy Appraisal Guidance 59.
   London: National Insti- tute for Clinical Excellence. 2003.

2. UK ECT Review Group. Systematic review of the effi- cacy and safety
   of electroconvulsive therapy. London: Department of Health. 2002.

3. Tharyan P. Electroconvulsive therapy for schizophre- nia (Cochrane
   Review). Cochrane Library, Issue 1, 2000. Oxford: Update Software.

4. Tharyan P, Adams CE. Electroconvulsive Therapy for Schizophrenia. The
   Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005; 2: CD000076.

5. American Psychiatric Association. Committee on Elec- troconvulsive
   Therapy. The practice of electroconvul- sive therapy: recommendations
   for treatment, train- ing and privileging: a task force report of the
   Ameri- can Psychiatric Association. Second Edition. Wash- ington DC,
   USA: American Psychiatric Association, 2001.

6. Royal College of Psychiatrists. The ECT Handbook: The Second Report
   of the Royal College of Psychia- trists’ Special Committee on ECT.
   London: Royal Col- lege of Psychiatrists, 1995.

7. Chanpattana W, Kunigiri G, Kramer BA, Gangadhar BN. Survey of the
   practice of electroconvulsive therapy in teaching hospitals in India.
   J ECT 2005; 21: 253-4.

8. UK ECT Group. Efficacy and safety of electroconvul- sive therapy in
   depressive disorders: a systematic re-

..

   view and meta-analysis. The Lancet 2003; 361: 799-808.

9.  Sackeim HA, Haskett RF, Mulsant BH, Thase ME, Mann JH, Pettinati, et
    al. Continuation pharma- cotherapy in the prevention of relapse
    following electroconvulsive therapy. JAMA 2001; 285: 1299-1307.

10. Girish K, Gill NS. Electroconvulsive therapy in lorazepam
    nonresponsive catatonia. Indian J Psychia- try 2003; 45: 21-5.

11. Chanpattana W, Chakrabhand MLS, Kongsakon R, Techakasem P,
    BuppanharunW. Short-term effect of combined ECT and neuroleptics
    therapy in treatment resistant schizophrenia. J ECT 1997; 15:129-39.

12. Kane JM, Honigfeld G, Singer J, Meltzer H, Clozaril Collaborative
    Study Group. Clozapine for the treat- ment of treatment-resistant
    schizophrenia: a double- blind comparison with chlorpromazine. Arch
    Gen Psy- chiatry 1988; 45: 789-96.

13. Petrides G, Svetina CJ, Malur C, Fink M, Bailine S, Mendelowitz A,
    et al. Electroconvulsive Therapy in Clozapine Refractory
    Schizophrenia 2002.[Online] Available from: URL://
    http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct/ show/ NCT00042224.
