   JPPS 2006; 3(1): 6–11 SPECIAL ARTICLE

DEPRESSION IN PRIMARY CARE: CLINICAL EPIDEMIOLOGY & CLINICAL DECISION
ANALYSIS —

AN ANALYTICAL REVIEW

   Haider Ali Naqvi

ABSTRACT
========

   A clinical decision analysis (CDA) is a mathematical tool designed to
   facilitate complex clinical decisions in which many variables should
   be considered simultaneously. CDA is a feasible tool for multifaceted
   problem of management of depression in primary health care. It
   provides a systematic frame work for organizing all data relevant to
   the decision on recognition and management of depression. Clinical
   epidemiological perspective is used for assessing the validity of
   screening instrument. A decision matrix based on reported
   probabilities is also constructed. Chance nodes and decisions
   pertinent to co- morbidities, illness severity and treatment options
   for depression are also presented.

   Key words: Clinical epidemiology, Clinical decision Analysis,
   Depressive disorder, primary care, Pakistan.

INTRODUCTION
============

New millennium has witnessed an epidemiologi- cal transition with rise
in burden of non-communicable diseases. According to 1993 World Bank
Report Neuro- psychiatric diseases (including self-inflicted injuries)
con- tribute 8.1% to the Global Burden of Diseases (GBD). Subsequently
this contribution to GBD has been reana- lyzed and found to be 10.5%.
This is projected to increase to 15% by the year 2020. The “behavior
related prob- lems” contribute an additional 34% to GBD1.

Prevalence of common mental disorders is esti- mated to be 30 % to 50%
in primary care settings of Pa- kistan. Most patients with mental
disorders initially con- sult their general physicians (GP)2. Although
CMD have been diagnosed in third of primary care attendees in developing
Asian countries, primary care staff is gener- ally reported to recognize
only 10 % of the cases. Stud- ies have shown that a substantial
proportion of mental disorders in primary care are inadequately managed
by the GPs3. There are many facets to this complex prob- lem. Some
issues are related to the physicians while other to the patients. Lack
of time, awareness and general stigma related to mental illness poses a
major problem for GPs4.

Patients presenting in primary care are much dif- ferent from
psychiatric settings. Generally they have con- current medical illness,
which remains the major focus

   **Correspondece:**

   Dr. Haider Ali Naqvi, FCPS, D.Clin. Epi

   Senior Instructor, Department of Psychiatry, Aga Khan University
   Hospital, Stadium Road, Karachi. Pakistan. E-mail:
   `haider <mailto:haider.naqvi@aku.edu>`__\ `.naqvi@aku.edu. <mailto:.naqvi@aku.edu>`__

   of management. Another common reason for this under recognition is
   somatisation, i.e., presentation of psycho- logical distress as
   somatic symptoms, and poor aware- ness of this in health
   professionals5.

A clinical decision analysis (CDA) appears to be a feasible tool for
this multifaceted problem. CDA is a math- ematical tool designed to
facilitate complex clinical de- cisions in which many variables should
be considered simultaneously. It provides a systematic frame work for
organizing all data relevant to the decision. It also as- signs a
numerical value to various courses of actions, simplifying comparison
among them6.

   This is particularly relevant in the context of Paki- stan, a South
   East Asian developing country. With the dearth of mental health
   professionals, management of common mental disorders is increasingly
   integrated in to primary health care. Complex clinical decisions are
   either delegated to clinical nurses or lady health work- ers. With
   explicit decision analysis, there is greater likeli- hood of adequate
   management of common mental dis- orders (depression and anxiety) in
   primary health care. CDA will also serve to promote informed consent
   as pa- tients input can be taken in to account in evaluating out-
   comes.

   Clinical Decision Analysis and Management of Depressive Disorder in
   Primary Health Care:

   Major depression is a disorder characterized by persistent and
   pervasive low mood, anhedonia, impaired concentration, disturbed
   sleep, appetite and morbid death wishes. The point prevalence of
   major depres- sion from community based studies is estimated to be
   between 25-66 % for females and 10-44% for males7,8. The prevalence
   estimates for MDD in primary care set-

   tings of Pakistan is estimated to be approximately 30 % to 50 %2.
   These are many times higher when compared with western countries.
   Additional problem is dearth of trained mental health professionals
   and scarcity of allo- cated resource.

   A clinical decision analysis and algorithm appears feasible in order
   to address the above needs and rectify potential problems in the
   management of depression in primary health care. A rough guide and
   skeleton of the decision analysis is presented in Figures 1 and 2.
   Prob- ability estimates of certain outcomes and potential multi-
   dimensional utility is presented when and where objec- tive
   literature on the subject was available.

   Fig. 1: Clinical decision Analysis: Management of Depression in
   Primary care.

   CLINICAL DECISION ANALYSIS

.. image:: media/image1.png

D1: Decision Node 1; multiple somatic symptoms of Unknown origin.

C1: Chance node 1; Chance of Functional depressive illness (Pr 0.64)

C2: Chance node 2; Chance of Depression secondary to Co morbid medical
condition (Pr 0.36)

C3: Chance node 3; Chances of no Thyroid abnormal- ity (Pr 0.95).

C4: Chance node 4; Chance of Sub clinical Thyroid abnormality (Pr 0.05).

   D2: Decision Node 2: Decision on severity of illness. C5: Chance node
   5; Chance of mild-to-moderate de-

   pression (Pr 0.86; Detection rate 18.4%).

C6: Chance node 6; Chance of severe depression (Pr .13; detection rate
73%)

D3: Decision on Psychotherapy based on the severity (mild-to-moderate)
and patient’s preference.

D4: Decision on Antidepressants Medication based on severity.

   D5: Decision to treat the underlying medical illness.

   Figure 2: Clinical decision Analysis: Management of Depression in
   Primary care

   |image1|\ (Final model after pruning the figure 1) CLINICAL DECISION
   ANALYSIS

D1: Decision Node 1; multiple somatic symptoms of Unknown origin.

C1: Chance node 1; Chance of Functional depressive illness (Pr 0.64).

C2: Chance node 2; Chance of Depression secondary to Co morbid medical
condition (Pr 0.36).

C3: Chance node 3; Chances of no Thyroid abnormal- ity (Pr 0.95).

C4: Chance node 4; Chance of Sub clinical Thyroid abnormality (Pr 0.05).

   D2: Decision Node 2: Decision on severity of illness. C5: Chance node
   5; Chance of mild-to-moderate de-

   pression (Pr 0.86; Detection rate 18.4%).

   C6: Chance node 6; Chance of severe depression (Pr

   .13; detection rate 73%).

D3: Decision on Psychotherapy based on the severity and patient’s
preference.

D4: Decision on Antidepressants Medication based on severity.

   D5: Decision to treat the underlying medical illness.

   Somatic symptoms and high index of suspicion for depression (Node –
   D-1):

   In primary care setting the most common presen- tation of patients’
   with depression is with multiple somatic symptoms. This premise is
   based on the comparative studies carried out by Mumford et al looking
   specifi- cally at the somatic manifestation of psychological symp-
   toms in the context of Pakistan. The sample population was group of
   people in Lahore, Pakistan and Leeds, U.K9,10. The decision node D-1
   pertains to maintaining high index of suspicion for depression when
   patients’ present with multiple somatic symptoms of unexplained
   nature. There is no study from Pakistan looking specifi- cally at the
   characteristics or out come of this atypical presentation in Primary
   care.

The chance node C-1 pertains to the probability of somatic symptoms,
given that the patient has underly- ing depressive illness (Pr 0.64).
The chance node C-2 pertains to having somatic symptoms given that
patient has underlying medical co morbidity.

According to studies carried out in the west, sig- nificant depressive
symptoms are seen in 36% of medi- cally ill patients11. Those with
dementia, diabetes, stroke, hypercortisolism, asthma and renal
impairment have especially high rates of co- morbid depression.
Conditions like fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome, exists at the
interface of medicine and psychiatry and are associated with major
depressive disorder12,13.

Depression is also associated with use of medica- tions. 3% of patients
on high dose steroids report signifi- cant symptoms of depression.
Calcium channel blockers, beta-blockers and digoxin are known to cause
depres- sion. Caffeine use may be associated with increased side effects
and failure of some symptoms to improve (for e.g. anxiety and insomnia).
Co morbid alcohol use and with- drawal from alcohol and stimulants are
associated with depression14-16. Co morbid depression will require a
simi- lar treatment strategy as functional depression, besides the
concurrent medical management.

Among these patients work up for thyroid abnor- mality should be carried
out in order to rule out psycho- logical symptoms secondary to thyroid
abnormality (Node C-3). Thyroid abnormality typically mimics symp- toms
of depression and should be exclusively ruled out in the context of
primary care. There are no studies from Pakistan on prevalence of
abnormal thyroid hormones in the setting of primary care. However in
clinical popu- lation (PC) from western countries it is estimated to be
around 5 % (Node C4). In psychiatric subset with chronic treatment
resistant depression, the prevalence of sub- threshold thyroid
abnormality is estimated to be much higher (around 50%)12.

After ruling out secondary and co morbid depres- sion it is pertinent to
establish the diagnosis of depres- sion. Use of screening
test/instrument is particularly rel- evant in the context primary care,
where constraints of time and resources demands rapid assessment. It
should be considered that any screening test, however robust it may be
has its limitations. Result of screening instrument should be checked
against a gold standard, measure of assessment. A brief discussion on
the definition, process and limitations of screening is particularly
relevant here, followed by issues pertaining to screening for depres-
sion in primary care setting.

   Clinical decision analysis and disease screening:

Screening has been defined as “\ *presumptive* iden- tification of
*unrecognized* disease or defect by the appli- cation of test,
examination, or procedure which can be applied *rapidly* to sort out
apparently well person who *probably* have a disease from those who
*probably do*

*not*. A screening test is *not* intended to be diagnostic” (commission
on chronic illness; italics added for empha- sis).

The whole process of screening appears to be quite simple but there are
several underlying complexities, alike the subject of clinical
epidemiology. There are concerns regarding the cost of screening which
may be apparent or hidden. Cost can be related to screening process/in-
strument or treatment of additional cases however, iden- tification of
these subjects in the pre-clinical stage by astute screening instrument
does make the early inter- vention possible. Thus screening can
facilitate primary and secondary prevention.

Suitable disease & screening:

A variation among natural history of the diseases has an impact on the
utility of early detection and treat- ment. A disease with long
pre-clinical phase, like carci- noma of cervix, will definitely require
early detection and screening, in order to modify its course. Besides
the long latency period, severity of the illness also merits consid-
eration while designing a screening program. A screen- ing program for
detection of upper respiratory tract in- fection will be less cost
effective than screening program for breast cancer, solely based on the
disease morbidity and mortality. In order to have effective screening
pro- gram the disease under consideration should be an im- portant
health problem. The disease should be progres- sive with serious health
consequences. An effective treat- ment at an earlier stage should be
able to modify the natural history and course of illness17.

   Major depressive disorder does full fill all these criteria. It is
   prevalent in community and primary health care setting, if undetected
   leads to progressive worsen- ing with tragic loss of life by suicide.
   Long term vulner- ability factors like loss of parent/s during child
   hood by death or separation and current non confiding spousal
   relations does lead to sub threshold symptoms. Thus detection of this
   preclinical phase of illness by screen- ing test helps in early
   intervention and subsequent modi- fication in its natural history.

   Suitable test & instruments

   There are certain consideration regarding the choice of screening
   test and instrument. Screening test should be inexpensive, easy to
   administer with minimal discomfort to the clients. Colonoscopy might
   be very ef- fective in early detection of carcinoma of colon, but it
   has limited acceptability in routine use for apparently healthy
   subjects. Another important characteristic of good screening
   instrument is its ability to separate people with and without
   disease. A robust screening instrument should have high validity and
   reliability.

   Validity & Reliability (Precision)

   Simply stated, a test is said to be valid when it does what it is
   suppose to do. This is usually measured through its sensitivity and
   specificity. Sensitivity can be described as the ability of the test
   to identify correctly those who

   have the disease. In conditional probability notation, sen- sitivity
   is written P (T+/D+). Specificity of the test is its ability to
   identify correctly those who do not have the disease. In conditional
   probability notation, specificity is written P (T-/D-). Sensitivity
   and specificity determined by comparing the result with a definitive
   diagnosis. It is important to note that sensitivity and specificity
   are re- ciprocal in nature18.

Consistency and reproducibility of the test is said to be its
reliability. It depends upon variation inherent in the method. The
variation can be inter-observer or intra- observer. A same individual
can rate the same observa- tion differently on different occasions.
Alternatively there can be a natural variation among two raters. In
rounding off some raters have preference for higher values while others
for lower values.

Determining performance of screening instrument (AKUADS) and assigning
probabilities:

While the specificity and sensitivity remain an im- portant issue in
considering the use of instrument for di- agnostic and screening
purposes, the psychometric mea- surement becomes an additional issue
when an instru- ment is applied in a cultural setting which is different
from the one in which it was originally developed. EMIC-in- struments
and questionnaires with cultural sensitive ex- planatory models are
reported to be preferable over ETIC- instruments (instruments developed
in another cultural setting). But research findings of studies using
EMIC- instruments only, without established cross cultural va- lidity
are open to question.

Aga Khan University Hospital Anxiety & Depres- sion Scale (AKUADS) is a
25 item screening instrument, developed indigenously in the primary
health care and psychiatric setting of Pakistan, for screening
depression and anxiety disorder. It incorporates culturally pertinent
somatic metaphors of depressive disorder. It has an advantage over ETIC
instruments, in assessing locally relevant idioms of distress in the
primary health care set- tings in Pakistan. To assess the performance of
a screen- ing instrument i.e., AKUADS, we take a hypothetical popu-
lation of 10000 and calculate the sensitivity, specificity based on the
sensitivity and specificity found in the lit- erature.

   Table 1

   Sensitivity & Specificity of Aga Khan University Anxiety and
   depression scale (AKUADS)

   as a screening instrument\*

   Disease status

+-------------------+------------------+------------------+-----------+
|                   | +                |    –             |    Total  |
+===================+==================+==================+===========+
|    +              | 2070             |    1470          | 3540      |
+-------------------+------------------+------------------+-----------+
|    Test Results   | 930              |    5530          | 6460      |
|                   |                  |                  |           |
|    –              |                  |                  |           |
+-------------------+------------------+------------------+-----------+

Summary of test performance characteristics (as stated in the published
reports)4

1. P (D+)= P (Major Depressive disorder)= .30

2. P (T+/D+)= sensitivity = True positive rate

..

   = .66

3. P (T -/D+)= 1- sensitivity = False negative rate= .34

4. P (T-/D-)= specificity = true negative rate

..

   = .79

5. P (T+/D-) = 1- specificity= false positive rate= .21.

These test characteristics can be used to gener- ate 2 x 2 tables, or
decision matrix, using an arbitrary sample size of 10000 patients (table
1). This can be used to assign probabilities to the branch node C-2,
thus an accurate estimate of how the screening instrument is
functioning.

   1. P (D+/T+) = 2070/3540= 0.58.

   2. P (D-/T+) = 1470/3540= 0.41

   3. P (D+/T-) = 930/6460= 0.14

   4. P (D-/T-) = 5530/6460= 0.85.

Bayes’ rule is a mathematical formula that can also be used to calculate
unknown conditional probability, such as predictive value positive [P
(D+ /T+)] directly from the reported values for sensitivity [P (T+/D+) =
0.66], specificity [P (T-/D-) =0.79] and prior probability of major
depressive disorder [prevalence, P (D+) = 0.30]19. Thus,

   P(D+T+) P(D+)

   P(D+T+) =

   P(D+T+) P(D+) + P(T+D-) P(D-)

   (0.66) (0.30)

   = =0.5739. or 0.58

   (0.66) (0.30) + (1-.79) (0.70)

In above example 1-sensitivity will be interpreted as probability of
test results as negative given the dis- ease status to be positive. For
any screening instrument false negative rate is a major concern. This is
particu- larly so in the context of primary health care in Pakistan. FNR
of 0.34 means that quarter of a patients attending primary health care
will be misclassified, therefore, los- ing valuable opportunity of early
recognition and inter- vention.

In this circumstances use of another screening in- strument
simultaneously or sequentially can serve to rec- tify this potential
problem. Use of two screening instru- ments simultaneously will serve to
increase the sensitiv- ity while sequential use will increase
specificity. The choice for either mode of screening depends upon the
purpose of screening.

With a population to psychiatrist ratio of 1: 100,000, primary care in
Pakistan serves as the sole care provider, unlike its filtering role in
western countries20. Therefore high specificity is desirable in the
contest of Pakistan. Thus sequential screening using AKUADS followed by
another instrument/tool might be more desirable. Diag- nostic
confirmation based on DSM-IV diagnostic criteria described by Reza H et
al can be used sequentially with AKUADS, in the context of primary
health setting in Paki- stan21.

   Depression sub-typing: differences in primary care and psychiatry
   (Node D-2):

   There are number of factors mentioned in litera- ture regarding
   “type” of depressive disorder seen in pri- mary care and psychiatry.
   Patients seen in the two set- tings may be quite different.
   Depression seen in primary care is less severe and less impairing.
   Evidence of this comes from Michigan Depression Project (MDP), a
   long- term study of depression in primary care that has pro- vided
   valuable data regarding the similarities and differ- ences between
   depressed patients in primary care and psychiatry and whether the
   same treatment is appropri- ate in both settings.

In its first phase, MDP screened 1928 adult pa- tients from fifty family
physicians practices in southeast Michigan and completed structured
diagnostic interviews on 425 distressed primary care patients and 123
de- pressed psychiatric outpatients using the structured clini- cal
interview for DSM-III-R (SCID). Clinicians were asked independently
whether each of the patients was clinically depressed. The full sample
received comprehensive as- sessment of stress, social support, overall
health, health care utilization, and depression severity at intake and
4.5 and 9 months after enrollment. Of the 425 depressed primary care
patients, 13.5% were diagnosed with Major Depression, but over 40 % of
those meeting the criteria for MDD were mildly depressed. Many of the
primary care patients with mild or moderate depression were not di-
agnosed; family physician only diagnosed 35% with MDD and 28% patients
with any depressive disorder22. How- ever detection rate for severe
depressive patients was significantly higher; 73% of severely depressed
patients were selected compared with 18.4% of mildly depressed patients.

In case of functional depressive disorder severity of the illness has
implication on detection rate (D-2). Detection rate for sever depressive
disorder is 73 % while detection rates for mild-to-moderate depression
is 18.4%. This is in the context when 80-to-86% of the Depressive
disorders is mild-to-moderate in intensity.

In primary health care mild-to-moderate depres- sion is the most common
presentation as compared to psychiatric setting23. The severity of
illness has implica- tions for treatment; as mild to moderate depression
is best treated by psychotherapy. Sever depressive disor- der will
invariably require anti-depressants medication therapy. There are no
studies on severity of illness and

   its subsequent detection rates in primary care setting from Pakistan.
   This is shown in chance node C-5 and C-6.

   Treatment option in primary care (Node D-3):

   The third decision (D-3) is related to the available choice of
   therapies. General Physicians can prescribe short term (8-10
   sessions) psychotherapy. Mild-to-Mod- erate depression is preferably
   treated with short term psy- chotherapy/counseling, in the setting of
   primary health care. However, the option of psychotherapy needs to be
   discussed with the patient, with clear delineation of utility and
   outcome.

   In a randomized control trial, Ali et al showed the effectiveness of
   psychotherapy when conducted by mini- mally trained therapist. Short
   term counseling was par- ticularly effective in low income group and
   can be use- fully delivered in primary health care setting23.

   Chance nodes on remissions and relapses are given in the decision
   making tree. Unfortunately there is no literature on the long term
   outcome of specific treat- ments for depression from Pakistan. In
   cases of relapse of the illness it is advisable for the Primary care
   physi- cian (health worker) to refer the patient to a psychiatrist.

   Decision node D-4 pertains to choice of psycho- tropic medication in
   cases of depressive disorder with moderate to sever intensity. There
   are no studies on the long term outcomes of depression in the context
   of Paki- stan. Extrapolating findings from western literature, around
   60 % patients with depressive disorder relapse with in a year. This
   is in the situation of successful re- sponse to psychotropic
   medications. However in the context of primary care setting in
   Pakistan, any recurrent and relapsing case should be referred to a
   psychiatrist. There may be complicating psychosocial determinants or
   co morbid psychiatric problems (personality disor- ders), that may be
   safely treatment by mental health phy- sician.

   Limitations:

   There are certain limitations to this decision analy- sis. The data
   on outcomes and utilities is based on west- ern literature; its
   generalizibility to the culturally unique setting of Pakistan needs
   to be considered carefully. Pro- spective data from primary care
   settings is required, in order to develop any robust model that
   serves decision making for management of depression in the context of
   primary care in Pakistan.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
==============

The author wishes to acknowledge Dr. Esfandiar Maram, for his
inspirational teaching of Epidemiology & Biostatics. His keen interest
in psychiatric epidemiology led to initiation of this work.

Assuming 30 % prevalence rate of MDD in primary health care, in a
hypothetical population size of 10,000

people, screened with AKUADS, with a sensitivity of 66% AKUHADS will
correctly identify 2,070 individuals who has the disease. It will
however fail to detect 930 indi- viduals who have depressive disorder.
Similarly with a specificity of 79 % it will detect their disease free
status among 5,530 individuals out of 7,000. However it will misclassify
1470 disease free individuals as disease posi- tive, thereby creating
some, albeit transient anxiety among them.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Murray CJ, Lopez AD. The Global Burden of Disease: A comprehensive
   assessment of Mortality and Disability from Disease, Injury and Risk
   Factors in 1990 and projected to 2020. Boston: Harvard School of
   Public Health, WHO and World Bank, 1996.

2. Mirza I, Jenkins R. Risk factors, prevalence, and treatment of
   anxiety and depressive disorders in Pakistan: systematic review. BMJ
   2004; 328: 794-7.

3. Patel V, Pereira J, Mann AH. Somatic and psychologi- cal models of
   common mental disorder in primary care in India. Psychol Med 1998;
   28: 135-43.

4. Naqvi H, Khan MM. Depression in Primary care: Diffi- culties and
   paradoxes. J Pak Med Assoc 2005; 55: 393-8.

5. Naqvi H, Iqbal R. Prevalence of mental disorder in Pakistan: A need
   for integrating their management in primary care. Med Today 2003; 1:
   107-11.

6. Sackett DL, Hayes RB, Tugwell P. Clinical Epidemiol- ogy: A basic
   science to clinical medicine. Boston: Little Brown, 1985.

7. Mumford DB, Nazir M, Jilani FU, Baig IY. Stress and psychiatric
   disorder in Hindukush: a community sur- vey of mountain village. Br J
   Psychiatry 1996; 168: 299-307.

8. Mumford DB, Saeed K, Ahmad I, Latif S, Mubbashar MH. Stress and
   psychiatric disorder in rural Punjab: a community survey. Br J
   Psychiatry 1997; 170: 473-8.

9. Mumford DB, Tareen IA, Bajwa MA, Bhatti MR, Karim

..

   R. The translation and evaluation of an Urdu version of The Hospital
   Anxiety and Depression Scale. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1991; 83: 81-5.

10. Husain N, Chaudhry I, Asfar S, Creed F. Psychologi- cal distress
    among patients attending a general medi- cal outpatient clinic in
    Pakistan. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2004; 26: 277-81.

11. Frasure-Smith N, Lesperance F, Talajic M. Depression and 18-month
    prognosis after myocardial infarction. Circulation 1995; 91:
    999-1005.

12. Pies R, Rogers D. The recognition and treatment of depression: A
    review for primary care clinicians. CME/ CE [On line] 2005 [cited on
    October 12, 2005]: Avail- able from : URL:
    `http://www.medscape.com. <http://www.medscape.com/>`__

13. Walker EA, Peter P, Katon WJ. Irritable bowel syn- drome and
    functional psychiatric illness. Am J Psy- chiatry 1990; 147: 565-72.

14. Patten SB, Love EJ. Drug induced depression. Psy- chotherapy and
    psychosomatics 1997; 66: 63-73.

15. Peroutka SJ, Newman H, Harris H. Subjective effects of
    3,4-methylenedioxymethylamphetamine in recre- ational users.
    Neuropsychopharmacology 1988; 1: 273-7.

16. Kendler KS, Heath AC, Neale MC, Kessler RC. Alco- holism and major
    depression in women: a twin study of the causes of the Comorbidity.
    Arch Gen Psychia- try 1993; 50: 690-8.

17. Gordis L. Assessing the validity and reliability of di- agnostic and
    screening test, In: Epidemiology Phila- delphia, Elsevier Saunders
    2004.

18. Fletcher RH, Fletcher SW, Wagner EH. Clinical Epi- demiology: The
    essentials. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1982.

19. Feinstein AR. Clinical biostatistics. Clin Pahrmacol Ther 1979;
    25:108-16.

20. Naqvi H, Khan MM. Pathways to psychiatric care in Karachi. J Coll
    Physicians Surg Pak 2006;16:438-9.

21. Reza H, Khan MM. Depression: Diagnosis and man- agement in general
    practice in Pakistan. J Pak Med Assoc 2003; 53: 500-5.

22. Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Kroenke K. Utility of a new procedure for
    diagnosing mental disorder in primary care: the PRIME-MD 1000 study.
    J Am Med Assoc 1994; 272:1749-56.

23. Schwenk TL, Klinkman MS, Coyne JC. Depression in the family
    physicians office: what the psychiatrist needs to know: The Michigan
    depression project. J Clin Psychiatry 1998; 59: 94-100.

24. Ali BS, Bahbar MH, Naeem S, Gul A, Mubeen S, Iqbal

    A. The effectiveness of counseling on Anxiety and De- pression by
       Minimally Trained counselors: A Random- ized Controlled Trial. Am
       J Psychotherapy 2003; 57: 324-36.

.. |image1| image:: media/image2.png
   :width: 3.11991in
   :height: 1.7251in
