JPPS 2008; 5(2): 65-67 DEBATE

DISASTERS & PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMA — CHALLENGE FOR PAKISTAN

Sohail Ali

ABSTRACT
========

   Psychological trauma, a new concept, came to Pakistan in the early
   1990s when Karachi was under- going crisis alongwith other social,
   geo-cultural and ethnic issues. This remained unrecognized gener-
   ally until the devastating earthquake in October 2005 for which
   National Plan of Action for Earthquake Survivors was drafted that
   included model of emergency and post emergency response based on a 8
   point model. In February 2007, the first national Centre for Trauma
   Research and Psychosocial Interven- tions (CTRPI) was established
   which is carrying out indigenous research projects and training
   activities. This article aims to examine the present efforts to
   address the trauma related mental health problems in Pakistan,
   identify the challenges we are facing and suggest future directions
   for services and research. The article also aims to raise awareness
   and debate about a crucial area of mental health which has become
   increasingly important with on going voilence in Pakistan but is
   largely neglected.

   **Key words:** Disaster, Psychological trauma, Earthquake, Pakistan.

   “Years ago I used to think it was possible for a novelist to alter
   the inner life of the culture. Now bomb- makers and gunman have taken
   that territory. They make raids on human consciousness. What writers
   used to do before we were all incorporated” (Don Delillo).

The Historical Milestones:
--------------------------

The concept of psychological trauma is rather new to Pakistan. The
concept of PTSD made its introduction in the country in early 1990s,
during the times when Karachi was undergoing political crisis and
various po- litical parties were involved in militant tactics. The natu-
ral outcome was psychological trauma, among other social and
geo-cultural and ethnic issues that took their roots in the country. The
concept, however, remained generally unrecognized amongst the
clinicians, until the Oct 2005 Earthquake that destroyed almost 3/4th of
the Azad Jammu & Kashmir, killing thousands of humans and creating a
pool of major social and civil concerns.

During the emergency phase of the disaster, a number of national and
international governmental and non-governmental agencies provided
services to the affectees. The community of mental health profession-
als also joined hands and the first joint meeting of the Steering
Committee was held at the Dept of Psychiatry, Military Hospital
Rawalpindi within 2 weeks of the earth- quake and came up with a draft
of a document that was to become the National Plan of Action for the
Earth- quake Survivors1 and an Emer- gency Mental Health Relief Plan for
the affected popula- tion was developed and implemented2.

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr Sohail Ali,** Consultant Psychiatrist, CMH Kohat. E-mail:
   sohailhaidertipu@yahoo.com

The model of emergency and post emergency re- sponse which was
incorporated in the National Plan of Action for Earthquake Survivors and
implemented on ground was based on the 8 – point model proposed by
Ommeren et al3. These eight principles include:

1. Contingency planning before the disaster.

2. Needs assessment before the interventions are put into place.

3. Use of a long term development perspective.

4. Collaboration with other relief and health agen- cies and linking
   mental health care with socioeco- nomic support and relief

5. Provision of mental health treatment and interven- tions in primary
   health care settings and as part of the general health care

6. Accessibility of services for all (including the relief workers and
   health care providers) irrespective of the degree of affliction by
   disaster or an injured status

7. Provision of care only by trained staff and always under strict and
   ongoing supervision.

8. Monitoring input, process and output mental health indicators.

With mental health relief centres established in the major cities in
earthquake affected areas, or what was left of them, the PG trainees,
psychologists, social workers, voluntary workers, consultants and
professors all got involved on a rota basis and were instrumental in the
well executed plan. Working with the community was a different kind of
experience for all of us, because such a model of health service is not
available in the country. In addition, working with traumatized
population requires specialized training, expertise of skills and
emphasis on

a psychosocial model of health delivery rather than a medical model. The
mental health professionals were not equipped with such skills and,
therefore, efforts were made to acquire competence in this area through
for- eign experts and professionals. Their help was used in the
immediate measures and also for the long term ca- pacity building of
local faculty of professionals. The Dept of Psychiatry, MH Rawalpindi,
took the lead and was able to establish professional linkages with
multiple teams of experts from UK, USA and Turkey. Similarly, the
Institute of Psychiatry at Benazir Bhutto Shaheed Hospi- tal,
Rawalpindi, organized multiple training programmes with international
experts as the trainers, for the capac- ity building of local mental
health professionals. The Inter Agency Standing Committee (IASC)
published their guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in
Emergencies4 in 2007 which are also in line with the model that was
followed in Pakistan.

Through the support of WHO – EMRO, the out- reach teams from the
Government Hospitals were able to function as well as they did. The
other major source of support was that of the humanitarian assistance
programmes of various countries, which imparted skill based learning to
the local population. A large number of unskilled youth and more skilled
and experienced professionals from various specialties also worked vol-
untarily in the affected community.

Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocess- ing (EMDR), Psychosocial
Interventions and Psychologi- cal First Aid are some of the skill based
interventions that have been imparted to the local mental health pro-
fessionals of the country. Many more trauma focused treatment modalities
are still deficient. It is interesting to note that there are no
qualified professionals for doing a Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT),
which is consid- ered a very basic treatment modality for trauma survi-
vors.

The post earthquake scenario:
-----------------------------

A lot has taken place since the Oct 2005 disaster but a lot more needs
to be done. Continuing with the long term strategy of professional
enhancement, the first national Centre for Trauma Research and
Psychosocial Interventions (CTRPI) was established in the Dept of
Psychiatry, MH Rawalpindi in Feb 2007, under the aus- pices of National
University of Sciences and Technol- ogy (NUST), Pakistan. CTRPI is
carrying out indigenous research projects and training activities, in
addition to providing services for the survivors of daily traumas (traf-
fic accidents, injuries, domestic violence).

CTRPI has specialists trained in EMDR, Psycho- social interventions and
Grief work and trauma research. Through the international collaboration
with Aberdeen Centre for Trauma Research, new psychometric scales were
translated and adapted into urdu language, as well. A dozen national and
international publications have come out of the Centre in its small life
history.

The first ever International Conference on Psychotrauma was organized in
Aug 2008, which gath- ered a large number of people from the country and
from across the globe, as well. The conference was able to generate high
quality scientific papers from various disciplines of psychological
trauma and a set of evi- dence based recommendations was submitted to
the Government for future development of these services in the country.
Besides, the conference also became a source for creating awareness
about the concept of psy- chological trauma among the general public,
through comprehensive media coverage.

For the first time in Pakistan, a comprehensive social work plan is
being carried out in the earthquake affected areas of Bagh and Rawlakot,
sponsored by the British Pakistani Psychiatrist Association (BPPA)
initia- tive. This programme is being supervised by the Dept of
Psychiatry, MH Rawalpindi and employs 9 Field Social Workers (FSWs) for
a contract period of 6 months and 20 people have been trained so far.
The FSWs are se- lected from the affected areas and trained in basic
psy- chosocial work which they carry out in their respective areas of
responsibility. This initiative has been taken with appreciation by the
local population and is a reflec- tion of the sensitivity and commitment
of BPPA towards the suffering of their Pakistani brethren.

The Challenge:
--------------

With increase in the geo-political crises, terrorism and increasing
threat of natural disasters, due to global environmental change,
developing countries are at high risk5. The world is hit by 220 natural
catastrophes, 70 technological disasters and three armed conflicts every
year, and the numbers are increasing with passing time6. On the average
there are 2-3 disasters in their emergency phase, 15-20 in their
recovery phase and about 12 conflict based emergencies in progress
daily7. Since 9/ 11 terrorist attacks on USA, 2929 people have died due
to terrorism, world over. Out of these, 1709 (58%) have died in last
year alone, thereby showing that terrorism related deaths are on the
increase8. in Pakistan alone, 22 suicide attacks were recorded between
2002 and 2006 but in 2007 over 45 such attacks have already taken
place9. In addition, injuries, disabilities and deaths related to road
traffic accidents, domestic violence and other kinds of non- terrorism
accidents are far too many as compared to those caused by terrorism or
disasters. On the average about 30000 die of suicide, 16000 by homicide,
43000 due to road traffic accidents and 15000 due to driving under
influence of drugs in USA, in a year10. These fig- ures may not be all
true for Pakistan but they do reflect the magnitude of the problem any
trauma service is likely to face.

   Psychological trauma services in Pakistan need to follow a consorted
   and well laid down plan if they want to address the ground realities.

The way forward:
----------------

Disasters, whether natural or man-made, have become the most challenging
issue of the 21st century. Pakistan is especially vulnerable to the
fallouts of psy- chological trauma, because of the current and emerg-
ing politics of the region. Trauma psychiatry, therefore, has a lot of
potential to grow into a major specialty of the future in Pakistan. The
major issues facing the mental health professionals in the country are
basically 4 di- mensional. On one hand, there is lack of awareness of
the subject and on the other, there are very few trauma professionals
and whatever number we have are also lacking in adequate treatment
skills. The third area of vacuity is the indigenous research database in
various trauma related matters. The most important issue con- cerning
the subject is the lack of a policy statement/ document for a disaster
(whether natural or man-made) response.

   There is large number of youth with basic trauma specific skills
   being wasted in the streets, which can be incorporated in the
   disaster response teams. Similarly, NGO’s are working independently
   doing their job in iso- lated pockets. There is room for a joint and
   consorted platform where all these professionals and organiza- tions
   can work together. Collaboration is the key to the next platform.

CONCLUSION
==========

This article discusses the response of mental health services to the
earthquake trauma and suggests the possible solutions and future
directions.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Rana MH, Ali Sohail, Yusufi BZ, Shah FS. National plan of action for
   mental health and psychosocial relief of

..

   earthquake survivors - emergency phase. Pak Armed Forces Med J 2006;
   56: 402-11.

2.  Rana MH, Ali Sohail, Yusufi BZ Mental health and psychosocial relief
    of earthquake survivors - acti- vities and interventions. Pak Armed
    Forces Med J 2006; 56: 441-9.

3.  Van Ommeren M, Suxana S, Saraceno B. Mental and social health during
    and after acute emergencies: emerg- ing consensus?. Bull World
    Health Organ 2005; 83: 71-6.

4.  IASC Guidelines for Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in
    Emergencies – IASC WG Approved; 25th Feb 2007 Version. [Online] 2007
    [Cited on 2008, November 15]. Available from URL: http://
    `www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc. <http://www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc>`__

5.  Graham B, Talent J, Allison G, Cleveland R, Rademaker S, Roemer T,
    et al. World at Risk: The report of the Commission on Prevention of
    Weapons of Mass Destruc- tion, Pro-liferation and Terrorism. New
    York: VintageBooks, 2008.

6.  International Federation of Red Cross Society (IFRCS), Manual of
    Disaster relief services for health providers, 2002.

7.  Alexander DE. An Interpretation of Disaster in Terms of Changes in
    Culture, Society and International Relations. In: Perry RW,
    Quarantelli EL editors. What Is a Disaster? New Answers to Old
    Questions. Philadelphia: Xlibris Press, 2005: p.1-15.

8.  CRS Report for congress; Trends in Terrorism: 2006. [Online] 2007
    [Cited on 2008, December 03]. Available from URL:
    `http://fas.org/sgp/crs/terror/RL33555.pdf. <http://fas.org/sgp/crs/terror/RL33555.pdf>`__

9.  Country reports on terrorism 2007. [Online] 2008 [Cited on 2008,
    November 01]. Available from URL: http://
    `www.state.gov/s/ct/rls/crt/2007. <http://www.state.gov/s/ct/rls/crt/2007>`__

10. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Na- tional Violent
    Death Reporting System (NVDRS). [Online] 2003 [Cited on 2008,
    November 18]. Available from URL:
    `http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/profiles/nvdrs/facts.htm. <http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/profiles/nvdrs/facts.htm>`__
