   JPPS 2009; 6(1): 33-35

ABSTRACTS OF COCHRANE SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS

   COCHRANE CORNER

1. Bipolar affective disorder is a severe mental illness characterized
   by frequent relapses and switchover. As a result compliance and
   prevention of recurrence becomes a major issue in the long-term
   management of this disabling psychiatric illness. One option for
   preventing relapses in this condition is the psycho education aimed
   at enabling the patients and the family members to detect early
   warning signs of re- lapse (EWS).

In this systematic review, effectiveness of EWS de- tection as compared
to the routine care has been ex- plored. The analysis shows beneficial
effects of early warning signs regarding time to recurrence, percentage
of hospitalization and level of functioning. However only six randomized
control trials could be included in the review. Moreover in these
studies EWS signs were used along with other psychological treatments,
so confound- ing factors cannot be ruled out.

2. Perinatal psychiatric morbidity is a common men- tal health problem
   carrying long term negative impact not only on mother but also the
   newborn and the family members at large. Moreover in developing
   countries more worse prognosis is reported due to underlying or-
   ganic factors.

In this rewiev role of psychosocial assessment in routine antenatal
checkup has been assessed to pre- vent this multidimensional
psychopathology. Unfortu- nately only two studies could fulfill the
inclusion criteria showing lesser sensitivity of the research workers
to- wards this important psychological problem.

Moreover, though the evidence was found in favor of increased awareness
of clinicians for psychosocial risk factors but its effect on improved
peri- natal mental health outcome was not convincingly proved.

3. In view of psychological theories of depression, self esteem has been
   found as the key cause for this highly prevalent psychiatric disorder
   in any community. Moreover intervention strategies aimed at enhancing
   the self esteem can prevent long term repercussions of this disorder
   on the psychological health of the chil- dren and adolescents. In
   this rewiev a relationship be- tween exercise and self esteem has
   been tried to ex- plore.

Only eight trials could meet the inclusion criteria with comparatively
smaller sample size. Majority of them reported positive effect on self
esteem with no negative

effect, which may be the result of social desirability bias. Further
larger size, good quality trials are needed to establish the evidence in
favor of this cost effective in- tervention strategy.

   **Edited by: Dr. Javaid Akhtar,** MCPS, FCPS, Head of Department of
   Psychiatry, Bannu Medical College, Bannu. Javaiddr2002@yahoo.com

1. INTERVENTIONS FOR HELPING PEOPLE RECOGNIZE EARLY

..

   SIGNS OF RECURRENCE IN BIPOLAR DISORDER

   Morris RK, Faizal MA, Jones AP, Williamson PR, Bolton C

ABSTRACT 
=========

**Background:** Recurrence rates for bipolar disorder are high despite
effective treatments with mood stabiliser drugs. Self-help treatments
and psychological treatments that teach patients to recognise and manage
early warn- ing symptoms and signs (EWS) of impending manic or
depressive episodes are popular with patients. The main aim of such
interventions is to intervene early and pre- vent bipolar episodes,
thereby increasing the time to the next recurrence and preventing
hospitalisation.

**Objectives:** To compare the effectiveness of an EWS intervention plus
treatment as usual (TAU ) versus TAU (involving and not involving a
psychological therapy) on time to manic, depressive and all bipolar
episodes (the primary outcome), hospitalisation, functioning, depres-
sive and manic symptoms.

**Search strategy:** Relevant studies identified by search- ing Cochrane
Collaboration Depression, Anxiety and Neurosis Controlled Trials
Registers (CCDANCTR-Stud- ies and CCDANCTR-References - searched on
20/10/ 2005), supplemented with hand searching the journal Bipolar
Disorders, searching the UK National Research Register, checking
reference lists of included studies and contacting authors.

*Selection criteria*
--------------------

Only randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were included. Participants
were adults with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder based on standardised
psychiatric cri- teria.

*Data collection and analysis*
------------------------------

Two reviewers independently rated trials for inclu- sion. Data were
extracted from included trials by review- ers using a data extraction
sheet. Authors of all the in- cluded studies were contacted for any
additional infor- mation required. Time to recurrence data was
summarised as log hazard ratios, dichotomous data as relative risk and
continuous data as weighted mean dif- ference, using random effects
models to calculate effect size only when there was heterogeneity in the
data.

*Main results*
--------------

Eleven RCTs were identified, but only six provided primary outcome data.
All six RCTs were of high quality. Time to first recurrence of any type
(RE, hazards ratio 0.57, 95% CI 0.39 to 0.82), time to manic/hypomanic
episode, time to depressive episode, and percentage of people
hospitalised and functioning favoured the inter- vention group. Neither
depressive nor hypomanic symp- toms differed between intervention and
control groups.

*Authors’ conclusions*
----------------------

This review shows a beneficial effect of EWS in time to recurrence,
percentage of people hospitalized and functioning in people with bipolar
disorder. However, the absence of data on the primary outcome measure in
so many included studies is a source of concern and a potential source
of bias. Mental health services should consider routinely providing EWS
inter- ventions to adults with bipolar disorder, as they appear to
reduce hospitalization and therefore may be cost- effective.

   *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2009, Issue 2.*

Copyright © 2009 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley
and Sons, Ltd.

2. ANTENATAL PSYCHOSOCIAL ASSESSMENT FOR REDUCING PERINATAL MENTAL
      HEALTH

..

   MORBIDITY

   Marie-Paule Austin, Susan R Priest, Elizabeth A Sullivan

.. _abstract-1:

ABSTRACT 
=========

**Background:** Mental health conditions arising in the peri- natal
period, including depression, have the potential to impact negatively on
not only the woman but also her partner, infant, and family. The
capacity for routine, universal antenatal psychosocial assessment, and
thus the potential for reduction of morbidity, is very signifi- cant.

**Objectives:** To evaluate the impact of antenatal psychosocial
assessment on perinatal mental health morbidity.

**Search strategy:** We searched the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth
Group’s Trials Register, the Cochrane Depression, Anxiety and Neurosis
Group’s Trials Regis- ter (CCDAN TR-Studies), HSRProj in the National
Li- brary of Medicine (USA), and the Current Controlled Trials website:
http://www.controlled trials.com/ and the UK National Research Register
(last searched March 2008).

.. _selection-criteria-1:

*Selection criteria*
--------------------

   Randomised and quasi-randomised controlled trials.

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-1:

*Data collection and analysis*
------------------------------

At least two review authors independently as- sessed trials for
eligibility; they also extracted data from included trials and assessed
the trials for potential bias.

.. _main-results-1:

*Main results*
--------------

Two trials met criteria for an RCT of antenatal psy- chosocial
assessment. One trial examined the impact of an antenatal tool (ALPHA)
on clinician awareness of psychosocial risk, and the capacity of the
antenatal AL- PHA to predict women with elevated postnatal Edinburgh
Depression Scale (EDS) scores, finding a trend towards increased
clinician awareness of ‘high level’ psychoso- cial risk where the ALPHA
intervention had been used (relative risk (RR) 4.61 95% confidence
interval (CI) 0.99 to 21.39). No differences between groups were seen
for numbers of women with antenatal EDS scores, a score of greater than
9 being identified by ALPHA as of con- cern for depression (RR 0.69 95%
CI 0.35 to 1.38); 139 providers. The other trial reported no differences
in EPS scores greater than 12 at 16 weeks postpartum between the
intervention (communication about the EDS scores with the woman and her
healthcare providers plus a patient information booklet) and the
standard care groups (RR 0.86 95% CI 0.61 to 1.21; 371 women).

.. _authors-conclusions-1:

*Authors’ conclusions*
----------------------

While the use of an antenatal psychosocial as- sessment may increase the
clinician’s awareness of psychosocial risk, neither of these small
studies pro- vides sufficient evidence that routine antenatal psycho-
social assessment by itself leads to improved perinatal mental health
outcomes. Further studies with better sample size and statistical power
are required to further explore this important public health issue. It
will also be important to examine outcomes up to one year postpar- tum
not only for mother, but also infant and family.

   *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2009, Issue 2.*

Copyright © 2009 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley
and Sons, Ltd.

3. EXERCISE TO IMPROVE SELF- ESTEEM IN CHILDREN AND

..

   YOUNG PEOPLE

   Ekeland E, Heian F, Hagen KB, Abbott JM, Nordheim L

.. _abstract-2:

ABSTRACT 
=========

**Background:** Psychological and behavioural problems in children and
adolescents are common, and improv- ing self-esteem may help to prevent
the development of such problems. There is strong evidence for the
positive physical health outcomes of exercise, but the evidence of
exercise on mental health is scarce.

**Objectives:** To determine if exercise alone or exercise as part of a
comprehensive intervention can improve self-esteem among children and
young people.

**Search strategy:** Computerised searches in MEDLINE, EMBASE, The
Cochrane Controlled Trials Register (CENTRAL), CINAHL, PsycINFO and ERIC
were under- taken and reference lists from relevant articles were
scanned. Relevant studies were also traced by contact- ing authors.
Dates of most recent searches: May 2003 in (CENTRAL), all others:
January 2002.

.. _selection-criteria-2:

*Selection criteria*
--------------------

Randomised controlled trials where the study popu- lation consisted of
children and young people aged from 3 to 20 years, in which one
intervention arm was gross motor activity for more than four weeks and
the outcome measure was self-esteem.

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-2:

*Data collection and analysis*
------------------------------

Two reviewers independently selected trials for inclusion, assessed the
validity of included trials

and extracted data. Investigators were contacted to collect missing data
or for clarification when neces- sary.

.. _main-results-2:

*Main results*
--------------

Twenty-three trials with a total of 1821 children and young people were
included. Generally, the trials were small, and only one was assessed to
have a low risk of bias. Thirteen trials compared exercise alone with no
intervention. Eight were included in the meta-analy- sis, and overall
the results were heterogeneous. One study with a low risk of bias showed
a standardized mean difference (SMD) of 1.33 (95% CI 0.43 to 2.23),
while the SMD’s for the three studies with a moderate risk of bias and
the four studies with a high risk of bias was 0.21 (95% CI -0.17 to
0.59) and 0.57 (95% CI 0.11 to

1.04), respectively. Twelve trials compared exercise as part of a
comprehensive programme with no interven- tion. Only four provided data
sufficient to calculate over- all effects, and the results indicate a
moderate short- term difference in self-esteem in favor of the interven-
tion [SMD 0.51 (95% CI 0.15 to 0.88)].

.. _authors-conclusions-2:

*Authors’ conclusions*
----------------------

The results indicate that exercise has positive short-term effects on
self-esteem in children and young people. Since there are no known
negative effects of exercise and many positive effects on physical
health, exercise may be an important measure in improving children’s
self-esteem.

These conclusions are based on several small low-quality trials.

   *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2007, Issue 1.*

Copyright © 2009 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley
and Sons, Ltd.
