   JPPS 2007; 4(2): 96-99 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

A SURVEY OF KNOWLEDGE AND ATTITUDE OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC TOWARDS
EPILEPSY

IN LAHORE, PAKISTAN

   Farooq Naeem, Muhammad Ayub, David Kingdon, Muhammad Mujtaba, Qaiser
   Abbas Zaidi, Faiz Bhatti, Haroon Rashid Chaudhry

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objective:** To explore the ideas people have towards epilepsy.

   **Design:** The qualitative methods were used in the first step while
   in second stage a cross sectional design was used.

   **Place and duration of study:** The study was conducted at the Ganga
   Ram Hospital medical outpatients in Lahore, Pakistan from November
   2003 to April 2004.

   **Subject and Methods:** A focus group was conducted to explore the
   beliefs people have towards epi- lepsy. Seven patients and their
   carers who were attending medical outpatients participated in this
   group discussion. On the basis of this a survey form was formulated.
   This form was used to gather information from a larger sample in the
   next step in which all those attending this service during the study
   period were contacted. Those who consented were asked questions from
   the survey.

   **Results :** Nearly 90% respondents were aware of epilepsy. Ninety
   three percent respondents believed that epilepsy is treatable. Nearly
   95% people believed that if epileptic patients are treated, they
   recover completely. However, there were variations in people’s
   beliefs about causes of epilepsy as well as how and who should treat
   it.

   **Conclusion:** Nearly half of our sample derived from a big urban
   centre believed in unscientific causes of epilepsy. There is urgent
   need to educate general public on this important issue.

   **Key words:** Knowledge, Attitude, Epilepsy, Pakistan.

INTRODUCTION
============

Stigma related to chronic health conditions such as HIV, leprosy,
tuberculosis, mental illness and epilepsy is a global phenomenon with a
severe impact on indi- viduals and their families, and on the
effectiveness of public health programs.

It has been claimed that 75 per cent of people with epilepsy in Pakistan
are not aware that they have the condition1. Patients with medical as
well as mental health problems consult practitioners of complimentary
and al- ternative medicine. The main reasons for this are; the
proximity, affordability, availability, family pressure and

   **Farooq Naeem,** Royal South Hants Hospital, Southampton, UK.
   E-mail: farooqnaeem@yahoo.com

   **Muhammad Ayub,** St Luke’s Hospital, Middlesborough, UK

   **David Kingdon,** Royal South Hants Hospital, Southampton, UK

   **Muhammad Mujtaba,** Services Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan

   **Qaiser Abbas Zaidi,** Forensic Psychiatry Services, Birming- ham,
   UK

   **Faiz Bhatti,** Substance Misuse Services, Portsmouth, UK

   **Haroon Rashid Chaudhari,** Fatima Jinnah Medical College, Lahore,
   Pakistan

   **Correspondence: Dr. Farooq Naeem**

   the strong opinion of the community2. In a study of the population
   attending these services and the practices of the native faith
   healers sixty-one percent of attendees were given a research
   diagnosis of mental disorder: major depressive episode (24%),
   generalized anxiety disorder (15%) or epilepsy (9%). The
   classification used by faith healers is based on the mystic cause of
   disorders: saya (27%), jinn possession (16%) or churail (14%)3.

The research in this area mainly comes from the Western countries. We
found very few studies from South East Asia looking at stigma of
Epilepsy. Randhkrishnan et al4 found that ninety-nine percent of the
respondents had read or heard about epilepsy. Thirty-one percent and 27%
thought epilepsy was a hereditary disorder and a form of insanity,
respectively. About 40% of the respondents felt that individuals with
epilepsy could not be properly educated or employed. Eleven percent
would object to their children having contact with epi- leptic children.
In another Indian study5 of the attitude of students it was found that
nearly 60% of students thought that epilepsy was a form of insanity.
Western Medicine as form of treatment was preferred by more than half of
the respondents; however, many had faith in exorcism and visiting
religious places as ways to cure epilepsy. Half of the students
considered epilepsy a hindrance to education, employment, and marriage.
Thirteen percent would be unwilling to sit adjacent to or play with a
child with epilepsy.

An English study6 using a qualitative interview method compared South
East Asians from different faith groups. The belief that epilepsy is
caused by spirit pos- session (Muslims) or attributable to sins
committed in a past life (Sikhs and Hindus) were reported as being
widely held among South Asians living both in the UK and the Indian
subcontinent, although few informants themselves subscribed to such
views. Although, most patients were compliant with conventional
medication, those with poor response were more likely to turn to
traditional South Asian therapies. Most informants used both treatments
simultaneously. Khan et al7 in a trans- cultural study comparing a
Kashmiri population with US population found that the use of adjunctive
spiritual therapies was more prevalent in the Kashmiri sample, and the
use of alternative, non-pharmacological thera- pies was more prevalent
in the American sample. Qual- ity of life for the Kashmiri patients
sampled was found to be poorer in terms of educational and occupational
op- portunities, feelings of stigmatization, and openness with others
about the illness. Although the two patient popu- lations interviewed
differed in their access to resources and approaches to the disorder,
both samples were found to be similar overall in many attitudes and
prac- tices relating to epilepsy and its treatment.

In our literature search we did not find any studies carried out in
Pakistan on this issue. We therefore de- cided to assess the knowledge
of the general public and their attitudes towards epilepsy since this
can have profound effect on their help seeking behaviour. The aim of
this study was to explore the attitudes and knowl- edge people have
towards epilepsy.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

It was a mixed design study with qualitative meth- ods used in the first
step while the second step was a cross sectional study. A focus group
was conducted to explore the beliefs people have towards epilepsy. Seven
patients and their carers who were attending medical outpatients
participated in this group discussion. On the basis of this a survey
form was formulated. This form was used to gather information from a
larger sample in the next step.

The study was conducted at the Ganga Ram Hos- pital medical outpatients
in Lahore, Pakistan. All those attending these services during the study
period were contacted. Those who consented were asked questions from the
survey.

We contacted all those attending the medical clin- ics but not those who
were attending the psychiatric or neurological departments since we
wanted to keep our sample as close to general population as possible.
Analy- sis was carried out using SPSS v 12.0.

RESULTS
=======

Mean age of the respondents was 28.4 years, (SD=11.25) and majority
(84.2%) were women. Table 1 shows demographic characteristics of
respondents.

Nearly 90% (51) reported that they are aware of a condition called
epilepsy, or at least have heard the

   Table 1

   Demographic details (total=57)

+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|                  |                     |               |    *       |
|                  |                     | **Frequency** | *Percent** |
+==================+=====================+===============+============+
|    **Gender**    |    Female           |    48         |    84.2    |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|                  |    Male             | 9             |    15.8    |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|    **Education** |                     |               |            |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|                  |    No education     | 1             |    1.8     |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|                  |    Student          |    17         |    29.8    |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|                  |    Primary          | 9             |    15.8    |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|                  |    Matric           | 9             |    15.8    |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|                  |    Masters /        |    11         |    19.3    |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|                  |    professional     |               |            |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|                  |    Missing          |    10         |    17.5    |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|    **Marital     |                     |    36         |    63.2    |
|    status**      |                     |               |            |
|    Single        |                     |               |            |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+
|    Married       |                     |    21         |    36.8    |
+------------------+---------------------+---------------+------------+

..

   Table 2

   People’s views of causes of Epilepsy

+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|                                   |    **Frequency** |              |
|                                   |                  |  **Percent** |
+===================================+==================+==============+
|    Ghost                          | 2                |    3.5       |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Physical Reasons               |    21            |    36.8      |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Psychological Reasons          |    16            |    28.1      |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Fear                           | 4                |    7.0       |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Inherited                      | 5                |    8.8       |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Physical reasons as well       |                  |              |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    as inherited                   | 3                |    5.3       |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Physical as well as            |                  |              |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    psychological reasons          | 2                |    3.5       |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+

name of it and 28% (16) reported they knew someone with the condition.
Table 2 shows views on causes of epilepsy.

Ninety three percent (53) respondents believed that epilepsy is
treatable. Nearly 95% (54) people be- lieved that epileptic patients if
treated do recover com- pletely. Table 3 shows the views about treatment
of epi- lepsy.

Nearly half of the respondents said that epilepsy can be treated
medically. However other half said that the treatments for epilepsy are
non medical.

A significant number of people believed that epi- lepsy can be treated
by doctors. Interestingly more people believed that epilepsy can be
treated by the psy- chiatrists than those who believed that epilepsy can
be treated by a neurologist or neurosurgeon. Table 4 shows respondents
views of who can treat epilepsy.

When asked if you will marry a person with epi- lepsy, 47% (27) replied
yes. When asked will you marry

   Table 3

   Respondents views of treatment of epilepsy (possible treatments)

+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    **Possible treatments**        |    **Frequency** |              |
|                                   |                  |  **Percent** |
+===================================+==================+==============+
|    Jooti Sunghana                 | 3                |    5.3       |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Taveez                         | 3                |    5.3       |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Dam darood                     | 5                |    8.8       |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Hakeem                         |    11            |    19.3      |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+
|    Medical treatment              |    30            |    52.6      |
+-----------------------------------+------------------+--------------+

..

   Table 4

   Who can treat epilepsy?

+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|      |                            |    **Frequency** |               |
|      |                            |                  |   **Percent** |
+======+============================+==================+===============+
|    a |    Pir Faqir               | 1                |    1.8        |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|    b |    Maulvi                  | 2                |    3.5        |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|    c |    Doctor                  |    22            |    38.6       |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|    d |    Neurologist             | 1                |    1.8        |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|    e |    Neurosurgeon            | 5                |    8.8        |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|    f |    Psychiatrist            |    17            |    29.8       |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|      |    Spiritual healers &     |                  |               |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|      |    doctors                 | 2                |    3.5        |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|      |    Spiritual healers &     |                  |               |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|      |    neuro surgeons          | 6                |    10.5       |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|      |    Spiritual healers &     | 1                |    1.8        |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+
|      |    psychiatrists           |                  |               |
+------+----------------------------+------------------+---------------+

..

   a person who has epilepsy in the family, 73% (42) said yes. Only 19%
   (11) believed that epilepsy is a conta- gious illness. Nearly twenty
   percent (11) of the people surveyed said if someone close to them had
   epilepsy they will hide the diagnosis from others.

DISCUSSION
==========

Most of our respondents were young women. Ganga Ram Hospital is a
teaching hospital attached with a female only medical college and it is
possible that more women attend this hospital than men. Only one
respondent was uneducated. This is hardly surprising when one considers
the fact that Lahore is a big city and the population has better access
to education and health facilities compared with remote areas. This is
one seri- ous limitation of this study in that the results might not be
applicable to older women, people living in remote ar- eas or even to
men living in Lahore.

Nearly all the respondents reported that they were aware of a condition
called epilepsy. They at least had heard the name of it and nearly one
third reported they knew someone who had got the condition. This might
also be due to our population sample being drawn from

a big city. One third respondents believed that epilepsy is due to
physical factors, while another one third be- lieved that epilepsy could
be due to psychological or emotional reasons. A small number also
believed in other (mostly para normal) explanations of epilepsy or
multiple explanations. Only 3.5% believed that epilepsy could be due to
ghosts and 7% thought is could be due to fear. It will be important to
mention here that by fear usually people mean fear induced by seeing
spirits or other paranormal phenomenon. Although only 9% be- lieved that
epilepsy can be caused through hereditary causes, nearly half of them
said they will not marry a person with epilepsy. Although most of the
respondents felt safer in marrying a person who had someone with
epilepsy in the family. The fact that although only a small number of
respondents believed in hereditary causes of epilepsy but they still
didn’t want to marry a person with epilepsy means that people might have
other explana- tions of causes of epilepsy. One such reason could be the
belief that epilepsy is a contagious illness which was shared by one
quarter of the respondents. Another reason for not marrying a person
could be high stigma attached to the condition, which was evident from
nearly the same number of respondents who said that if some- one close
to them had epilepsy they will hide the diag- nosis from others.

High perceived stigma and non medical explana- tions of causes and
spread of the illness are important variables which could lead to delays
in seeking treat- ment because people not only hide patients from others
but also a non medical explanation makes it less likely for them to
bring the patient to medical professions. The same problems might be
involved in epileptic patients not getting married or at least getting
married with great difficulties (marriage in Pakistan is mostly arranged
and very much like a business partnership between two fami- lies in
which each tries to get the most from the deal, and an illness with high
stigma can be a big handicap). This can lead to patients being socially
isolated and can cause further psychological and social problems not
only for the patients but also for the families. It would have been
interesting to explore these issues further to see if men hold different
views on these subjects, but the number was too small to conduct further
analyses. These are however, important issues which need to be dealt
with through effective community education and information at the
primary and secondary care level.

The finding that one third of the respondents be- lieved in physical
causes is in line with the view ex- pressed by nearly half of the
respondents that epilepsy can be treated medically. What was confusing
however, was the finding that nearly all of them believed that epi-
lepsy is treatable and that epileptic patients if treated do recover
completely. This does not fit in with the views expressed by the
respondents in general. The only pos- sible explanation could be that
they believed that medi- cal as well as non medical treatments work. The
non medical treatments included; jooti sunghana (putting a

   shoe near the nose of a person who is having an epilep- tic attack),
   taweez (religious verses or some writings on a piece of paper which
   the affected person then keeps with him), dam darood (blowing air
   towards the person after saying some quranic verses) and hikmat
   (derived from the old Greek or Indian medicine).

   Another issue related to the causes and possible treatments of the
   epilepsy was “who could treat the epi- leptic patients”. We were
   interested in this issue since in our focus group discussions we
   found that people men- tioned different healthcare professional who
   could treat epilepsy. Lack of structure and organization in the
   healthcare system, poor differentiation between primary and secondary
   care services and poorly organized or sometimes non existent referral
   system are important considerations in this regard. The issue is
   further com- plicated by the fact that most professionals have to run
   their private practices due to poor salaries in the gov- ernment
   sector, which might even explain to some ex- tent the lack of a
   referral system. We found that people who believed that epilepsy can
   be treated by psychia- trists were more than those who believed that
   epilepsy can be treated by a neurologist or a neurosurgeon. This
   could be explained by two possibilities. First, as men- tioned above
   lack of a referral system and additionally poorly set professional
   boundaries and ethical standards and secondly, most patients in the
   psychiatric outpatient clinics present with dissociative disorders
   with convul- sions which might be misleading to the non professional
   observer. At the end of the day someone has to treat these patients
   and what counts is; better medical care, better prognosis and leading
   a healthy life with mini- mum deficits.

CONCLUSION
==========

We found that members of general public who come from a big city and
most of whom were educated

and attending one of the main hospitals had nega- tive opinions and
views regarding epilepsy and patients with epilepsy. Most of them
believed in non physi- cal causes and treatments of the epilepsy. There
is a need to repeat this work with better methodology and bigger samples
from other populations in Pakistan. There is also a need to focus on
this very important issue in public health programs.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Aziz H. Three-Quarters of Pakistanis with Epilepsy “Not Aware” of
   condition [Online] 2003 [Cited on 7 June 2005] available from:
   http://www.epilepsy.org.uk/news/ archive/20030304.html

2. Shaikh BT, Hatcher J. Complementary and Alternative Medicine in
   Pakistan: Prospects and Limitations. Evid Based Complement Altern Med
   2005; 2:139-42.

3. Saeed K, Gater R, Hussain A, Mubbashar M. The preva- lence,
   classification and treatment of mental disorders among attenders of
   native faith healers in rural Pakistan. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr
   Epidemiol 2000; 35:480-5.

4. Radhakrishnan K, Pandian JD, Santhoshkumar T, Tho- mas SV, Deetha TD,
   Sarma PS, et al. Prevalence, knowl- edge, attitude and practice of
   epilepsy in Kerala, South India. Epilepsia 2000;41:1027-35.

5. Pandian JD, Santosh D, Kumar TS, Sarma PS, Radhakrishnan K. High
   school students’ knowledge, atti- tude, and practice with respect to
   epilepsy in Kerala, southern India. Epilepsy Behav 2006; 9:492-7.

6. Ismail H, Wright J, Rhodes P, Small N, Jacoby A. South Asians and
   epilepsy: exploring health experiences, needs and beliefs of
   communities in the north of England. Sei- zure 2005; 14:497-503.

7. Khan A, Huerter V, Sheikh SM, Thiele EA. Treatments and perceptions
   of epilepsy in Kashmir and the United States: a cross-cultural
   analysis. Epilepsy Behav 2004; 5:580-6.
