   JPPS 2008; 5(1): 48-49 CONFERENCE REPORT

2ND SOUTH ASIAN REGIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON EVIDENCE INFORMED HEALTH CARE

   Javaid Akhtar

Cochrane network is an origination continuously struggling to search for
evidence and defining its role in policy making and clinical practice.

Since its inception in1993 it has grown steadily and has about 1500
members from all over the world including developed and developing
countries both.

In order to achieve its goals and creating aware- ness among health
professionals, about the importance of EVIDENCE, this organization keeps
organizing sym- posiums and conferences. This symposium was part of its
struggle against ignorance in health care system es- pecially focused on
developing countries.

The symposium started at 9.45 am on 9th April 2008 at Scudder
Auditorium, located in Greenland of Chris- tian Medical college,
Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India. The man behind the show was Prof Prathap
Tharayan who along with his team managed the symposium in a befit- ting
manner.

The inaugural session was followed by intensive one day programme of
research and clinical presenta- tions, workshops and poster display,
fully involving the participants in goal oriented activity all day long.

All the sessions and discussions were based on the important message of
“Evidence informed health care.”

PLENARY SESSION 1
=================

In the first part of this session, the speakers pre- sented their talk
about the role of Cochrane network in evidence informed heath care.
Lorne Becker in his infor- mative talk reported that the collaboration
makes up to date accurate information about the effects of health care
readily available by producing, disseminating and con- tinuously
updating systematic rewieves. The results of Cochrane network are
available by subscription on the internet, but are free with one click,
to almost all of the world’s population.

Then was the presentation by Andy Oxmen, Direc- tor Cochrane group from
Norway, on evidence informed

health care “ What is it and who cares”. According to him informed
decisions about health policies require informations and for policies to
be well informed, we need good evidence.

The third presentation of this session was by Paul Garner and Helen
Smith from Liverpool UK. They elabo- rated their views on,” evidence
into policy: The effective heath care research programme.” According to
them, involving the people in developing countries in cochrane reviews
and ensuring health problems relevant to their regions was focus of
their group activity for the last 15 years.

Jeremy Grimshaw , Director Canadian network , highlighted the bitter
realities in his talk on “ Moving evidence into policy and practice “.
He mentioned that globally million dollars are being spent each year, in
both public and research on biomedical and health ser- vices, but
unfortunately heath care system and health care research fails to
provide the level of care they as- pire to. The convincing reason for
this failure as he says is the big gap between evidence and practice.
Accord- ing to the figures given by him 30 to 40 % of the patients do
not receive the care according to the scientific evi- dence and 20 to 25
% of care is either not needed or potentially harmful.

PLENARY SESSION 2
=================

This session was again very informative, motivat- ing and eye opener for
the participants as very interest- ing and alarming informations were
provided in this ses- sion.

Peter Gotzsche, Director Nordic Cochrane centre Denmark, in his
comprehensive lecture on :” tainted evidence ; Drug companies and power
of marketing .” reported that literature on drugs is seriously distorted
through flawed designs, flawed analysis and selective publications of
trials. Moreover bribery of doctors appar- ently in the name of so
called research and patient ser- vices has become a common practice.
Alarming is that the use of violence against independent scientists who
have identified harms of drugs is frequent and involves

   intimidation ,litigation and even firing.

   **Correspondence:**

**Dr Javed Akhtar,** MCPS, FCPS, Senior Registrar, De- partment of
Psychiatry, Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar.

   The last presentation of this session was on “ The effective use of
   media in disseminating evidence about health care.” by Deborah
   Pantesco Gilbert. He com- mented that media is the main route through
   which in-

   formations about new products and interventions get to the health
   care decision makers. According to his views, we may despair at
   inaccurate, uncritical and sensation- alized media reports but we can
   no longer ignore the absolute impact of media and increasingly
   internet in shaping peoples perception of health care.

POSTER PRESENTATIONS
====================

Another interesting part of this one day intensive symposium was in the
form of poster display session. Many authors from different parts of
India, even the out- side world, very beautifully prepared their posters
high- lighting the importance of research in many fields of physical and
mental health.

The delegates during the lunch break enjoyed this session and made
active discussions with the relevant authors. The authors were also
awarded prizes for the first three positions along with the winners of
essay com- petition at the end of the programme.

WORKSHOPS
=========

After the lunch break, workshops started .The par- ticipants were given
choice to select any one according to their interest and requirement in
their field of work. The workshops were organized on:

-  Systematic reviews of diagnostic test accu- racy.

-  Clinical trial registrations & results reporting the CONSORT
   guidelines and beyond.

-  Evidence informed health policy.

-  Evidence for consumers heath care and media

-  The chochrane library and EBM resources.

The workshop session was really very interactive and energizing for the
participants. In each group there were lively discussions on important
topics and areas of interest. All these discussions provided good
guidelines to each participant for their future planning and adminis-
trative activity.

KEYNOTE ADDRESS
===============

Dr. Tikki Pang, Director, Research Policy and Co- operation, World
Health Organization was the keynote speaker at the occasion. He through
his tele speech elaborated various issues regarding Evidence Informed
Health Care.

CONCLUSION
==========

It was really a wonderful experience to come across the traditional
culture of Chennai and Vellore. Simplicity prevailed in the living,
eating and sitting ar- rangements of the one day symposium,
communicating a hidden message of humble living and quality thinking.
