   **JPPS 2007; 4(1): 65–66**

CORRESPONDENCE

   Contents

-  Heal thy self Physician

..

   **CORRESPONDENCE**

HEAL THY SELF PHYSICIAN
=======================

   Dear Editor,

   Once there was a Physician who made a pact with the devil. Devil
   caused him to give-in to one impulse after another. Soon he was
   surrounded with lot of life’s luxuries; PDA, laptop, convertible-top
   Mercedes Benz, etc. Later he realized there is a price to every
   bargain. He has to loose his sovereignty. The prerogative to prac-
   tice as he sees fit, impervious to inclinations and impulses was
   taken away from him. He became a customary agent and benefactor of
   the devil.

   Is the relation between Physicians and Pharmaceu- tical industry any
   different? Surely, they are no devils. It is just an industry. Like
   any other industry, they are governed by profit-maximization. They
   don’t claim to be operating for altruistic purposes. All the
   expensive gifts they offer to doctors, as promotional items, comes
   either from the mar- keting or Research and development (R&D) budget;
   in any case it is the patient who has to pay the cost. Eco-

   Like any other industry, interaction with pharmaceu- tical has to be
   regulated within some ethical norms. As Jung writes ‘once you have
   sold your soul, it is hard item to retrieve. Those who have already
   given-in to such im- pulses can only be told – heal thy self
   Physician!

REFERENCES
----------

1. Khan MM. Murky waters: pharmaceutical industry and psychiatrists in
   developing countries. Psychiat Bull 2006; 30: 1-4.

2. Ahmer S, Haider II,, Anderson D, Arya D. Do Pharma- ceutical
   Companies Selectively Report Clinical Trial Data? Pak J Med Sci 2006;
   22: 338-46

3. Jung P. No free lunch. Health Affairs 2002; 21: 226-31.

..

   **Dr. Haider A. Naqvi**

   M.B. B.S, F.C.P.S, D.C.E ,

   Senior Instructor & Consultant Psychiatrist , Aga Khan University
   Hospital, Karachi.

   E mail: `haider <mailto:haider.naqvi@aku.edu>`__\ .naqvi@aku.edu

   nomics of health care industry remains enigmatic for most health care
   providers. Question to ask is; how long will

   we give-in to impulse of sponsoring CME’s, recent ad- vances
   work-shops and conference trips through pharmaceutical industry.
   Evidence has shown that they feed biased information1. Fact of the
   matter is they influ- ence systematic-research in order to have
   desirable re- sults2.

Like devil, they target (pious) opinion leaders. Re- cently, I have
received an e-mail from corporate head asking me to list few
individuals, in my area of research, who are expected to be opinion
leaders in the coming ten years; off course with some compensation for
my efforts. This brings us to the dilemma of industry spon- sored
research. Before starting a project one has to sign a legal binding;
sponsor is entitled to have a look at the first draft of the
publication. In a small print one can also read that sponsor has the
legal-right to ask researcher for delay in submission of paper – mostly
in lieu of patent issues. All the issues related to bona fide null
hypoth- esis and scientifically valid clinical equipoise goes out of the
window with such contracts. In any case, young re- searcher always runs
the risks of compromising his in- tegrity if things go dirty.

Through the journal of Pakistan Psychiatric Society (JPPS), young
researchers and physicians need to be guided in their interaction with
the industry.

HEAL THY SELF PHYSICIAN — CAN JPPS HELP?
========================================

This letter points out to a very important issue. We at the editorial
board feel flattered that the author expects the JPPS to guide the
researchers and physicians in their interaction with the industry.

Unfortunately the debate on this issue has mostly been limited to the
extreme positions. The recent issue of “World Psychiatry” has useful
articles trying to disen- tangle this complicated matter1,2. JPPS can
offer its pages for debate on this or any other issue of interest to our
readers. However, I would like to point out that the very existence of
JPPS has been maintained through the “courtesy” of this “devil”, This
gives me no comfort in saying that the same is the case with many
reputed jour- nals not to speak about a nascent journal like JPPS. Al-
though, the publication of the journal has been mainly sponsored by
pharmaceutical industry, it gives me some pleasure in putting the JPPS
as a model in a way to deal with the industry.

One of the salient features of the JPPS is its em- phasis on the
evidence based medicine and developing critical appraisal skills. The
editorial board believes that

the only way, doctors can confidently deal with the on- slaught of the
industry is to equip the practitioners with the skills to evaluate the
literature. JPPS is perhaps one of the few journals in the country which
regularly pub- lishes the “Cochrane Corner”. Many readers of the jour-
nal will agree that at present Cochrane Collaboration is the main source
which systematically evaluates the evidence available for all the health
care interven- tions and it is largely free of industry influence. In
this regular feature of the journal, we published highly critical review
of the products promoted by the pharma- ceutical companies which have
regularly been our sponsors.

I believe we need not to forget that pharmaceuti- cals is an industry
and a commercial business.

There is no such thing as free lunch but we should also be proud of
being true professionals, always being aware of our learning needs while
serving the best interest of patients and having the ability to
differentiate commercial interest from the valid scientific findings.

.. _references-1:

REFERENCES
----------

1. Healy D. One flew over the conflict of interest nest. World
   Psychiatry 2007; 6: 26-7.

2. Vieta E. Psychiatry: from interest in conflicts to con- flicts of
   interest. World Psychiatry 2007; 6: 27-9.

**The Editor**
