   JPPS 2007; 4(2): 112-114 COCHRANE CORNER

ABSTRACTS OF COCHRANE SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS

As usual we have selected three systematic re- views for providing you
an evidence based insight.

1. The review on marital therapy is significant for two reasons. It
   provides some evidence about an interven- tion which does not figure
   prominently in the interven- tions for depression in literature and
   texts these days. Secondly, it demonstrates that evidence can be pro-
   duced (and summarised as well!) even for an interven- tion like
   marital therapy which is rather difficult to mea- sure even amongst
   psychotherapies. In our sociocul- tural context, marital factors play
   both the negative i-e in the onset and maintenance of this behavioral
   problem as well as positive role in the form of buf- fering effect in
   interpersonal relations. This review should help us in making
   informed decisions about non pharmacological interventions, alone or
   in combination with drug therapy in a commonly occurring psychiatric
   disorder. The authors concluded that there is no evidence of
   effectiveness. But in view of small num- ber of studies comparing
   marital therapy with number of interventions (psychotherapy, drugs
   and minimal or no treatment) in just eight studies, one wonders
   whether this is the case of lack of evidence rather than no evi-
   dence.

2. The Obsessive Compulsive Disorders in children pose a significant
   therapeutic challenge. The pharma- cological treatment with SSRIs,
   which may be needed in significantly high doses in view of stubborn
   nature of the disorder, can be particularly problematic in children.
   The total number of participants in these trials is small but it
   generally supports the view we had in adult OCD i.e that these
   psychological interventions augment the Phar- macotherapy and in some
   resistant cases provide most effective treatments. We know that in
   case of poor re- sponse to treatment this disorder not only causes
   high level of psychological distress but also impairs and dis- rupts
   the psychosocial development in the adolescent age group. According
   to this systematic review psycho- logical interventions like behavior
   or cognitive behavior therapy (BT/CBT) play promising role in
   treating OCD in children and adolescent. The effectiveness of BT/ CBT
   can be further potentiated, when combined with pharcotherapy.

3. Final rewieve assesses the role of antidepressants in prevention of
   postnatal depression This psychiatric disorder has always remained a
   challenge in develop- ing countries, carrying long term implications
   for moth- ers and infant’s mental as well as physical health. The

postnatal psychiatric disorders offer a huge potential for prevention in
developing countries in view of the high fertility rates and somewhat
predictable nature of the disorder in a specific time frame i.e few
weeks after the childbirth. It is disappointing to note that there were
only two trials with total of 73 participants. This perhaps reflects
overall lack of attention in psychiatry towards prevention. According to
this rewieve, there is insufficient evidence for the preventive role of
antidepressants in postnatal depression during pregnancy or immediately
postpartum. So the decision about the use of these drugs in pregnant
women, with past or family history of depression should be made with
care.

   **Edited by: Dr. Javed Akhtar,** MBBS, FCPS, Senior Registrar,
   Department of Psychiatry, Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar.

1. MARITAL THERAPY FOR DEPRESSION

..

   A Barbato, B D’Avanzo

ABSTRACT
========

**Background:** Marital therapy for depression has the two- fold aim of
modifying negative interaction patterns and increasing mutually
supportive aspects of couple rela- tionships, thus changing the
interpersonal context linked to depression.

Objectives:
~~~~~~~~~~~

1. To conduct a meta-analysis of all intervention studies comparing
   marital therapy to other psychoso- cial and pharmacological
   treatments, or to non-active treatments.

2. To conduct an assessment of the internal validity and external
   validity.

3. To assess the overall effectiveness of marital therapy as a treatment
   for depression.

4. To identify mediating variables through which marital therapy is
   effective in depression treat- ment.

**Search strategy:** CCDANCTR-Studies was searched on 5-9-2005, Relevant
journals and reference lists were checked.

*Selection criteria*
--------------------

Randomised controlled trials examining the effec- tiveness of marital
therapy versus individual psycho- therapy, drug therapy or waiting
list/no treatment/mini- mal treatment for depression were included in
the re- view. Quasi-randomised controlled trials were also in- cluded.

*Data collection and analysis*
------------------------------

Data were extracted using a standardised spread- sheet. Where data were
not included in published pa- pers, two attempts were made to obtain the
data from the authors. Data were synthesised using Review Man- ager
software. Dichotomous data were pooled using the relative risk (RR), and
continuous data were pooled us- ing the standardised mean difference
(SMD), and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. The random
effects model was employed for all comparisons. A for- mal test for
heterogeneity, the natural approximate chi- squared test, was also
calculated.

*Main results*
--------------

Eight studies were included in the review. No sig- nificant difference
in effect was found between marital therapy and individual
psychotherapy, either for the con- tinuous outcome of depressive
symptoms, based on six studies: SMD -0.12 (95% CI -0.56 to 0.32), or the
di- chotomous outcome of proportion of subjects remaining at caseness
level, based on three studies: RR 0.84 (95% CI 0.32 to 2.22). In
comparison with drug therapy, a lower drop-out rate was found for
marital therapy: RR 0.31 (95% CI 0.15 to 0.61), but this result was
greatly influ- enced by a single study. The comparison with no/mini- mal
treatment, showed a large significant effect in favour of marital
therapy for depressive symptoms, based on two studies: SMD -1.28 (95% CI
-1.85 to -0.72) and a smaller significant effect for persistence of
depression, based on one study only. The findings were weakened by
methodological problems affecting most studies, such as the small number
of cases available for analysis in almost all comparisons, and the
significant heterogene- ity among studies.

*Authors’ conclusions*
----------------------

There is no evidence to suggest that marital therapy is more or less
effective than individual psycho- therapy or drug therapy in the
treatment of depression. Improvement of relations in distressed couples
might be expected from marital therapy. Future trials should test
whether marital therapy is superior to other inter- ventions for
distressed couples with a depressed partner, especially considering the
role of potential effect moderators in the improvement of depres- sion.
*Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews* 2007 Issue 4

Copyright © 2007 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

2. BEHAVIOURAL AND

..

   COGNITIVE BEHAVIOURAL THERAPY FOR OBSESSIVE COMPULSIVE DISORDER IN

   CHILDREN & ADOLESCENTS

   O’Kearney RT, Anstey KJ, von Sanden C

.. _abstract-1:

ABSTRACT
========

**Background**: While behavioural or cognitive- behavioural therapy
(BT/CBT) is recommended as the psychotherapeutic treatment of choice for
children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), the
application of BT/CBT to paediatric OCD may not be straightforward.

**Objectives:** This review examines the overall efficacy of BT/CBT for
paediatric OCD, its relative efficacy against psychopharmacology and
whether there are benefits in using BT/CBT combined with medication.

**Search strategy:** We searched CCDANCTR-Studies and
CCDANCTR-References (searched on 5/8/2005), MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO,
the reference lists of all selected studies and handsearched journals
specifically related to behavioural treatment of OCD.

.. _selection-criteria-1:

*Selection criteria*
--------------------

Included studies were randomised controlled tri- als or quasi-randomised
trials with participants who were 18 years of age or younger and had a
diagnosis of OCD, established by clinical assessment or standardised di-
agnostic interview. Reviewed studies included the stan- dard behavioural
or cognitive-behavioural techniques, either alone or in combination,
compared with wait-list or pill placebo.

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-1:

*Data collection and analysis*
------------------------------

The quality of selected studies was assessed by two independent
reviewers. The primary outcomes com- prised of endpoint scores on the
gold standard clinical outcome measure of OCD symptoms, distress and
inter- ference (CY-BOCS) and endpoint OCD status.

.. _main-results-1:

*Main results*
--------------

Four studies with 222 participants were consid- ered eligible for
inclusion and for data extraction. Two studies showed significantly
better post-treatment func- tioning and reduced risk of continuing with
OCD at post- treatment for the BT/CBT group compared to placebo or
wait-list comparisons. We suggested that the POTS 2004 result, equal to
a difference of about eight points on the CY-BOCS, represented the best
available estimate for the efficacy of BT/CBT relative to no treatment.
(WMD - 7.50; 95% CI -11.55, -3.45). Pooled evidence from two

trials indicated that the efficacy of BT/CBT and medica- tion did not
differ significantly (WMD -3.87; 95% CI - 8.15, 0.41). There was
evidence of the benefit of com- bined BT/CBT and medication compared to
medication alone (WMD -4.55; 95% CI -7.40, -1.70), but not relative

to BT/CBT alone (WMD -2.80; 95% CI -7.55, 1.95). The

rates of drop out suggested BT/CBT is an acceptable treatment to child
and adolescent patients and their fami- lies.

.. _authors-conclusions-1:

*Authors’ conclusions*
----------------------

Although only based on a small number of stud- ies, behavioural or
cognitive-behaviour therapy appears to be a promising treatment for OCD
in children and adolescents. It can lead to better outcomes when com-
bined with medication compared to medication alone. Additional trials
are needed to confirm these findings. In the interim, consideration
should be given to the ways in which BT/CBT might be made more widely
available as a treatment for OCD in children and adolescents. *Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews* 2007 Issue 4

Copyright © 2007 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

3. ANTIDEPRESSANT

..

   PREVENTION OF POSTNATAL DEPRESSION

   LM Howard, S Hoffbrand, C Henshaw, L Boath, E Bradley

.. _abstract-2:

ABSTRACT
========

**Background:** Postnatal depression is a common and important
complication of childbearing. Untreated de- pression can lead to
potentially negative effects on the foetus and infant, in addition to
serious morbidity for the mother. The use of antidepressants during
pregnancy for prevention of postnatal depression is unclear, due to the
possibility of adverse effects on the mother and de- veloping foetus,
and the difficulty of reliably identifying the women who would go on to
develop postnatal de- pression.

.. _objectives-1:

Objectives:
~~~~~~~~~~~

1. To evaluate the effectiveness of different antide- pressant drugs in
   addition to standard clinical care in the prevention of postnatal
   depression.

2. To compare the effectiveness of different antide- pressant drugs and
   with any other form of intervention for postnatal depression i.e.
   hormonal, psychological or social support.

3. To assess any adverse effects of antidepressant drugs in either the
   mother or the foetus/infant.

**Search strategy:** CCDANCTR-Studies and CCDANCTR-References were
searched on 11-6-2007.

.. _selection-criteria-2:

*Selection criteria*
--------------------

Randomised studies of antidepressants alone or in combination with
another treatment, compared with placebo or a psychosocial intervention
in non-depressed pregnant women or women who had given birth in the
previous six weeks (i.e. women at risk of postnatal de- pression)

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-2:

*Data collection and analysis*
------------------------------

Data were extracted independently from the trial reports by the authors.
Missing information was requested from investigators wherever possible.
Data were sought to allow an “intention to treat” analysis.

.. _main-results-2:

*Main results*
--------------

Two trials involving a total of 73 participants ful- filled the
inclusion criteria for this review. Both looked at women with a past
history of postpartum depression. Nortriptyline (n=26) did not show any
benefit over pla- cebo (n=25). Sertraline (n=14) reduced the recurrence
of postnatal depression and the time to recurrence when compared with
placebo (n=8). Intention-to-treat analy- ses were not carried out in
either trial.

.. _authors-conclusions-2:

*Authors’ conclusions*
----------------------

It is not possible to draw any clear conclusions about the effectiveness
of antidepressants given imme- diately postpartum in preventing
postnatal depression and, therefore, cannot be recommended for
prophylaxis of postnatal depression, due to the lack of clear evi-
dence. Larger trials are needed which also include com- parisons of
antidepressant drugs with other prophylac- tic treatments to reflect
clinical practice, and examine adverse effects for the foetus and
infant, as well as as- sess women’s attitudes to the use of
antidepressants at this time. *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
2007 Issue 4*

Copyright © 2007 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
