   JPPS 2009; 6(1): 42-43

   SHORT COMMUNICATION

DEVELOPING CHILD AND ADOLESCENT PAEDIATRIC LIAISON SERVICE IN LAHORE,
PAKISTAN

   Faria Khan, Arsala Khan , R. K. Shehzad, Haroon Siddiq, Nasar Sayeed
   Khan

INTRODUCTION
============

In Pakistan like the rest of the developing world the provision of child
and adolescent psychiatric ser- vices are under developed and patchy. In
such a sce- nario the need is for identifying available resources and to
streamline what is available to provide a comprehen- sive healthcare
package for this population1.

Both paediatricians and psychiatrists are trained to promote normal
child development, work with fami- lies and value preventative
strategies 2.Research has consistently reported high rates of
psychopathology in children presenting with physical complaints as well
as those hospitalized under care of paediatricians 3,4.

In Pakistan professionals working with young people with mental health
difficulties generally lack an awareness of mental health issues
stressing the need for links between agencies to deliver an effective
ser- vice 5.

We conducted a survey with the local paedia- tricians to develop an
understanding of their views on developing a child and adolescent
paediatric liaison service with their local psychiatric mental health
ser- vices. We also identified their training needs in mental health
assessment of children and in Lahore, Pakistan.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

A questionnaire survey was conducted in three large Government teaching
hospitals of Lahore, Paki- stan, i.e., Services Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lahore General Hospital and Children’s hospital Lahore.
Paediatricians from all grades were included. Sixty ques- tionnaires
were hand distributed, completed by partici- pants and collected by the
distributer.

   **Faria Khan**, Consultant Child and adolescent psychiatrist, Early
   Intervention services, Lancashire , UK. Contact (mo-
   bile):00447796013455.
   `Email:drfariakhan@yahoo.co.uk. <mailto:drfariakhan@yahoo.co.uk>`__

   **Arsala Khan,** Medical Officer, Services Institute of Medical
   Sciences, Lahore , Pakistan.

   **R. K. Shehzad,** Paediatric Registrar, Clonmel General Hospi- tal,
   Ireland.

   **Haroon Siddiq**, SHO, Psychiatry, Burnley General Hospital,
   Burnley, UK.

   **Nasar Sayeed Khan**, Consultant Psychiatrist, Services Insti- tute
   of Medical Sciences, Lahore , Pakistan.

   **Correspondence: Dr. Faria Khan**

Areas covered were:(appendix1) Do paedia- tricians have any formal
training in child psychiatry, How confident they were in assessing a
child with a mental health problems, Their awareness of International
diag- nostic classification systems(ICD-10/DSM IV),Do they feel a
psychiatric diagnosis in a child is stigmatising, Can they assess a
child who has been abused(physically, emotionally /sexually) ,Their
awareness of national guidelines around child protection issues ,Do they
con- sider a need for the development of paediatric-psychiat- ric
liaison service and the usefulness of developing a teaching programme to
address their training needs iden- tified.

The data of the study was analysed on SPSS ver- sion 12.

RESULTS
=======

   There was a 100% response rate. 90% of paediatricians reported having
   no formal training in child psychiatry. Only 16% felt confident in
   assessing a child with mental health problems.

   90% reported not being aware of International di- agnostic
   classification systems. 79% reported that a psy- chiatric diagnosis
   in a child is stigmatising. Only 40% reported feeling comfortable in
   assessing a child who has been Abused (physically, emotionally,
   sexually). 71% report having no awareness of national guidelines
   around child protection issues. 78% consider there is a need for the
   development of paediatric-psychiatric liai- son service and the
   majority, 97%, expressed the need for joint training programmes to
   address their training needs.

DISCUSSION
==========

In this survey which to date is the first of its kind in Lahore ,
Pakistan , several very important and useful findings have been
highlighted.

A reponses rate of 100% indicates paediatrician’s level of interest to
look at the mental health needs and service provision for children and
adolescents with men- tal health difficulties.

This survey has pointed out that a lack of a formal training structure
limits paediatricians in their assess- ment of children. A lack of
awareness of available re- sources and current best practice may
adversely effect practice. This is shown by the non-familiarity with
guide- lines on child protection and the use of standard diag- nostic
criteria for mental health problems.

   This survey has also shown that the majority of the paediatricians
   felt there is a stigma associated with a psychiatric diagnosis for
   the child and family. This is a significant and concerning finding
   highlighting the nega- tive impact of a mental health label for a
   child or adoles- cent potentially affecting their assessment and
   manage- ment of such cases.

   The limitation of our study is the small power. How- ever this
   project has highlighted important issues in the training and
   development of CAMHS (child and adoles- cent mental health services)
   links with our paediatric colleagues.

   Joint problem-based training sessions with paediatricians and
   psychiatrists needs to be rolled out in teaching set-ups, with a view
   to developing liaison services.

CONCLUSION
==========

In this survey, the paediatricians have identified the need and areas
for future training and have agreed in majority for joint collaborative
working of both Facul- ties.

The next step is to develop a training pac- kage to address the areas
identified by the paediatricians.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Khan F, Shehzad RK, Chaudhry HR.Child and adoles- cent mental health
   services in Pakistan : current situa- tion, future directions and
   possible solutions.International Psychiatry 2008; 5: 86-8.

2. Stocking M, Rothney W, Grosser A, Goodwin R. Psycho- pathology in the
   paediatric hospital. Am J Public Health 1972; 62: 551-6.

3. Fritz GR. Consultation – liaison in child psychiatry and the
   evolution of psychiatry. Psychosomatics 1990; 31: 85-90.

4. Meltzer H, Gatward R, Goodman R, Ford T. The mental health of
   children and adolescents in Great Britain : Summary Report 2000
   London : Office of National Statistics.

5. Kurtz Z, Thornes R, Wolkinds S. Services for the mental health of
   children and young people in England. A na- tional review 1994.
   London. Dept. of Public Health, South Thames RHA.

..

   APPENDIX

   **Survey: Developing child and adolescent paediatric liai- son
   services in Lahore-Pakistan.**

   *This survey is being carried out by Mental Health Services, SIMS
   with a view to develop paediatric liaison services and to identify
   training needs in professionals managing the child and adolescent
   population. All information gathered will be treated in the strictest
   confidence & will remain entirely anony- mous. Please do not leave
   blanks or unanswered questions.*

-  Year of Graduation ……………….

-  Experience in Paediatrics (years)

-  Grade (please circle): SHO/ MO/ FCPS Part 2 trainee/ Consultant/
   Assitstant Profssor/ Associate Professor.

1) **Do you have any formal training in exploring mental health issues
   in the child and adolescent population?**

..

   Yes D No D

2) **Do you feel confident in giving a psychiatric diag- nosis to a
      child with? Mental health illness**

..

   Yes D No D

3) **If you diagnose a child with mental health illness, do you
   routinely use Published diagnostic criteria?**

..

   Yes D No D

   If yes, which one ……………………………

4) **Do you feel a psychiatric diagnosis in child and adolescent
   population is stigmatising?**

..

   Strongly agree / agree/ disagree / strongly disagree / none

5) **Do you feel confident in assessing a child for physi- cal,
   emotional or Sexual abuse?**

..

   Yes D No D

   If No where do you refer these children……….........

6) **Are you aware of any national child protection guidelines?**

..

   Yes D No D

7) **Do you feel there is a need for paediatric Liaison services in
   Pakistan?**

..

   Strongly agree/ agree/ disagree /strongly disagree/none

8) **Do you feel lectures and training seminars in child and adolescent?
   Psychiatry would be beneficial in addressing your training needs?**

..

   Yes D No D
