Expansion Of Mental Health In Primary Care – Charity Begins At Home
===================================================================

   Dr. Saeed Farooq

The high prevalence of psychiatric disorders and their colossal impact
on the developing countries economics is now well established. It is
also beyond doubt that this high burden can’t be faced without expanding
the mental health in Primary Care and involving the general
practitioners. It is therefore, not only understandable but highly
relevant that the 15\ :sup:`th` international psychiatric conference has
selected this important theme. While we are embarking on this journey,
it is important that we chart our course carefully. Four important
considerations come to mind.

First, recent studies at least from UK paint a grim picture of
educational interventions for the General Practitioners, one of the most
commonly advocated approaches for encountering depression in primary
care. Upton et al report that when provided with the ICD-10 PHC Mental
Health guidelines, a group of 14 GPs who volunteered for the study
showed no improvement in overall detection of mental health problems in
accuracy of diagnosis or the prescription of antidepressant, although
there was a significant increase in the number of patients diagnosed
with depression or unexplained physical symptoms.\ **1** In a subsequent
study which was much larger and better designed ( unlike Upton et al it
also included a comparison group of GPs who were not provided with extra
information) largely similar negative result was obanied.\ **2** The
findings of these studies are also consistent with Hampshire Depression
Project, a large cluster RCT of educational intervention for GPs on
recognition and management of depression.\ **3** A commentary by
Cooper\ **4** accompanying one of these articles has rightly pointed out
that the findings of these studies may not be applicable to developing
countries, where there are few psychiatrists and even fewer trained GPS.

Other explanations are also possible. These findings however raise
serious questions for those who are planning to train primary care
physicians for the detection of common psychiatric disorders in the
primary care. While developing educational interventions and primary
care guidelines for PHC physicians as a part of attempt to expand mental
health in primary care in Pakistan, we need to take a different look at
the whole process to avoid the reinventing of the wheel.

The observation made by Cooper is entirely valid in identifying the fact
there are only few trained GPs in the primary care in developing world.
This should also force us to think about the nature of primary care in
developing countries. We did raise the question of definition of the
term “community psychiatry” in developing countries sometimes
back\ **5**. Primary care is perhaps another ill defined term in the
context of developing countries. Take one example. How much of primary
care is provided by the so called tertiary care hospitals in our
country? Anyone who has worked in tertiary care hospitals can easily
identify the fact that a large amount of the workload in these hospitals
is actually primary care. Exact estimates are not available for the
proportion of primary care being provided by the tertiary care
hospitals. This is a question for the public health researchers and is
unfortunately not seriously addressed. It would be however, interesting
to note the conclusion of Oxford policy Management Group, hired by the
North West Frontier Province (NWFP) government to study and propose
health sector reforms. After a through analysis of health structure in
NWFP, they noted that “Tertiary facilities provide a large volume of
primary services”. On a detailed analysis of health accounts of the
province, they found that actual share of genuine tertiary care in these
hospitals may be as low as 2% **6**.

Finally, another important aspect of a lack well developed structure of
primary care is that there are no structured training programmes for the
primary care physicians. In absence of such a training programme it is a
common observation that the GPs generally follow the trends set by the
tertiary care doctors especially the teaching staff. This fact is well
recognized by the pharmaceutical industry while promoting the drugs. The
doctors in these hospitals are termed by the pharmaceutical industry
“opinion leaders”, as their prescription pattern is widely followed.

While facing the challenge of expanding the mental health in primary
care we will also have to consider the constraints imposed by manpower
and resources. With about 500 psychiatrists for the whole country mostly
concentrated in tertiary car teaching hospitals we can not expect them
to reach out in the primary care for expansion of mental health in
primary care. We will have to use our resources optimally looking for
new opportunities. An important avenue could be to train the doctors
working in tertiary care hospitals in recognition and management of
common psychiatric disorders. With very limited number of psychiatrists
to provide the services as well as training this may be cost effective
way of using the resources maximally. In view of very significant
overlap in tertiary and primary care this will effectively serve the
primary care. The fact that a significant proportion of tertiary care
hospital doctors, especially in junior cadre, also work part time in
primary care and are normally transferred between different levels of
care, will also enhance the value of such training. More importantly,
perhaps it will also help to maintain the continuity of training and its
impact while both the trainers and trainees will remain in touch with
each other not only in training but also in routine day to day working
in the hospital setting. In view of high psychiatric morbidity
associated wit physical disorders it will serve also to easy detection
and management of this morbidity. A recent study of the attitudes and
hospital doctors shows that there is a great demand for this as
well\ **7**.

It can therefore be argued that training the doctors working in various
disciplines in tertiary care hospitals can be a very cost effective
strategy for the expansion of mental health into primary care in a
developing country like Pakistan. So should not charity begin at home?

REFERENCES:
===========

1. Upton, MW; Evans M; Goldberg, DP; et al. Evaluation of ICD- 10 PHC
   Mental health guideline in detecting and manning depression in
   primary care. British Journal Psychiatry 1999; 175: 476-82.

2. Croudace, T; Evans, J; Harrision, G; et al. Impact of the WHO, ICD-10
   PHC Diagnostic management of guidelines for mental disorders in
   detection and out come in primary care. Cluster randomized controlled
   trial. British Journal of Psychiatry,2003; 182, 20-30.

3. Thompson, C; Kinmanth, A. L; Stevens, L, et al. Effects of clinical –
   practice guideline on detection and out come of depression in primary
   care: Hampshire Depression Project randomized control trial. Lancet,
   355, 185-91.

4. Cooper J. E Detection and management of Depression and primary care
   British Journal of Psychiatry, 2003, 182, 1-2.

5. Farooq S. Manhas F. Community Psychiatry in developing countries- A
   misnomer? The Psychiatric Bulletin UK June 2001, 26-7.

6. Oxford Policy management group.Health system in NWFP. Department of
   health. Government of NWFP, 2000. Peshawar.

7. Fraooq S, Akhter JA, Ijaz M et al .The attitude and knowledge of
   hospital doctors towards management of common psychiatric disorders.
   Submitted for publication.
