   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 86-89 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

PSYCHOLOGICAL MORBIDITY AMONG PRIMARY CARE ATTENDEES IN EARTHQUAKE
AFFECTED AREAS OF NORTHERN PAKISTAN AND AZAD KASHMIR

   Syed Ahmer, Haider Naqvi, Muhammad Kamran Khan, Naim Siddiqui, Murad
   Moosa Khan

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objective:** The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence
   of psychiatric morbidity in patients presenting to Primary Healthcare
   Centers in the affected regions of Pakistan and Azad Kashmir, in the
   aftermath of the October 8, 2005 earthquake. Another objective was to
   carry out a need-assessment survey from patients’ and health care
   providers’ perspective.

   **Design:** Observational study.

   **Place & duration of study:** The study was carried out in Arja and
   Muzaffarabad in Azad Kashmir, and Garhi Habibullah in North West
   Frontier Province in Pakistan, over a period of three weeks.

   **Subjects & Methods:** A sample of patients visiting primary care
   centers in the above mentioned areas was enrolled by convenient
   method of sampling. Data was collected on a specially designed data
   collection form. Psychiatric diagnoses were based on ICD-10
   diagnostic criteria.

   **Results:** 140 patients participated in this study. The median age
   of the patients seen in the study was 32 years (Age range; 1-73
   years), and an inter-quartile range of 21-40 years. Males and females
   were represented almost equally (51% and 49% respectively). More were
   married (67%) than single (31 %). In our sample 30 % patients were
   diagnosed with Depressive disorder and 16% with Generalized Anxiety
   Disorder. Eighty one percent reported having suffered loss of
   property, 48% had suffered an injury during the earthquake and 21%
   reported loss of a family member. Treatment and shelter were
   identified as the most important needs both by the patients
   themselves and their primary care physicians.

   **Conclusion:** Five months after the earth quake most common
   psychiatric morbidity was Depression followed by Generalized Anxiety
   Disorder in primary care attendees in earthquake affected areas. PTSD
   was conspicuously absent despite the fact that all the participants
   had suffered significant losses. This needs to be taken into
   consideration when the plans for physical, psychological and social
   rehabilitation for this population are made.

   **Key words:** Primary care, Depression, Anxiety, PTSD.

INTRODUCTION
============

The October 8, 2005 earthquake was one of the worst natural disasters
ever to hit Pakistan with 5.8 mil-

   **Syed Ahmer**, MRCPsych Assistant Professor, Department of
   Psychiatry Faculty Offices Building, Aga Khan University Sta- dium
   road,Karachi 74800,Ph: 021 4864691-2

   **Haider Naqvi**, Department of Psychiatry, The Aga Khan Univer-
   sity, Karachi,

   **Muhammad Kamran Khan**, Surgical ‘C’ Unit, Ayub Teaching Hospital,
   Abbottabad

   **Naim Siddiqui**, Department of Psychiatry, The Aga Khan Uni-
   versity, Karachi

   **Murad Moosa Khan**, Department of Psychiatry, The Aga Khan
   University, Karachi

   **Correspondence: Dr Syed Ahmer**

lion people affected by it.1 Almost 100,000 died, about half of them
being children. Many survivors sustained spinal injuries and
amputations2. About 3.3 million were left homeless3. The World Health
Organization (WHO) warned that “the number made homeless, the destruc-
tion of roads and infrastructure, and the terrain over which the
catastrophe has struck make this a bigger disaster than the tsunami”4.

The long-term effects of such disasters are never solely physical5. In a
study on psychological distress among Bam earthquake survivors in Iran,
58% were found to be suffering from severe mental health prob- lems,
three times higher than reported psychological distress in the general
population6. Other studies have reported rates of depression and Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) as high as 42% and 63% respectively7.
One of the priorities set by the WHO in the immediate

   aftermath of the Pakistan earthquake was to address the mental health
   needs of a population struggling to come to terms with the loss of
   family and friends, pos- sessions and livelihoods2.

   In the aftermath of the earthquake, due to the col- lapse of the
   healthcare system in affected areas, the Governments of Pakistan and
   Azad Kashmir temporarily handed over the day-to-day running of 5
   primary healthcare centres in North West Frontier Province (NWFP) and
   Azad Kashmir to Aga Khan Health Ser- vices, Pakistan (AKHS, P). These
   centres were based at Arja, Langar Purah and Muzaffarabad in Azad
   Kashmir, and Garhi Habibullah and Shinkiari in NWFP. In March 2006,
   two teams of 2 consultant psychiatrists each, from the Aga Khan
   University (AKU) Karachi, traveled to these primary healthcare
   centres to provide training to the pri- mary care physicians working
   there in diagnosing and treating common mental disorders. SA and HN
   con- ducted training at Rural Health centre Arja, from the 13th to
   the 16th of March 2006, and MMK and NS conducted training from the
   20th to the 24th of March 2006 at the healthcare centre in Shinkiari.

   An observational study was conducted as a part of the training
   programme to determine the types of psy- chiatric illnesses patients
   were presenting with in the Primary Healthcare Centres in the
   earthquake affected regions, in order to assess the mental health
   needs of the affected population and to help us focus our present and
   future training accordingly.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

SA and HN, consultant psychiatrists at Aga Khan University, Karachi,
attended primary care physicians’ clinics at Arja and Muzaffarabad , in
order to collect data on patients being seen by the primary care
physicians and to provide hands on training in diagnosing and treat- ing
common mental disorders to these physicians. In data collection they
were assisted by MKK, a primary care physician working at another center
(Garhi Habibullah), who attended the first wave of the training at Arja.

Data were collected on a specially devised form which recorded basic
socio-demographic details, pre- senting complaints, details and types of
losses suffered by patients during the earthquake, details of medical
and psychiatric history, diagnostic conclusion of the in- dex
consultation, and three most important needs of pa- tients as assessed
by the patients themselves and the primary care physician seeing them.
The data were col- lected during routine consultations of patients with
their physician, to keep discomfort to the patients and disrup- tion to
the services at a minimum. The psychiatric diag- noses were based on
ICD-10 diagnostic criteria.

RESULTS
=======

A total of 140 patients were seen by SA, HN and MKK between 13th March
and 3rd April 2006. This consti-

tuted about 5 % of patients seen by all the primary care physicians at
these primary healthcare centres during this period. About 26% of the
cases included in the study were seen by psychiatrists while sitting as
observers in the primary care physicians’ clinics. The rest of the cases
were seen by MKK while working as a primary care physician in Garhi
Habibullah over the subsequent two weeks.

The median age of the patients seen in the study was 32 years, with age
range of 1-73 years, and an inter-quartile range of 21-40 years. 51% of
the patients were males and 49% were females. 67% were married, 31 %
were single and 2 % were widowed.

Eighty one percent (114/140) of patients reported having suffered loss
of property, 48% (67) had suffered an injury during the earthquake, 21%
(29) reported loss of a family member and 6% (8) said that they had
suffered professionally as a result of the earth- quake.

Of all the patients seen during the study 30% (42) were diagnosed as
suffering from a Depressive Episode and 16% (23) from Generalized
Anxiety Disorder. One person each was diagnosed as suffering from Abnor-
mal Grief Reaction, Specific Phobia, Agoraphobia, and Opioid Dependence
Syndrome.

The local primary care physicians reported that that they were aware of
people abusing drugs in the community but as they did not attend the
primary healthcare centres for help, they do not appear in the numbers
above. Similarly when we visited schools in the local areas we were
introduced to children who were experiencing significant psychological
problems but again they had not been taken to the primary healthcare
centres to get help for those symptoms.

The most common physical illnesses among the primary care attendees were
Gastritis (21%), Acute Res- piratory Infections (12%), and Hypertension
and Sca- bies (9% each). 39% of patients presented with the com- plaint
of generalised body aches symptoms which ap- peared to be medically
unexplained.

Treatment (96[68%]) and Shelter (95[67%]) were identified by the
participants as their primary needs, fol- lowed by money in 10% (14) of
cases, when explicit questions were asked regarding their most important
needs after the earthquake. The same two needs were also identified as
the most important by the primary care physicians for their patients
though relative percentages were different (treatment 75% [105], shelter
29% [40]). The doctors also identified clean water supplies as an
important need for about 6% (8) of their patients. When patients were
asked what services they needed Treatment and Shelter again topped the
list (66% each [93 & 92 respectively]), followed by food in 8% (11) of
cases.

DISCUSSION
==========

To our knowledge this study is one of the first to report rates of
psychological morbidity amongst primary care attendees in recent
earthquake affected areas of Pakistan. Our study reports 30 % point
prevalence for depression in primary care attendees in Earth Quake
affected areas of Northern Pakistan. This estimate is not too dissimilar
to previous studies assessing psychologi- cal morbidity in victims of
natural disaster in other coun- tries. In two studies on earthquake
survivors in Turkey the estimated rate of depression was 18% in
non-treat- ment seekers8 and 42% in treatment seekers7. Another study
reported a rate of 31% for major depression in earthquake survivors in
Turkey9. None of these studies have reported rates for generalised
anxiety disorder which was 16% in our study.

In our study we did not identify a single case pre- senting as classical
PTSD, even though we saw several people who refused to sleep under a
hard roof for fear of another earthquake. Some psychiatrists have
expressed doubts whether PTSD is a ‘disease’ or merely a sociopolitical
construct10, though others have refuted this point of view11. A study
from Indian Gujarat reported that even though PTSD was marked 3-6 months
after the earthquake, it was minimal 2 years after the event, while
sadness about the event was the only residual PTSD symptom12. Other
authors have reported significantly higher rates of PTSD in the
aftermath of earthquakes ranging from 4.5%(13) to 63%7, 14, 15.

There could be several possible explanations for this difference in PTSD
rates. We did not use a specific PTSD rating scale in contrast to many
of the other stud- ies. Considering the ethical issues and sensitivities
of post-disaster research we decided not to use any rating scales. We
intended to keep the study as close to rou- tine clinical practice as
possible. Also, as our study shows, focusing too narrowly on PTSD in the
aftermath of disasters may make researchers miss other common mental
health presentations like depressive and anxi- ety disorders. The other
possibility could be that 74% of the patients in our study were assessed
by Mohammad Kamran Khan who is not a psychiatrist. However, the two
psychiatrists SA and HN who assessed the rest of the patients also did
not see any patient as presenting with the full syndrome of PTSD.

Various models of providing psychological help were applied in the
aftermath of the October 8 earth- quake, including psychiatrists from
other areas of Paki- stan and abroad providing short-term direct
clinical care, training lay volunteers in providing some level of psy-
chological support, training primary care physicians working with
Non-Government Organisations (NGOs)

and training local primary care physicians. The first model, while very
well-intentioned, is unlikely to be sus- tainable in the long run. In
the second model, the role of psychological debriefing immediately after
a disaster is uncertain any way16. There would also be issues about the
fidelity of method and of evaluation of services pro- vided by these
volunteers. The third model would pro- vide long-term benefit only if
the NGOs stayed long- term, something that does not always happen once
the acute post-disaster phase is over. From our observation and
experience it seems to us that that the only viable and sustainable way
to address the mental health needs of this affected population is mental
health profession- als from other areas training the local primary care
phy- sicians in diagnosing and treating common mental dis- orders in the
short term, and in increasing local capacity and training more local
mental health professionals in the long term.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
===============

We wish to thank all doctors and paramedical staff at the five PHCs who
participated in our training, Mr Muhammad Zaman for data entry, and Dr
Rafey Faruqui & Mr John Arudo for commenting on an earlier manu- script
of this paper.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Asian Development Bank and World Bank report. Earth- quake,
    Pakistan. Preliminary damage and needs as- sessment. Islamabad:
    Asian Development Bank and World Bank Pakistan, November 12, 2005.

2.  Anonymous. A forecast of disaster for Pakistan. Lancet
    2005;366:1674.

3.  Cohen D. Rebuilding from the rubble. BMJ 2006;332:10.

4.  Moszynski P. Kashmir crisis is worse than the Asian tsu- nami, says
    WHO. BMJ 2005;331:926.

5.  Woersching JC, Snyder AE. Earthquakes in El Salva- dor: a
    descriptive study of health concerns in a rural community and the
    clinical implications: Part III—Mental health and psychosocial
    effects. Disaster Manag Re- sponse 2004;2:40-5.

6.  Montazeri A, Baradaran H, Omidvari S, Azin SA, Ebadi M, Garmaroudi
    G, et al. Psychological distress among Bam earthquake survivors in
    Iran: a population-based study. BMC Public Health 2005;5:4.

7.  Livanou M, Basoglu M, Salcioglu E, Kalendar D. Trau- matic stress
    responses in treatment-seeking earthquake survivors in Turkey. J
    Nerv Ment Dis 2002;190:816-23.

8.  Salcioglu E, Basoglu M, Livanou M. Long-term psycho- logical outcome
    for non-treatment-seeking earthquake survivors in Turkey. J Nerv
    Ment Dis 2003;191:154-60.

9.  Basoglu M, Salcioglu E, Livanou M. Traumatic stress responses in
    earthquake survivors in Turkey. J Trauma Stress 2002;15:269-76.

10. Summerfield D. The invention of post-traumatic stress disorder and
    the social usefulness of a psychiatric cat- egory. BMJ
    2001;322:95-8.

11. Mehta K, Vankar G, Patel V. Validity of the construct of
    post-traumatic stress disorder in a low-income country: Interview
    study of women in Gujarat, India. Br J Psy- chiatry 2005;187:585-6.

12. Roy N, Shah VH, Patel V, Bagalkote H. Surgical and psychosocial
    outcomes in the rural injured- a follow-up study of the 2001
    earthquake victims. Injury 2005;36: 927-34.

13. Roussos A, Goenjian AK, Steinberg AM, Sotiropoulou C, Kakaki M,
    Kabakos C, et al. Posttraumatic stress and depressive reactions
    among children and adolescents

..

   after the 1999 earthquake in Ano Liosia, Greece. Am J Psychiatry
   2005; 162:530-7.

14. Goenjian AK, Walling D, Steinberg AM, Karayan I, Najarian LM, Pynoos
    R. A prospective study of post- traumatic stress and depressive
    reactions among treated and untreated adolescents 5 years after a
    catastrophic disaster. Am J Psychiatry 2005; 162: 2302-8.

15. Goenjian AK, Steinberg AM, Najarian LM, Fairbanks LA, Tashjian M,
    Pynoos RS. Prospective study of post- traumatic stress, anxiety, and
    depressive reactions after earthquake and political violence. Am J
    Psychiatry 2000;157:911-6.

16. Rose S, Bisson J, Churchill R SW. Psychological debrief- ing for
    preventing post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Cochrane Database
    Syst Rev 2002.
