   JPPS 2007; 4(2): 71-75 GUEST EDITORIAL

THE SPIRITUAL DIMENSION IN PSYCHIATRY

   Andrew Sims

Professor Andrew Sims is former Dean and President of the Royal College
of Psychiatrists UK. He was also the first director of Continuing
Professional Development for the Royal College of Psychiatrists. He is
author of one of the most authoritative books on psychopathology
‘Symptoms in the mind: an introduction to descriptive psychopathology’.
He has been instrumental in establishing The Spirituality and Psychiatry
Special Interest Group at The College. — Editor

INTRODUCTION
============

It is a great pleasure, and an honour, to be writing for the Journal of
the Pakistan Psychiatric Society on this important subject. It is my
opinion that Pakistani psy- chiatrists could be one of the most
influential groups in Britain today. Taking spiritual issues seriously
is some- thing we have in common. Muslim and Christian psy- chiatrists
both believe, passionately, in the spiritual di- mension. Ahmed Okasha,
former President of the World Psychiatric Association, an Egyptian
Muslim, has writ- ten: *“The emphasis of all religions and their
spirituality focuses not on the person but on the role of the person in
relation to God and the family”1*. The three monotheis- tic religions
share the creed of the Old Testament prophet, Micah:

   “He has showed you, O man, what is good. And what does the Lord
   require of you?

   To act justly and to love mercy

   and to walk humbly with your God2.

For most of my adult life there has been violent conflict in Northern
Ireland, the ‘Troubles’, which has harmed the whole of Britain. For the
last few years, the situation has become more peaceful. How did the im-
provement come about? The media, and many in En- gland, who have never
visited Northern Ireland, de- scribed it as a religious war – Catholics
versus Protes- tants. That being so, it was quite obvious that those
quali- fied to sort it out should have been atheists, or at least
agnostics. Or was it?

In fact, those who eventually brought peace to the province came from
within the two religious communi- ties – devout, God-fearing Christians,
both Catholic and Protestant, meeting with each other and praying for
peace. Prominent among these was John, Lord Alderdice, long term
Chairman of the Alliance Party, some time Speaker of the Northern
Ireland Assembly, consultant psychiatrist and an openly practising
Chris- tian. This combination of an insightful psychiatrist, a per- son
brave enough to get involved in public affairs, and a religious believer
has been, in my opinion, a very pow- erful force for good.

   **Correspondence:**

   **Prof. Andrew Sims**, MA. MD. FRCPsych. FRCP, Emeritus Pro- fessor
   of Psychiatry, University of Leeds

This paper will discuss what we mean by spiritual- ity and spiritual
care. I will also describe beliefs among psychiatrists in the United
Kingdom and the recent in- crease of interest in spiritual issues
amongst psychia- trists. I will then review outcome studies in religion
and mental health as well as the implications of spirituality for
psychiatric practice.

*Physical and mental*
---------------------

Most doctors have now got beyond assuming that all ‘real’ illnesses
arise from solely organic pathology. General physicians, mostly, now
accept psychological factors as being important aetiologically; most
psychia- trists consider mental illness as being both physical and
mental in causation and treatment. I would like to elabo- rate further
on this

Disease or illness is a social construct.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A philosopher who was deeply interested in health and illness, Peter
Sedgwick, wrote: “All departments of nature below the level of mankind
are exempt both from disease and from treatment – until man intervenes
with his own human classifications of disease and treatment. The blight
that strikes at corn or at potatoes is a *human invention,* for if man
wished to cultivate parasites (rather than potatoes or corn) there would
be no “blight”, but simply the necessary foddering of the
parasite-crop”3. Thus, because we want to grow potatoes we categorise
potato blight as ‘disease of potatoes’. Because I dislike becoming less
supple as I grow older, I call the normal aging of my joints,
‘osteo-arthritis’.

Physical or mental illness is an unhelpful dis- tinction.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Robert Kendell, Past President of the Royal Col- lege of Psychiatrists,
wrote: “Not only is the distinction between mental and physical illness
ill-founded and in- compatible with contemporary understanding of
disease, it is also damaging to the long-term interests of patients
themselves”4. Doctors should try and get away from hav- ing a flow-chart
in their minds that sends ‘physical’ and ‘mental’ in opposite
directions.

Every physical illness has psychological con- comitants.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I challenge you to think of a disease where this is not so: diabetes,
bronchopneumonia, hypothyroidism,

lumbar disc protrusion, all have organic pathologies, and all have
psychological consequences.

Most mental illnesses manifest physical symp- toms.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, schizophrenia will
appear in any nosological list in psy- chiatry. Yet, each of them is
associated with physical manifestations.

Anorexia nervosa, alcohol misuse: are they physi- cal or mental?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These conditions are obviously both physical and mental; they require
psychiatric management, and some- times medical as well.

After a long campaign against reductionism, we are finally agreed, as
doctors, that there is both a physi- cal and psychological element in
all illness. Now, we need to add spiritual aspects of health to our
medical consideration.

*What is spirituality?*
-----------------------

Dictionary definitions are not particularly helpful. For instance, in
the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, *Spiritual- ity* is defined: “that which
has a spiritual character, the quality or condition of being spiritual”.
*Spiritual* means “of, pertaining to, affecting or concerning, the
spirit or higher moral qualities, especially as regarded in a reli-
gious aspect”5.

   A definition of spirituality agreed by the Spirituality and
   Psychiatry Special Interest Group of the Royal Col- lege of
   Psychiatrists for a forthcoming book, is: *“Spiritu- ality is a
   distinctive, potentially creative and universal dimension of human
   experience arising both within the inner subjective awareness of
   individuals and within communities, social groups and traditions. It
   may be ex- perienced as relationship with that which is intimately
   ‘inner’, immanent and personal, within the self and oth- ers, and/or
   as relationship with that which is wholly ‘other’, transcendent and
   beyond the self. It is experienced as being of fundamental or
   ultimate importance and is thus concerned with matters of meaning and
   purpose in life, truth and values”6*. This is somewhat
   over-complicated for those of us coming from an established world
   reli- gion but it is designed to include a very wide range of
   philosophy and creed.

The word *religion* has the same root as *ligament* and *ligature.* It
is that grounding of faith and basis of life to which I regard myself as
being bound, a rope that ties me to God and to other believers. In
everyday conversa- tion, spirituality has come to mean almost the same
as religion but is ‘politically correct’ in involving also those people
in our society who have no religious affiliation. I think of
spirituality, without religion, as a marvelous, gleaming Ferrari, but
with no engine! Jonathan Sacks, the Chief Rabbi, has written a bit more

politely: “Spirituality changes our mood, religion changes our life”7.

An operational definition of spirituality that I find useful, runs:

(a) *Aims and goals;* looking for the meaning in life, what one regards
    as essential;

(b) *Human solidarity;* the interrelatedness of all, both doctor and
    patient; consciously and uncon- sciously-shared beliefs;

(c) *Wholeness of the person;* the spirit is not separate from body or
    mind, but includes them;

(d) *Moral aspects;* what is seen as good, beautiful, enjoyable, as
    opposed to what is bad, ugly, hate- ful;

(e) *Awareness of God;* the connection between God and man8.

*Spiritual care*
----------------

So much for what spirituality means, but what does this imply when it is
extended to medical practice? What are the essential elements of
spiritual care? This list was constructed from what patients would like
their doc- tors to take into consideration:

-  *An environment fostering hope, joy and creativity.* This may seem
   quite surprising to many of us, who consider our work to be making a
   correct diagno- sis, arranging for appropriate treatment, ascertain-
   ing that it is working and ensuring satisfactory fol- low-up.

-  *Being valued and trusted, treated with respect and dignity.* Sadly,
   patients do not feel they receive this and feel that more emphasis on
   spiritual values would make it more likely.

-  *Sympathetic and confidential listening.* Again, we should be doing
   this irrespective of spirituality. Our patients do not feel that they
   are *listened* to.

-  *Help to make sense of, and derive meaning from, illness
   experiences.* Spirituality is vitally concerned with personal
   meaning, and meaning for the pa- tient within the family and
   community group.

-  *Receiving permission, encouragement (and some- times guidance) to
   develop spiritually*\ 9. Many pa- tients would welcome a more open
   acknowledg- ment of the spiritual aspects of illness.

*Belief amongst psychiatrists in the UK*
----------------------------------------

A survey of religious attitudes of psychiatrist’s in relation to their
clinical practice revealed that 73% of UK psychiatrists and 38% of
patients reported no religious affiliation10. So, psychiatrists are much
less likely to have any religious practice than their patients - or the
general public, 72% of whom described themselves as Christian in the
2001 UK Census11. To continue with the figures for British
psychiatrists, 78% of psychiatrists attended reli- gious services less
than once a month. Only 39% of women psychiatrists, and 19% of men
believe in God. However, the rather odd finding is that 92% of psychia-

trists consider religion and mental illness to be con- nected, which
would presume that enquiry about the patient’s religious situation is
relevant.

This highlights the position in the United King- dom; when discussing
these issues within the medical profession, the word *spiritual* may
well be preferable. The word *religious* carries too much historical
baggage.

*Recent increase in interest in spiritual* issues amongst psychiatrists
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Why has there been such an anti-religious atti- tude from psychiatrists?
To answer this question, we have to look at history, both recent and
more remote.

The roots of psychiatry were not anti-religious, but anti-clerical,
going back to the witch-hunts of the 17th century and the rise of
Darwinism in the 19th century. Reductionism dominated medicine in the
first half of the twentieth century - mankind was regarded as ‘nothing
but’ an excessively cerebral, erect ape. Following on from this, human
behaviour was considered to be ‘noth- ing but’ Pavlovian conditional or
Skinnerian operant con- ditional responses.

Freud, in his book ‘Moses and Monotheism’, had stated that belief in a
single God is delusional12. Not surprisingly, many religious leaders had
come to iden- tify Freud, psychoanalysis, and, by association, psychia-
try with atheism and amorality. On the one hand, psychiatrists often
believed that religion was ‘bad for your health’. On the other, the
therapeutic effec- tiveness of psychiatry was low and the Church dis-
trusted it for ‘leading people astray’ without helping them at all.

In the 1960s, religious belief amongst patients was frequently equated
with neurosis, and amongst trainees in psychiatry was regarded as being
seriously unscien- tific and strongly discouraged. There were a few
brave pioneers but in general the atmosphere in psychiatry was strongly
anti-religious and anti-spiritual.

Psychiatric books of the time virtually ignored reli- gion, for example,
the standard British textbook, Mayer- Gross, Slater and Roth has only
two references to reli- gion in the index: “‘Religiosity’ in
deteriorated epilep- tic”, and, “Religious belief, neurotic search
for”13. The latter was aimed as an attack upon psychoanalysis but
assumed religion is for, “the hesitant, the guilt-ridden, the
excessively timid, those lacking clear convictions with which to face
life”.

There was no sense that the patient’s religious beliefs were an
important element to be taken into ac- count in the psychiatric history,
formulation and plan- ning of treatment. Spiritual aspects of the
patient’s prob- lem were usually ignored. It did not even enter into
con- sideration that there could be collaboration between psychiatrists
and religious leaders, jointly trying to help people.

In the 1970s, there was a very slight thaw. Psy- chiatrists with
religious beliefs began meeting with oth- ers who were similarly minded.
More practicing Chris- tians had begun to enter the specialty of
psychiatry. Very

important at this time was the contribution of psychia- trists from
Pakistan and many other countries. There was an influx into psychiatry
in Britain of those from other faiths, particularly Muslim, Hindu, and
Buddhist, most of these having qualified in medicine in other countries.
Many of these assumed that religion would be an impor- tant part of
everyone’s life, including patients and doc- tors. There was a mood, the
beginning of ‘post-modern- ism’, that perhaps materialism ‘had gone too
far’.

During the 1980s, informal groups of psychiatrists with a concern for
faith developed, churches were be- coming better disposed towards
psychiatry because treatment was more effective and more Christians were
entering the specialty as trainees. During this decade, psychiatrists
with spiritual interests gained confidence in expressing their faith and
working out the conse- quences for their professional practice.
Religious belief was still not regarded as quite respectable by the rest
of the profession but there was less animosity.

In the 1990s the quiet progress of the 70s & 80s became more public in
various ways. For example, Prince Charles addressed the Royal College of
Psy- chiatrists in 1991 at its 150th anniversary on the impor- tance of
recognizing the spiritual needs of patients14. At a joint meeting of the
College and the Association of European Psychiatrists, the then
Archbishop of Canter- bury emphasized the importance of understanding
and collaboration between psychiatrists and religious lead- ers15.

Professor Bhugra convened several conferences of Religion and
Psychiatry16. My valedictory as Presi- dent of the RCPsych, ‘Psyche –
spirit as well as mind?’ argued for bringing the spiritual into
psychiatry17. There was a different attitude towards religion resulting
in some change of practice during this decade; there was also the
beginning of research in the area of mental illness and religious
belief. At long last, religion had come to be recognized as important
for mental health18.

There have been further changes in the early years of this century. In
2000, the Spirituality and Psychiatry Special Interest Group of the
College was formed and has now grown to more than 1300 members.
Spirituality has become an accepted topic in education and prac- tice of
psychiatry. What can we learn from history? Our pessimism is not always
well founded - attitudes can, and sometimes do, change over time.

*Religion and health: outcome studies*
--------------------------------------

The next part of the spiritual dimension in psy- chiatry that I want to
highlight is quite surprising – it arises from meta-analysis of the
epidemiological research. Back in the 60s psychiatrists had thought that
religion dam- aged your health. Was this so? The essential work to
answer this question is Koenig, McCullough & Larson, *Religion and
Health,* 200119. This is a massive book, cit- ing 1200 original research
studies and 400 reviews. It covers the whole of health\ *,* with 10
chapters on physical and 10 on mental health. In most of these studies,
reli- gious practice or belief was added as an extra to the

main study; this is, methodologically, a strength, in that it shows that
the research was carried out without positive or negative religious
bias. Research method for this book was rigorous, and papers were
weighted for quality of design, statistical analysis and interpretation
of results.

For looking at the relationship between religion and mental health, the
following factors were investi- gated; religion and well-being,
depression, suicide, anxi- ety disorders, schizophrenia and other
psychoses, al- cohol and drug use, delinquency, marital instability and
personality.

From the results of research studies conducted in these areas, the
authors demonstrated that “Religious involvement is correlated with,
well-being, happiness and life satisfaction; hope and optimism; purpose
and meaning in life, higher self-esteem; bereavement adap- tation and
greater social support and less loneliness; lower rates of depression
and faster recovery from de- pression; lower rates of suicide and fewer
positive atti- tudes towards suicide; less anxiety; less psychosis and
fewer psychotic tendencies; lower rates of alcohol and drug use and
abuse; less delinquency and criminal ac- tivity; greater marital
stability and satisfaction…”

To summarise their findings, in which only a few studies were initially
designed to examine the effects of religious involvement on health: over
80% of papers showed a positive correlation between religion and good
health; correlations between religious belief and greater well being
“typically equal or exceed correlations be- tween well-being and other
psychosocial variables, such as social support”. Considering how strong
a protective factor social support is, for example, in the work of
George Brown, this is a massive claim20.

*Implication for Psychiatric practice*
--------------------------------------

1. It is very important that we should be taking a *spiri- tual history*
   and recognize the importance of spiri- tual issues for each of our
   patients. Larry Culliford has written a clear and comprehensive
   article on how to do this for psychiatrists in Advances in Psy-
   chiatric Treatment21. A briefer form of religious his- tory taking
   recommended for the American College of Physicians has the following
   four questions, which can be asked in a couple of minutes22:

   a. Is faith (religion, spirituality) important to you in this
         illness?

   b. Has faith (religion, spirituality) been impor- tant to you at
         other times in your life?

   c. Do you have someone to talk to about reli- gious matters?

   d. Would you like to explore religious matters with someone?

2. Spiritual aspects are vitally important for patients and doctors, for
   religious and non-religious people, for Muslims and Christians.
   Prayer is central for both religions.

3. Both the Muslim and Christian religions emphasise compassionate care
   for patients, and the whole person approach, including body, mind and
   spirit.

4. Whatever our religion and whatever the patient’s religion we should
   be alert – patients may have been inoculated against displaying their
   beliefs before sceptical doctors and be reluctant to dis- cuss what
   they hold with great conviction.

5. Both religions have a strong, ethical framework for medical
   decision-making in many important areas; on many topics this is the
   same for both religions.

6. We both, Muslims and Christians, recognise a need for co-operation
   with others in helping our patient – relatives, friends, ministers of
   religion, and so on. We do not see any individual in isola- tion from
   the rest of the community.

7. For both the foundations for good medical prac- tice are directly
   established from the religion itself

CONCLUSION
==========

I will end with a quotation from Professor John Swinton, who has written
an excellent book entitled Spiri- tuality and Mental Health Care23. He
makes the point that psychiatrists and other mental health professionals
need to be *bilingual*, “to become fluent in two languages: the language
of psychiatry and psychology… and the language of spirituality that
focuses on issues of mean- ing, hope, value, connectedness and
transcendence”

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Okasha A. The individual versus the family: an Islamic and
    traditional societies’ perspective. In: Cox J, Campbell AV, Fulford
    KWM, editors. Medicine of the Person London: Jessica Kingsley, 2006:
    110-7.

2.  Micah. New York: American Bible Society, 1999: 6: 8

3.  Sedgwick P. Illness - mental and otherwise. In Caplan AL, Engelhardt
    HT, McCartney JJ, editors. Concepts of Health and Disease:
    Interdisciplinary Perspectives. Lon- don: Addison-Wesley, 1981.

4.  Kendell RE. The distinction between mental and physi- cal illness.
    Br J Psychiatry 2001; 178: 490-3.

5.  The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary on Historical Prin- ciples.
    3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973.

6.  Cook CCH. Addiction and spirituality. Addiction 2004; 99: 539-51.

7.  Sacks J. ‘Spirituality’ is escapist, shallow and self-indul- gent.
    The Times 2002 August 24th.

8.  Sims A. ‘Psyche’ Spirit as well as mind? Br J Psychiatry 1994; 165:
    441-6.

9.  Nathan MM. A study of spiritual care in mental health practice:
    patients’ and nurses’ perceptions. [Thesis]. Enfield: Middlesex
    University, 1997.

10. Neeleman J, King MB. Psychiatrists’ religious attitudes in relation
    to their clinical practice: A survey of 231 psy-

..

   chiatrists. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 1993; 88:

   420-4

11. Office for National Statistics. Census 2001 [CD supple- ment to the
    National report for England and Wales and Key Statistics for local
    authorities in England and Wales] ONS, 2003.

12. Freud S. Moses and Monotheism: An Outline of Psycho-Analysis and
    Other Works. In: Strachey J edi- tor. The Standard Edition of the
    Complete Psychologi- cal Works of Sigmund Freud. London: Hogarth
    Press, 1937.

13. Mayer-Gross W, Slater E, Roth M. Clinical Psychiatry. 3rd ed.
    London: Baillière Tindall & Cassell, 1969.

14. Lecture by HRH The Prince of Wales, as Patron, to the Royal College
    of Psychiatrists, Brighton, Friday 5 July 1991. Br J Psychiatry
    1991; 159: 763-8.

15. Carey G. Towards wholeness: transcending the barri- ers between
    religion and psychiatry. Br J Psychiatry 1999; 170: 296-7.

16. Bhugra D. Psychiatry and Religion: context, consensus and
    controversies. London: Routledge, 1996.

17. Sims A. ‘Psyche’ — Spirit as well as mind? Br J Psychia- try 1994;
    165: 441- 6.

18. Okasha A. Religion and Mental Health at the Turn of the Century.
    Plenary Events, XI World Congress of Psychia- try, Hamburg, August
    6-12, 1999.

19. Koenig HG, McCullough ME, Larson DB. Handbook of Religion and
    Health. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.

20. Brown GW, Harris TO. Social Origins of Depression. London:
    Tavistock, 1978.

21. Culliford L. Taking a spiritual history. Adv Psych Treat 2007; 13:
    212-9.

22. Lo B, Quill T, Tulsky J. Discussing palliative care with patients.
    Ann Intern Med 1999; 130: 744-9.

23. Swinton J. Spirituality and Mental Health Care, page

174. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2001: 174.
