JPPS 2008; 5(1): 41-42 CASE REPORT

CHILDHOOD PSYCHOGENIC SNEEZING

Avinash De Sousa

ABSTRACT
========

   Sneezing in childhood is a common occurrence which is often organic
   in nature. In some cases however intractable sneezing may be
   psychogenic in origin. We present herewith a case of a 10 year old
   girl with intractable sneezing of psychogenic origin that responded
   to psychological interventions.

   **Key words**: Childhood Psychogenic Sneezing.

INTRODUCTION
============

Common cold and sneezing are common occur- rences in children but
intractable sneezing in children is a rare occurrence. A large number of
cases since then have been reported in adolescents with hardly 10 re-
ports in children alone. Majority of these were psy- chogenic in origin
with multifactorial causative factors1 It has been noted that the
occurrence has a female pre- ponderance2 and that sneezing persists when
awake while there is no sneezing during periods of sleep3.

Organic sneezing has been shown to respond to topical nasal anesthesia4
while various psychological therapies such as supportive psychotherapy,
relaxation therapy and hypnotherapy have all been effective in sneezing
that is psychogenic in nature5. In most cases of psychogenic sneezing
there is an underlying psy- chiatry history and psychological stressor
that needs to be ascertained. Sneezing may have neuropsychiatric origins
such as neuroimmunological6, epileptic and va- somotor causes.

It has been noted that psychogenic sneezing is made up of aborted or
pseudosneeze with little or no inspiratory phase, short nasal grunting
and minimal aerolization in the nasal secretions7.

Here we report the case of an 11 year old girl with intractable sneezing
of psychogenic origin that re- sponded to psychological interventions.

CASE HISTORY
============

A 11 year old girl studying in Standard VI was brought by her parents
with complaints of continuous sneezing and heaviness in the head for the
past 1 week. The child was normal prior to that and a week back had
suddenly developed sneezing. There was no associ- ated nasal discharge,
watering of the eyes, cough and

   **Correspondence :**

   **Dr. Avinash De Sousa,** Consultant Psychiatrist, Carmel, 18 St.
   Francis Avenue, Willingdon Colony Santacruz West Mumbai-54, India.

fever. The sneezing was continuous and did not how- ever occur during
sleep as reported by the parents. There was no past history of
allergies, bronchial asthma or medication sensitivity. The child was
seen by the ENT physician who gave her a trial of antihistamnics,
bronchodilators and intranasal corticosteroid aerosols. This caused no
improvement in her symptoms. Local nasal examination, ENT check up and X
Ray Nasal Si- nuses were normal. A CT Scan of the Head also re- vealed
nothing. She was also evaluated by two pediatri- cians, two chest
physicians and another ENT physician who were not successful in reducing
her symptoms. All medications were tapered off in 3 weeks and the child
was sent for a psychiatric evaluation.

On detailed psychological assessment it was noted that one of her
classmates had bronchial asthma and uncontrollable sneezing. The child
had seen these episodes. She had noted that the classmate was given
special treatment and attention in the school by all the teachers. Her
classmate was also missing school regu- larly due to her medical
problems and would probably be missing her examinations as well. The
child in our case when questioned further revealed incongruent parenting
practices between both her parents as well as a pressure on her to
perform well in the forthcoming school examinations.

The child was given individual supportive psycho- therapy and was given
suggestion and explained the nature of her symptoms. Her family was also
called in for joint and separate sessions with their goals for the child
being revised as well change in parenting practices being suggested.
Marital counseling was offered to the parents for their differences. The
parents were coun- seled about the nature of their child’s illness, its
onset and aggravating factors. The child was also given exam related
counseling to alleviate exam stress and was started on Tab. Clonazepam
0.25mg half a tablet twice a day to reduce her anxiety. This was tapered
off in 3 weeks once counseling was successful in reducing the fre-
quency of her sneezing followed by complete remis- sion. On following
her up monthly for the next 6 months she did not re-develop any
sneezing.

DISCUSSION
==========

The child in our case report had intractable sneez- ing. The examination
and investigations were normal. Detection of psychological stressors and
the conversion model was paramount in the amelioration of her symp-
toms. It was noted that once the underlying stressor as a cause of her
symptoms and the secondary gain desired from teachers as well as the
primary gain were explained to parents and to the child, there was a
marked improve- ment in her symptoms. Here we used anxiolytic drugs like
Clonazepam to reduce the initial intense anxiety and make the child more
amenable to psychotherapy. The role of supportive psychotherapy,
behavior therapy, hypnosis, relaxation therapy and family support in the
management of these problems have already been docu- mented.

Delayed diagnosis often results in extensive medical investigations,
visits to multiple physicians and specialists, stress for the child,
stress for the par- ents as well loss of academics due to absenteeism
from school. Though rare, intractable psychogenic sneezing

must be kept in mind when dealing with the vexing problems of conversion
and somatoform disorders in children.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Fochtmann LJ. Intractable sneezing as a conversion symptom.
   Psychosomatics 1995 ; 36 : 103-12.

2. Keating MU, O’Connell EJ, Sachs MI. Intractable parox- ysmal sneezing
   in an adolescent. Ann Allergy 1989 ; 62: 429-31.

3. Gopalan P, Browning ST. Intractable paroxysmal sneez- ing. J Laryngol
   Otol 2002; 116: 958-9.

4. Aggarwal J, Portney J. Intractable sneezing with a spe- cific
   psychogenic origin. Ann Allergy 1986 ; 56 : 345-6.

5. Shapiro RS. Paroxysmal sneezing in children : two cases. J
   Otolaryngol 1992 ; 21 : 437-8.

6. Herman JJ. Intractable sneezing due to triethanolamine sensitivity. J
   Allergy Clin Immunol 1983; 71: 339-43.

7. Wiener D, McGrath K, Patterson R. Factitious sneezing. J Allergy Clin
   Immunol 1985; 75: 741-2.
