   JPPS 2008; 5(1): 36-37 CASE REPORT

SEROTONIN SYNDROME CAUSED BY VENLAFAXINE (LATE ONSET)

ABSTRACT
========

   Nafisa Cheema

   Serotonin Syndrome is a disorder induced by pharmacological treatment
   with serotonergic

   agents. A case of a 54 year old man with Serotonin Syndrome after 15
   weeks of 375 mg Venlafaxine use is presented.

   **Key words:** Serotonin Syndrome, Venlafaxine.

INTRODUCTION
============

Serotonin Syndrome is an iatrogenic disorder in- duced by
pharmacological treatment with serotonergic agents that increase
serotonin activity in both central and peripheral serotonergic systems.
It is characterized by a clinical triad of mental-status changes,
autonomic hyperactivity and the neuromuscular abnormalities. Se- verity
ranges from mild , self limiting symptoms to severe cases with
rhabdomyolysis and renal failure.

The syndrome was first described in animal mod- els in the 1950s.
Reports of serotonin syndrome have become increasingly frequent since
the 1960s in hu- mans. Serotonin sundrome has previously been thought to
occur when a patient concomitantntly receives 2 an- tidepressants,
especially the combination of a monoam- ine oxidase inhibitor and a
monoamine reuptake inhibi- tor. But reports suggest that this syndrome
can happen even when the patients receives only 1 antidepressant.

Venlafaxine induced serotonin syndrome has been reported , most case
reports describe concomi- tant use of venlafaxine with other
antidepressant medi- cation1-3. However, there are case reports with
monotherapy when the patient was overdosed or re- ceived a therapeutic
dosage4.

   Out of some146 published cases of serotonin syn- drome with SSRIs and
   related drugs, venlafaxine is im- plicated in 16 of these.

   Our case report illustrates serotonin syndrome in- duced by
   venlafaxine monotherapy . To our knowledge this is the first case
   report in which the onset of full blown serotonin syndrome was
   several weeks after the in- crease in the dose of venlafaxine.

CASE HISTORY
============

B is a 54 year old man of Indian Gujrati origin. He is married with two
grown up children. His illness started 9 years ago, after he was made
redundant from his job as a crane operator of 22 year duration. He
became

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. Nafisa Cheema,** MBBS, MRCPsych, Staff grade, Birming- ham and
   Solihull Mental Health Trust.

increasingly withdrawn and non-communicative with gradual decline in
interest in day-to-day activities and family issues with delusions of
impoverishment and ni- hilism. He was given a diagnosis of depression
with mood congruent psychotic symptoms and treated over time with
various antidepressants , antipsychotics and lithium.

On 225 mg of venlafaxine, he showed only partial improvement. After
admission to psychiatric unit, the dose was increased to 300mg. After
this increase B re- ported myoclonic jerks which became worse after
addi- tion of amisulpride and lithium. He also became con- fused and
unsteady. Laboratory investigations showed CK 183 ( normal range less
than 130) The rest of the biochemical and haematological tests were
within nor- mal limits. An EEG and brain scan were also normal.
Myoclonic jerks improved after stopping amisulpride and lithium.

His venlafaxine was increased to 375 mg once daily after which he was
discharged back to community.

Case notes have recorded, history of achy legs, myoclonic jerks and
unsteady gait some weeks after the increase in the dose of venlafaxine.

15 weeks after the increase in the dose of venlafaxine, B was admitted
to the medical ward in emer- gency for jerky movements of head and
limbs, gross ataxia and fluctuating consciousness. He appeared to be
gasping for breath and was not maintaining his air- way on his back. He
had profound involuntary move- ment of his head and limbs. He had
decreased con- sciousness. His pupils were equal and reactive. Power and
reflexes could not be tested formally. The tone in muscles was
decreased. He also developed marked psychomotor agitation.

On examination, his pulse was 87, RR24 and BP un recordable. ,
temperature was 37.2, On investigation U&Es and TFTs were within normal
limits. AST was 93, blood glucose 15.4 and CK was 1652. ESR was not done
and CRP was 8.

   Urine dip test showed proteinuria and haematuria.

No growth was found on culture.

ECG was of poor quality but no abnormality was found.

   No infective or metabolic cause was found.

His venlafaxine was stopped immediately. He was given supportive
treatment including bezodiazepines (lorazepam and midazolam) and
Benztropine . B made complete recovery within 72 hours.

He was subsequently treated with lofepramine and aripiprazole for his
psychiatric symptoms and was fol- lowed up for 12 months(upto the
writing of this report) with no recurrence of involuntary movements,
confu- sion or ataxia.

DISCUSSION
==========

We believe that this was a case of Serotonin Syn- drome that was
precipitated by monotherapy with venlafaxine. The clinical features of
this episode and their rapid resolution on discontinuation of
venlafaxine support this.

Serotonin syndrome is the result of overstimulation of 5 HT-1a receptors
in central grey nuclei and the me- dulla and, perhaps of overstimulation
of 5HT2 recep- tors5.

A large number of drugs and drug and drug com- binations have been
associated with the serotonin syn- drome. These include MAOIs, TCAs,
SSRIs, opiate an- algesics, over the counter cough medicine,
antibiotics, weight educing agents, antiemetics, antimigraine agents,
drugs of abuse and herbal products.

The serotonin syndrome encompasses a range of clinical findings. The
diagnosis serotonin syndrome is guided by the Sternbach’s criteris:5
which are as fol- lows; recent change of a potent serotonin agent; no
history of substance abuse or infectious or metabolic disease; absence
of any antipsychotic drug; and 3 of the following symptoms:-

1.  change in the finding of the mental status

2.  agitation

3.  myoclonus

4.  hyperreflexia

5.  diaphoresis

6.  shivering

7.  tremor

8.  diarrhea

9.  Incoordination

10. fever

Our patient had 4 of these criteria (change in the mental status,
agitation, myoclonus, incoordination).

Clonus (inducible, ocular and spontaneous) by some clinicians is
considered to be the most important finding in establishing the
diagnosis of the serotonin syndrome6. Clonus was our patient’s main
clinical fea- ture.

The principal dd is NMS.Both NMS and SS can be fulminant, and patients
may present with delirium, hy-

perthermia, rhabdomyolysis, dilated pupils, tachycardia, diaphoresis and
rigidity and blood pressure changes and a rise in CK.

The main difference lies in the clinical gestalt : typically a patient
with SS is agitated, speaks incoher- ently and has prominent myoclonus,
whereas a patient with NMS is immobile, mute and staring 7.

The presentation of our patients in his first hospi- tal stay (in
psychiatric unit) could have been due to NMS, but re-emergence of
symptoms after stopping amisulpride makes it unlikely. During second
episode of serotonin syndrome, our patient was not on any antipsy-
chotic. Only one case report of NMS has been connected to venlafaxine ,
this was associated with a single dose of venlafaxine in a patient
previously on trifluoperazine 7.

In our case report the onset of serotonin syndrome is delayed for
several weeks after the increase in the dose of venlafaxine. Typically
the onset is considered to be rapid, 60% of patients with the serotonin
syndrome present within 6 hours after initial use of medication, an
overdose or a change in dosing6, patients with mild mani- festation may
present with subacute or chronic symp- toms. Some case reports have
shown a delay of upto 2 weeks. One reason for delay in our case report
could be that mild symptoms of serotonin syndrome could have been
present throughout. Symptoms could be missed because of its protean
manifestation. Clinician and pa- tients may dismiss symptoms as
inconsequential or symp- toms such as anxiety or akathisia may be
misattributed to the patient’s mental state7. Our patient complained of
akathisia on discharge from hospital after his first ad- mission and was
prescribed procyclidine for that. The reason for sudden deterioration in
his condition remains unclear. There is no indication that he took any
over the counter drugs with serotonergic properties which might act as a
contributory factor.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Lizer MH, Masters KP. Combination of methylphenidate, venlafaxineand
   escitalopram resulting inserotonin syn- drome. J Pharm Technol,
   2006,22,110-3.

2. Adnan-Manes J, Lithium and venlafaxine interaction, J Clin Pharm
   Therap 2006; 31:397-400.

3. Pan JJ, Shen WW. Serotonin syndrome induced by low dose venlafaxine,
   Ann Pharmacother 2003; 37: 209-11.

4. Hanekamp BB, Zijlstra JG, Tulleken JE, Ligtenberg JJ, Van der Werf
   TS, Hofstra LS. Serotonin syndrome and rhabdomyolysis in venlafaxine
   poisoning: a case report. Netherland J Med 2005; 63:316-8.

5. Sternbach H. The serotonin syndrome. Am J Psych 1991; 148: 705-13.

6. Boyer EW, Shannon MPH. The Serotonin syndrome. N Eng J Med 2005:352:
   1112-20.

7. Montases-Rades F, Bilbao-Gary J, de Lucas-Taracena MT, Ortiz-Ortiz
   ME. Venlafaxine, serotonin syndrome and differential diagnosis. J
   Clin Psychopharmacol 2005; 25: 101-2.
