   JPPS 2007; 4(2): 115-117 SHORT COMMUNICATION

PSYCHOLOGICAL MORBIDITY IN A GROUP OF JOURNALISTS AFTER SIX WEEKS OF A
BOMB BLAST IN KARACHI

   Syed Ali Wasif, Rafey Ahmed Faruqui, Haider Naqvi, Syed Haroon Ahmed

INTRODUCTION
============

There has been an increase in ethnic, sectarian, religious, political
and state violence in Pakistan over the last two decades1. Karachi is
the largest city of Paki- stan and has been the centre-stage of brutal
conflicts.

On May 26, 2004 a police guard was killed and at least 33 people,
including police personnel and media men, were wounded when two car
bombs exploded in succession near the Pak-American Cultural Centre and
the residence of the United States’ Consul General in Karachi. Police
and media people had reached the spot soon after the first explosion.
The reporters were re- cording details and photographers and cameramen
were snapping shots when the second car blew up, resulting in
casualties.

This was not an isolated incident of man-made violence. Earlier that
month, two civilians were killed and two others injured in a parcel bomb
explosion on the premises of Karachi Port Trust. In a separate inci-
dent a suicide bomber had succeeded in killing 14 people inside a
mosque. In total 51 people have lost their lives in the month of May
2004 alone during which the city witnessed some of the worst incidents
of blood- shed and violence in a decade.

According to the data compiled by leading Karachi newspaper “Dawn” (8
June, 2004) as many as 1110 casualties have been reported in about 140
blasts since 19902.

   **Syed Ali Wasif,** MBBS, MCPS Psych, Consultant Psychatrist, Dr.
   Ziauddin University, Main Head Office, North Nazimabad, Karachi.
   E-mail: wasif_ali@hotmail.com

   **Rafey Ahmed Faruqui,** MBBS, MCPS Psych, MRCP Psych. Speclaist
   Registrar and Hon. Research Fellow Charing Cross Higher Training
   Scheme, West London Mental Health NHS Trust, Southall Middlesex, UK

   E-mail:
   `rafey <mailto:rafey.faruqui@imperial.ac.uk>`__\ .faruqui@imperial.ac.uk

   **Haider Naqvi,** MBBS, FCPS Psychiatry, Assistant Professor, Aga
   Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan. E-mail:
   `haider <mailto:haider.naqvi@aku.edu>`__\ .naqvi@aku.edu

   **Syed Haroon Ahmed,** FRCPsych.,MD, 11-13, Hilal-e-Ahmed House,
   Clifton, Karachi. E-mail: pamh@cyber.net.pk

   **Correspondence: Dr. Syed Ali Wasif**

Depressive, anxiety and other stress related reac- tions are not
uncommon after exposure to traumatic events. Survivors of these
incidents may carry psycho- logical scars for a long period of time,
though an acute stress reaction usually subsides within days or weeks of
the exposure to trauma.

In this study we measured the persistence of anxi- ety, depressive and
other psychiatric features in a group of young journalists who were
present at the time of second bomb blast on May 26, 2004. None of these
journalists required hospitalization after the blast nor they were
physically injured.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

The subjects were identified through links in jour- nalist community.
They were approached to self-admin- ister the following screening
instruments.

Hopkins symptoms checklist-25 (HSCL)
====================================

Hopkins symptoms checklist-25 provides primary care physicians, mental
health practitioners and other health care providers with an instrument
for detecting anxiety and depression in medical patients, psychiatric
patients and in normal population. HSCL has also been used on torture
and trauma victims to elicit information on anxiety and depression and
is proven to be highly valid and reliable screening instrument3-5. This
check- list has been translated for use in Urdu speaking popu- lation.
The HSCL-25 has several advantages as a screening instrument. It is
brief, simple in use and may be self-administered by literate patients.
The HSCL does not provide a diagnosis; it allows the clinician to
recognize symptoms associated with anxiety and de- pression6.

Davidson Trauma Scale
=====================

The Davidson Trauma Scale (DTS), a 17-item cli- nician-administered
scale, is a self report instrument that measures both the frequency and
severity of each DSM- IV PTSD symptoms. The DTS has been shown to have
good predictive properties for response to treatment and is sensitive to
treatment effect7.

This scale has also been translated in Urdu for screening people who
were exposed to traumatic events. A high score on this scale indicate a
diagnosis

   Table 1

   SCORE OF HOPKINS SYMPTOM CHECK LIST -25

+--------------+----------------+---------------------+---------------+
| **Hscl25**   |    **Anxiety** |    **Depression**   |    **Total**  |
+==============+================+=====================+===============+
| Range        |    0.3-1.7     |    0.2-1.3          |    0.03-1.48  |
+--------------+----------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Mean         |    0.47        |    0.31             |    0.36       |
+--------------+----------------+---------------------+---------------+

.. image:: media/image1.png

Fig. 1: Correlation of Severity of symptoms on DTS and Anxiety scores on
HSCL25

.. image:: media/image7.png

   Fig. 2: Correlation of Frequency and Severity on DTS

   Table 2

   SCORE 0F DAVIDSON TRAUMA SCALE

+----------------------+-------------------------+---------------------+
| **DTS**              |    **Frequency**        |    **Severity**     |
+======================+=========================+=====================+
| Mean                 |    7.3                  |    8.85             |
+----------------------+-------------------------+---------------------+
| Max.Score            |    18                   |    28               |
+----------------------+-------------------------+---------------------+

of PTSD. The cutoff value for the diagnoses of PTSD is

62.0 +/- 38.0 and for sub clinical presentation the cutoff value is 41.7
+/-288.

Subjects were requested to mail the completed questionnaires to (WAS).

A descriptive analysis has been performed to study the demographic
characteristics of the subjects.

Responses on anxiety and depression clusters on HSCL were summed-up and
divided by the number of an- swered items to generate anxiety (10
items), depres- sion (15 items) and total HSCL scores.

Responses on sub-scales of Davidson Trauma Scale were added to generate
total scale score.

RESULTS
=======

13 subjects returned completed questionnaires. These questionnaires were
completed almost six weeks after the exposure to traumatic event.

All subjects were male with an age range of 23-42 years (mean 33.3). In
our sample ten subjects were married. Overall 9 subjects reported mild
to moderate level of distress.

9 subjects reported residual mixed features of anxiety (group mean 0.47)
and depression (group mean 0.31) on HSCL. Overall, anxiety features were
more prominent. 1 subject scored 1.7 on HSCL anxiety clus- ter,
accompanied by a high score on depressive cluster. Score of this subject
on David Trauma Scale was above the cut-off point for the diagnoses of
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. 3 subjects did not report any symptoms.
2 subjects reported abuse of benzodiaz- epines.

DISCUSSION
==========

This study has provided findings to confirm the persistence of mainly
anxiety symptoms in a group of journalists, who were exposed to bomb
blast and had witnessed the death and injury of other professionals.
These symptoms were still prominent after six weeks of the incident,
indicating a significant level of distressing psychological response.
The general population and even the professional groups who are exposed
to trau- matic events remain prone to develop psychological reactions to
these adverse incidents.

Most people who present with features of acute stress recover completely
within a period of few weeks. Persistence of anxiety features after a
six-week period may indicate future vulnerability for developing
signifi- cant distress if these professionals are exposed to fur- ther
trauma in future.

In the ICD -10 classification and DSM-IV it is noted that PTSD is often
accompanied by anxiety depression or even obsessive – compulsive
disorder but co-mor- bidity with other disorders including dissociative
disor- ders is quite common along with subsequent drug abuse and
dependence9-11.

Mental health professionals and occupational health departments of
relevant organizations should be able to devise individual and group
support strategies to help the workforce groups, which are exposed to
life threatening work situations. In addition to journalists and
policemen, healthcare professionals and voluntary aid workers also
constitute the vulnerable professional groups.

The bulk of research appears to be consistent with a model of PTSD that
points a role for pre trauma and post exposure risk and protective
factors (including bio- logical, psychological and socio politico
cultural factors), in addition to the traumatic experience, per se.
Although many kinds of extreme events can cause PTSD but not all of
those exposed will develop the disorder. Exposure to potentially
traumatic event may be more common than once thought, and that risk
factors for PTSD include personal and biological histories at the time
of expo- sure to the extreme event, characteristics of the event itself,
and characteristics of the post-exposure environ- ment12.

Acts of man-made violence, such as bomb blasts and wars may be intended
to spread intimidation, panic, mistrust and destruction in a population
in order to con- vey message of fear and helplessness and as a means of
control and terror.

It remains for further research to identify the specific contribution of
factors within each of these major domains, as well as ways in which
they may interact.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Faruqui RA, Wasif SA, Ahmed SH. Violence in Karachi and its’ impact
   on mental health. In Preliminary report of Distress Response Team.
   Karachi: Pakistan Association For Mental Health (PAMH) 1997; 16-21.

2. Hassan SR. Daily Dawn; Karachi 2004 June 08. [On line] 2005 [cited
   November 17, 2007]. Available from: URL:
   `http://www.dawn.com/2004/06/08/nat28.html. <http://www.dawn.com/2004/06/08/nat28.html>`__

3. Derogatis LR, Lipman RS, Rickels K, Uhlenhuth EH, Covi

..

   L. The Hopkins Symptom Checklist (HSCL) a measure of primary symptom
   dimensions in Mod- ern Problems in Pharmacopsychiatry. Basel Karger;
   1974.

4.  Rickels K, Garcia CR, Lipman RS, Derogatis LR, Fisher EL. The
    Hopkins Symptom Checklist assessing emo- tional distress in
    obstreticgynaecological practice. Pri- mary Care 1976; 3:751-64.

5.  Derogatis LR, Lipman RS, Rickels K, Uhlenhuth EH, Covi L. The
    Hopkins Symptom Checklist (HSCL) a self- report symptom inventory.
    Beh Sci 1974; 19:1-15

6.  Halepota AA, Wasif SA. Hopkins Symptoms Checklist 25(HSCL-25) Urdu
    translation: an instrument for detect- ing anxiety and depression in
    torture and trauma vic- tims. J Pak Med Assoc 2001; 51: 255-7.

7.  Davidson JR, Colket JT. The eight-item treatment-out- come
    post-traumatic stress disorder scale: a brief mea- sure to assess
    treatment outcome in post-traumatic stress disorder, Int Clin
    Pharmacol 1997;12:41-5.

8.  Davidson JR, Book SW, Colket JT, Tupler LA, Roth S, David D, et al.
    Assessment of a new self rating scale for posttraumatic stress
    disorder, Psychol Med 1997; 27: 153-60.

9.  Breslau N, Davis GC, Andereski P, Peterson EL,Traumatic events and
    posttraumatic stress disorder in an urban population of young
    adults. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1991; 48:216-22.

10. Breslau N, Davis GC, Peterson EL, Schultz LR. Psychiat- ric sequelae
    of posttraumatic stress disorder in women. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1997;
    54:81-7.

11. Chilcoat HD, Breslau N. Posttraumatic stress disorder and drug
    disorders: testing causal pathways. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1998;
    55:913-7.

12. King DW, King LA, Foy DW, Keane TM, Fairbank JA. Posttraumatic
    stress disorder in a national sample of females and male Vietnam
    veterans: risk factors, war- zone stressors, and resilience-recovery
    variables. Abnorm Psychol 1999; 108:164-70.
