ABSTRACT
========

Depression And Anxiety In Patients Undergoing Hysterectomy
----------------------------------------------------------

   Yasmin N. Farooqi

**Objectives:** The present research evaluated depression and anxiety in
patients undergoing hysterectomy during their pre-surgical and post
surgical phases.

**Design:** A Pre-Post Research Design was used.

   **Place and duration of study:** This study has carried out at
   Department of Gynaecology Lady Wellington Hospital Lahore Pakistan

**Subjects & Methods:** Sample consisted of 50 hysterectomy patients,
selected from the Gynaecology Department of Lady Wellington Hospital of
Lahore, Pakistan. Each subject was individually administered Depression
Scale and Anxiety Check-List twice; that is: 1-7 days before and 1-7
days after surgery.

**Results:** All the hysterectomy patients seemed to experience more
depression (t=- 2.55;df=48;*p<0.05) and anxiety (t= -5.74;df=48;*p<0.05)
during their post-surgical phase as compared to their pre-surgical
phase, probably due to the psychosocial and cultural misconceptions and
biased attitudes attached to “loss of uterus” in Pakistani society where
a woman’s status and role primarily revolves around her reproductive
capacity.

   **Key words**: Hysterectomy, Anxiety, Depression

INTRODUCTION
============

The loss of the uterus via hysterectomy carries significant negative
repercussions especially in the case of women from developing countries.
As this surgical procedure results in the loss of reproductive capacity
it is avoided in younger women even at the cost of their lives\ **1**.
Even for women who do not wish to have more children the uterus is not
an organ to be discarded lightly. The very knowledge that she is
‘normal’ and the recurrent evidence of this by way of menstruation, are
psychologically if not physically important.\ **2**. The side effects of
this surgical treatment invariably cause some loss of function such as
cessation of menstruation, infertility and hormonal imbalance. These
changes may in turn influence sexual functioning. Patients may also
experience general feelings of malaise which are threatening to females
especially, in a traditional society where females are supposed to live
within the four walls of their houses and bear children. Jochimsen (as
cited in Branolte-Bos, 1991) found that 82% of hysterectomy patients
reported a poor body-image which may be attributed to the importance
attached to this organ. The socialization process instils the value of
the uterus and its functions and of the body as a whole which may lead
to perceptions of poor body image and inadequacy\ **3**.

Many women are surprised to find that after they have undergone
hysterectomy they feel ‘spoiled’ and less valuable\ **4**. Hysterectomy
has traditionally been regarded as having an adverse effect on women’s
sexuality because it is thought to reduce their sense of
femininity\ **5**. Women are referred to psychiatrists much more
commonly after hysterectomy than after any other operation\ **2**.
According to Roeske\ **6** the most frequent psychopathological reaction
is depression as a mourning process occurs as a woman reintegrates her
gender identity after the operation. Pakistan is a country with a birth
rate of 3.1%, the highest in the world. Mainly parents, especially the
father, desire a large family and, in particular a large number of sons
in Pakistan\ **7**.

A woman who is unable to produce children is viewed as being incomplete
and is assigned a low status within the family as well as society. This
may cause the woman to reassess the meaning and purpose of her
marriage\ **8.** Loss of the ability to bear children may also result in
increasing family pressures and at times divorce or re-marriage of the
husband.

The reactions experienced by women undergoing hysterectomy are similar
to those of bereavement; that is: an initial phase of disbelief that it
has been removed, followed by sadness and depression\ :sup:`9.`

Baum\ **10** suggests that surgical procedures like hysterectomy are
emotionally stressful and may lead to depression and anxiety in females
undergoing this procedure. The removal or alteration of body parts,
which are symbolically significant for traditional femininity, may cause
major emotional repercussions to the females whose femininity and
role-identity seems to be threatened by such procedures. The uterus
contributes to a woman’s sexual, reproductive and social identity. They
are

related to the concepts of femininity, sexuality, procreation and
motherhood and are necessary parts of a woman’s body-image\ **1**. The
present research is an attempt to investigate depression and anxiety as
experienced by patients undergoing hysterectomy during their
pre-surgical and post surgical phases.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

The sample consisted of 50 hysterectomy cases. All the hysterectomy
cases (n=50) were selected from the Gynaecology Department of Lady
Wellington Hospital of Lahore, Pakistan. The researcher selected only
those patients in this research project, whose age was between 30 to 60
years and agreed to participate and who had been married for 10 or more
years, with at least one child.

**Instruments:** Depression Scale, Anxiety Check-List and Personal
History Questionnaire were constructed. The rationale for the Depression
Scale was derived from DSM IV (1994) and Beck\ **11**. Depression
Inventory(1993). It measured the severity of depression in each patient
during their pre and post surgical phases and consisted of 19 items. The
rationale for the Anxiety Check-List was derived from DSM IV (1994) and
Taylor\ **12** Manifest Anxiety Scale (1951) and consisted of 55 items.
Items pertaining to physical, psychological and social symptoms
experienced during this stressful period were included in the Scale and
Check-List. Each item was scored on a three-point scale ranging from
0-2. A score of 0 indicated absence of the symptom. A score of 1
indicated occurrence of the symptom with mild severity. A score of 2
indicated occurrence of the symptom with greatest severity. After
obtaining informed consent from the patients and assuring them of
confidentiality, the researcher first administered the Personal History
Questionnaire to collect demographic information from the patients. The
Anxiety Check-List and Depression Scale were individually administered
by the researcher. Each patient was evaluated on Depression Scale and
Anxiety Check-List twice: The pre-surgical phase (1-7 days prior to
surgery) and post surgical phase (1-7 days after surgery).

RESULTS
=======

The mean age of the sample (hysterectomy patients) was 42.4 years. The
level of Education ranged from 1-16 grades. 64% of the sample was
uneducated, 16% were between grade 1 to 10, and 20% between grade 11 to
14. 36% of the sample were working and 64% were non-working women. 8% of
the sample had 1-2 number of children; 45% had 3-4; 27% had 5-6 and 8%
had 7-10 ( Table 1).

Pre and Post Surgical Depression scores of Hysterectomy Patients on the
Depression Scale are shown in Table 2. It shows that there is
significant difference in depression (t= - 2.55;df=48;*p<0.05) of
hysterectomy patients during the pre surgical and post surgical phases.
It can be observed that greater depression is manifested in the post
surgical phase by patients undergoing hysterectomy (M=12.48) as compared
to their pre-surgical phase (M=10.44). Pre and post Surgical Scores of
Hysterectomy Patients on Anxiety Check List shown in Table 3. t\\ These
findings (t= - 5.74;df=48;*p<0.05) also indicate significant difference
in anxiety in hysterectomy patients during the pre surgical and post
surgical phases. The current results indicate that pre-surgical anxiety
(M=13.38) is low as compared to post surgical anxiety (M=27.10)

DISCUSSION
==========

According to Lipowski\ **5** anatomical loss of body parts which have a
symbolic significance are a crucial factor in determining emotional
response. As the uterus is a highly valued body part, its loss carries
physical and emotional repercussions and may result in intense
psychological reactions across the globe. It can be argued that in Third
World countries like Pakistan, great importance is attached to the
females’ capacity to bear children because in such traditional societies
females are “perceived” as “reproduction machines.” Patients who have
undergone hysterectomy have to come to terms with their incapacity to
bear children, which can threaten their self-worth\ **13**.
Roeske\ **6** (1978) suggest that high levels of depression are observed
before and after surgery.

13. Current research findings (t= -5.74;df=48;*p<0.05) also indicate
significant difference in anxiety in hysterectomy patients during the
pre surgical and post surgical phases. The current results indicate that
pre-surgical anxiety (M=13.38) is low as compared to post surgical
anxiety (M=27.10) (See Table 3). According to Wilson-Barnett\ **14**
medical procedures evoke anxiety and discomfort and many patients remain
inadequately prepared to face this experience. This significant
difference indicates that anxiety does not decrease post operatively and
is a common reaction to the fear of the

Table 1: Descriptive Characteristics of the Sample (n=50)
---------------------------------------------------------

+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| **Variables**          |    *          |                             |
|                        | *Hysterectomy |                             |
|                        |    Cases** n  |                             |
|                        |    =50        |                             |
+========================+===============+=============================+
|                        |               |    **Percentage**           |
|                        | **Frequency** |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| **Subject’s Age:**     |               |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 30-39 (years)          |    14         |    28%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 40-49                  |    30         |    60%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 50-59                  | 5             |    10%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 60-                    | 1             |    2%                       |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| **Level of             |               |                             |
| Education:**           |               |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| Illiterate             |    32         |    64%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| Grade 1-10             | 8             |    16%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| Grade 11-14            |    10         |    20%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| Grade 15-16            | 0             | -                           |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| **Occupation :**       |               |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| Working                |    18         |    36%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| Non-working            |    32         |    64%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| **Marital Status:**    |               |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| Married                |    50         |    100%                     |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| **Duration of          |               |                             |
| marriage:**            |               |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 10-15 (years)          | 7             |    14%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 16-20                  |    12         |    24%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 21-25                  |    14         |    28%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 26-30                  |    15         |    30%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 31-35                  | 1             |    2%                       |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 36-40                  | 1             |    2%                       |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 41-45                  |               |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| **Total Monthly        |               |                             |
| Income:**              |               |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 1,000 - 1,499          | -             |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 1,500 - 6,499          |    10         |    20%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 6,500 - 11, 499        |    22         |    44%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 11,500 – 16,499        | 5             |    10%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 16,500 – 21,499        |    13         |    26%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 21,500 – 26,499        | -             |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 26,500 – 31, 499       | -             |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| **No. of Children:**   |               |                             |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 1-2                    | 4             |    8%                       |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 3-4                    |    23         |    45%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 5-6                    |    19         |    27%                      |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 7-8                    | 1             |    2%                       |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+
| 9-10                   | 3             |    6%                       |
+------------------------+---------------+-----------------------------+

..

   Note: Percentage of each sub-classification is based upon the total
   number of subjects in the group: hysterectomy cases (n=50).

Table 2:Pre & post Depression Scores of hysterectomy patients on the Depression Scale
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

+-----------------------+-----------+----------------+----------------+
|    Depression Scores  |    *N*    | **M**          | **SD**         |
+=======================+===========+================+================+
|    Pre-Surgical       |    50     |    10.44       | 4.31           |
|    Scores             |           |                |                |
+-----------------------+-----------+----------------+----------------+
|    Post-Surgical      |    50     |    12.48       | 3.71           |
|    Scores             |           |                |                |
+-----------------------+-----------+----------------+----------------+

..

   SE = 0.80 -2.55; df=48; p<0.05

Table 3: Pre & post Anxiety Scores of hysterectomy patients on Anxiety Check-List
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

+-----------------------+-----------+----------------+----------------+
|    Anxiety Scores     |    *N*    | **M**          |    **SD**      |
+=======================+===========+================+================+
|    Pre-Surgical       |    50     |    13.38       |    10.86       |
|    Scores             |           |                |                |
+-----------------------+-----------+----------------+----------------+
|    Post-Surgical      |    50     |    27.10       |    13.00       |
|    Scores             |           |                |                |
+-----------------------+-----------+----------------+----------------+

..

   SE = 2.39- 5.74; df=48; p<0.05

N.B: Pre-Surgical Scores refer to subjects’ scores on Depression Scale
or Anxiety Check-List 1-7 days prior to surgery and Post-Surgical Scores
are 1-7 days after surgery.

unknown. It may be argued that in a society like Pakistan women are
viewed as “breeding machines” due to which loss of an organ vital to
femininity, inability to fulfil the “role identity” demanded by the
prevailing culture, incapacity to bear children and physiological
changes accompanying the surgery might cause post-operative anxiety to
increase. Moreover, there is no concept of couple therapy or
sex-education in Pakistani society which could help the patient grapple
with her fears and misconceptions about her sexual role and function
after hysterectomy.

The period before surgery appears to be of maximum stress for most women
and counselling particularly before and after surgery may help to lessen
apprehensions\ **15**. Due to lack of emphasis on psychotherapeutic
interventions and rehabilitation programs many patients may overlook the
psychological aspect associated with their surgery. The professionals
too are too busy and even tight-lipped about these crucially important
areas pertaining to the rehabilitation of hysterectomy patients.
Intolerance for psychological diseases may also inhibit females from
expressing their true feelings. Counselling, rehabilitation and
psychotherapy may help in relieving psychological stress felt by the
family and depression and anxiety in the patient. The effect of surgery
on the female self- concept and role of social support\ **16** in
recovery are related. Low levels of support from family and spouse
indicate poorer outcome.

In Pakistani society, females are occupied with fulfilling the
multifarious roles assigned to them by society. Due to this their health
suffers which is compounded by a blatant disregard for their welfare,
even in their hour of need such as recovering/recuperation from major
surgery. It is suggested that sharing of apprehensions by the patient
with their families may serve to reduce the patient’s anxiety and
depression and assist her recovery. Thus, better treatment and case
management strategies can be introduced to alleviate the sufferings of
the hysterectomy cases in Pakistan.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Ashurst, P., & Hall, Z.. Understanding Women in Distress. London:
    vistock/Routledge1989.

2.  Tindall, V.R.. Jeffcoate’s Principles of Gynaecology.(5th ed.).
    Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd. (1993).

3.  Branolte-Bos, G. Gynaecological Cancer: A Psychotherapy Group. In
    Maggie Watson (Ed.), Cancer Patient Care: Psychological Treatment
    Methods.. New York: Cambridge University Press & BPS Books. 1991;
    260-80.

4.  Lewis, T.L.T. & Chamberlain, G.V.P.(Eds).. Gynaecology by Ten
    Teachers. (15th ed.). Great Britain: Butler & Tanner Ltd. 1991.

5.  Lloyd, G.G. Textbook of General Hospital Psychiatry. London:
    Churchill Livingstone. 1991

6.  Roeske, N.C. Quality of life and factors affecting the response to
    hysterectomy. Journal of Family Practice, 1978; 7 (3), 483-8.

7.  Mubasher, M., & Sathar, Z.A. Demography. In M. Ilyas (Ed.).
    Community Medicine and Public Health. Karachi: Time Traders. 1997;
    196.

8.  Khalid, R. . Pregnancy and PsychoSocial Reactions. In I.N.Hassan
    (Ed.), Psychology of Women. Islamabad: Allama Iqbal Open University.
    1996; 121-4.

9.  McPherson, A., & Anderson, A. The ‘ Ecotomies”. In Ann McPherson
    (Ed.), Women’s Problems in General Practice. (2nd ed. New York:
    Oxford University Press. 1987; 112-9.

10. Baum, M. The Breast. In C.V. Mann, R.C.G. Russell & N.S. Williams,
    Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery. 22nd ed. London:
    Chapman & Hall. 1995; 546-62.

11. Beck, A.T., & Steer, R.A. Beck Depression Inventory. San Antonio,
    TX: The Psychological Corporation. 1993.

12. Taylor, R. Manifest Anxiety Scale. U.S.A.: American Psychiatric
    Association. 1951.

14. Ohkawa,R., Tanaka, K., Morikawa,S., Takeda, S., & Katoh, K. A
    prospective study of psychosomatic reaction to hysterectomy. Nippon
    Sanka Fujinka Gakkai Zasshi, 1992 44 (6), 676-82.

15. Wilson-Barnett, J. (1992). Psychological reactions to medical
    procedures. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 1992; 57 (3), 118-27.

16. Wren, B.G. Counselling the hysterectomy patient. Medical Journal of
    Australia, 1978; (2), 87-9.

Jamison, K.R., Wellisch, D.K. & Pasnau, R.O. Psychosocial aspects of
mastectomy: The woman’s perspective. American Journal of Psychiatry,
1978; 135 (4), 432-6.
