   JPPS 2007; 4(2): 108-109 CASE REPORT

   A CASE OF EPISODIC CLUSTER HEADACHE RESPONDING DRAMATICALLY TO

LITHIUM CARBONATE

   M.B Abdel-Maksoud, A. Nasr

ABSTRACT
========

   We are reporting a case of episodic cluster headache in a 33 years
   old male which responded dramati- cally to a 6 weeks course of
   lithium carbonate at a dose of 600mg daily. The lithium blood level
   was maintained at 0.4 mmol/l and the attacks were completely aborted
   with 3 years remission afterwards. In the discussion we included a
   summary of the previous trials which proved the effectiveness of
   lithium carbonate in treating the 2 types of cluster headache (the
   episodic and the chronic types). We concluded that low serum level of
   lithium is effective in the prophylaxis of episodic cluster headache
   and that the duration of treatment can be guided by the duration of
   the previous cluster episodes.

   **Key words:** Cluster Headache, Lithium Carbonate.

INTRODUCTION
============

Lithium carbonate is a mood stabilizer which can be used in various
psychiatric conditions. Lithium is ef- fective in the treatment and
prevention of acute mania1 and it is also valuable in the prophylaxis of
recurrent depression and bipolar illness\ *.* It has also been of value
in personality disorders associated with aggression or alcoholism2,3.

The effectiveness of lithium against psychiatric conditions of an
essentially cyclic nature such as manic depressive psychosis led Ekbom
to a trial of this drug in patients with cluster headache with promising
results. Ekbom’s observations of the beneficial effect of lithium in
cluster headache were confirmed by Kudrow in a larger series of
patients. Graham pointed out that the behaviour of the patient during a
headache which may consist of running, screaming, head banging, pacing
and other frantic and bizarre actions may remotely resemble a manic
attack. He suggested that the effect of lithium on cluster headache may
be presumably, because this dis- order shares several characteristics
with manic depres- sive disease4.

CASE HISTORY
============

A 33 years old male of African origin presented with a long history of
cluster headache. His condition started at the age of 11 years with
unilateral attacks of severe periorbital headache. The attacks used to
occur on a yearly basis during September/October of each year and each
episode would last for 6 to 8 weeks. The headache was unilateral on the
right side and always associated with Horner’s syndrome on the right
side, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, agitation, and screaming.

   **M B Abdel-Maksoud,** M.B.CH.B, MRCPsych. Queen Eliza- beth
   Psychiatric Hospital, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK

   **A Nasr,** M.B.CH.B, MSc, MRCPsych. Long Bridge Health and Community
   Centre, 10 Park Way, Rubery, Birmingham, UK

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. M B Abdel-Maksoud**

The attacks used to last between 45 minutes up to one hour.

At the age of 14, the patient was prescribed differ- ent pain killers
including Diclofenac sodium, Ibuprofen and paracetamol. The patient
continued to take pain killers when required for several years with no
benefit.

The patient has had C.T brain with contrast, C.T sinuses and MRI brain
and they were all normal.

The patient had a formal diagnosis of cluster head- ache at the age of
25 and he was prescribed pridnisolone tablets 5 mg b.d as a prophylactic
treatment and sumatriptan tablets 50-100 mg P.R.N during attacks (max
tds). His condition improved dramatically and the attacks were well
controlled with these medications.

Few years later (2004) the patient had another episode as usual in
September/October and he had a repeated prescription of prednisolone and
sumatriptan tablets but unfortunately with limited benefit. The
sumatriptan tablets were changed to subcutaneous in- jection form and he
was also prescribed oxygen 8L/ minute during the attacks which resulted
in a better con- trol of the acute attacks. Unfortunately, during this
epi- sode the patient was having up to eight attacks per day which made
the benefit of the sumatriptan injection lim- ited as the manufacturer
recommend a maximum dose of two injections (i.e. 12 mg) /24 hrs.

He was then started on verapamil tablets (40mg tds) for prophylaxis but
unfortunately he developed side effects in the form of fatigue,
dizziness, and bradycardia and accordingly it was stopped immediately.
He was then tried on indomethacin tablets but they had no effect and
were stopped after a week. Then he was started on lithium carbonate 400
mg nocte’ which was increased to 600 mg nocte and he continued on this
dose for 6 weeks only. Since he was started on the lithium there was a
dramatic improvement in his condition. Initially, the frequency and the
intensity of the attacks were sig- nificantly reduced and the patient
did not even use any

   sumatriptan injections. After 1 week the attacks stopped completely
   (i.e. at week 3 of this episode). Lithium level was checked 12 hours
   post dose and it was stable at 0.4mmol/l. The patient had few side
   effects mainly in the form of fine tremors, polydypsia, and polyurea
   but he was able to tolerate these side effects.

   The patient was followed up and so far he had no further episodes for
   3 years after the last episode. This patient does not have any other
   medical problems and he has no family history of similar conditions.

DISCUSSION
==========

A number of trial showed that lithium is effective in the management of
cluster headache. Ekbom treated 5 males with cluster headache (3 of them
showed chronic symptoms). Lithium was administered in the form of slow
release tablets and the serum concentrations maintained between 0.7 and
1.2 mEq/l. In all 3 patients with chronic cluster headache, lithium
treatment gave an immediate, partial remission of the headache;
withdrawal of the drug caused an increase of the attacks while a second
period of treatment resulted in definite improvement. Lithium was also
found effective in the 2 patients with episodic cluster headache5.

In another study by Karl Ekbom, when he treated 19 cases of cluster
headache with lithium, he concluded that patients with chronic cluster
headache had immedi- ate improvement after starting lithium. He also
concluded that in all 7 patients with acute periodic symptoms lithium
was almost entirely or entirely without effect6.

The results of lithium in chronic cluster patients have also been
confirmed by Kudrow. He treated 32 patients, unresponsive to
conventional prophylactic and systemic drugs. Therapy was maintained
over a period of 32 weeks. 6 patients had intolerable side effects. Of
the remaining 26 patients, 25 obtained marked improve- ment. Kudrow also
compared lithium with methysergide or pridnisolone and found that it was
significantly supe- rior to these drugs7.

Mathew (1978) has described 31 patients, 14 with episodic and 17 with
chronic form: 80% of the former and 84% of the latter group showed a
definite improve- ment within 2 weeks, a little faster than the response
in mania2,3.

Between January and December 1980, 31 patients (out of a total number of
48 patients with cluster head- ache who were seen at Princess Margaret
migraine clinic at Charing Cross Hospital) were given lithium carbon-
ate (priadel initially 800mg at night). 14 patients showed a marked
improvement in the 1st week, having no at- tacks or no more than a
single mild one; 10 patients showed a lesser improvement, with one
severe attack or several mild ones during the week. In the 7 remaining
patients, 5 patients did not improve significantly on this dose, 1
patient did not attend the follow up and 1 patient showed a smaller
improvement3.

The short and long term effects of lithium carbon- ate in 90 patients
with episodic (68 cases) and chronic (22 cases) were reported in a study
by Faustino Savoldi et al in 1983. The results showed that lithium was
highly

effective in the great majority of patients with chronic cluster
headache. It also proved that lithium was also effective in episodic
cases as the drug decreased the frequency and the intensity of the
attacks over a short period of time7.

   Hanna Damasio et al treated 21 patients with lithium. The results
   showed an absolute improvement in 11 patients, a partial improvement
   in 5 patients, and no response in 5 patients. The beneficial results
   were ob- tained with dosages lower than those used for effective
   treatment of bipolar illness8.

CONCLUSION
==========

The main value of our case report is the long term effect of lithium in
episodic cluster headache. So far, our patient had a 3 years period of
remission without any single attack. Before using lithium, the patient
used to get an episode on a yearly basis and this certainly indi- cates
that lithium can affect the course, the duration, and the frequency of
the condition. It is also interesting to notice the significant
improvement of the condition after the first lithium dose in our
patient. Our patient did not develop any intolerable side effects and
the serum level of lithium was maintained at 0.4 mmol/l. Although there
is a controversy about the efficacy of lithium in episodic cluster
headache and there is no clear guid- ance for the duration of the
prophylactic treatment, how- ever, our patient responded very well to a
6 weeks course of lithium. We concluded that lithium treatment can be
given at low doses (serum level of 0.4 mmol/l) and for the duration of
the cluster period (known from previous episodes) and this seems to
alter the spontaneous occurrence of the disease. We strongly recommend
further research with large number of cases com- paring the two levels
of lithium (i.e. low and high levels) as it will certainly be of a
significant clinical im- portance if a low serum concentration is proved
to be adequate.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Coppen A, Noguera R, Bailey J, Burns BH, Swani MS, Hare EH, et al.
   Prophylactic lithium in affective disor- ders - a controlled trial.
   Lancet 1971;2: 275-9.

2. Gerbino L, Oleshansky M, Gershon S. Clinical use and mode of action
   of lithium. In Lipton MA, DiMascio A, Killam KF editors.
   Psychopharmacology: A generation of progress. New York: Raven 1978:
   1261-75.

3. Peatfield RC. Lithium in migraine and cluster headache: A review. JR
   Soc Med 1981; 74:432-6.

4. Mathew NT. Clinical subtypes of cluster headache and response to
   lithium therapy, Headache 1978; 18:26-30.

5. Ekbom K. Lithium in the treatment of chronic cluster headache.
   Headache 1977; 17: 39-40.

6. Ekbom K. Lithium for cluster headache. Headache 1981; 21:132-9.

7. Savoldi F, Bono G, Manzoni GC, Micieli G, Lanfranchi M, Nappi G.
   Lithium salts in cluster headache treatment. Cephalgia 1983; 3 (Suppl
   1): 79-84.

8. Damasio H, Lyon L. Lithium carbonate in the treatment of cluster
   headache. J Neurol 1980; 244: 1-8.
