JPPS 2008; 5(1): ??-?? SHORT COMMUNICATION

   COCHRANE CORNER IN JOURNAL OF PAKISTAN PSYCHIATRIC SOCIETY – A
   POPULAR TOOL FOR

DISSEMINATING COCHRANE SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS

   Saeed Farooq, Zahid Nazar, Javaid Akhter, Muhammad Irfan, Uma M.
   Irfan

BACKGROUND
==========

   One of the Cochrane Collaboration (CC) key principles is to promote
   access to the Cochrane Systematic reviews. Globally, less than 10% of
   the Cochrane Reviews are authored by people based in a develop- ing
   country1. Many topics relevant to the developing world and addressing
   problems that affect large populations in these countries remain
   neglected. Without greater involvement of authors and consum- ers
   from developing countries, the Cochrane Collaboration will not be
   able to achieve its objective of promoting evidence based practice.

OBJECTIVES
==========

To document the efforts of Journal of Pakistan Psy- chiatric Society
(JPPS) in disseminating the Cochrane Systematic Reviews (CSR) and to
present the results of publishing the abstracts of CSR over the last
four years. We also aim to identify appropriate strategies for creat-
ing awareness about Cochrane Collaboration and recommend a framework
promoting evidence based practice in developing countries.

METHODS
=======

A search and review of JPPS since its inception in 2004 for the articles
related to evidence based medi- cine and abstracts of CSR published in a
regular feature as ‘‘Cochrane Corner’’. These abstracts were accom-
panied by critical comments by the editor and associate editor of the
journal.

   **Saeed Farooq,** MCPS, FCPS. Editor JPPS, Postgraduate Medical
   Institute, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Paki- stan.

   **Zahid Nazar,** FCPS. Associate Editor JPPS, Postgraduate Medical
   Institute, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Paki- stan.

   **Javaid Akhter,** MCPS, FCPS. Associate Editor JPPS, Post- graduate
   Medical Institute, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan.

   **Muhammad Irfan,** MCPS. Associate Editor JPPS, Post- graduate
   Medical Institute, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan.

   **Uma M. Irfan,** Ph.D. Director, Directorate of Research & De-
   velopment, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan.

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. Saeed Farooq,** Associate professor and Head Depart- ment of
   Psychiatry, Postgraduate Medical Institute, Khyber Medical
   University, Peshawar, Pakistan.

   E-mail: sfarooqlrh@yahoo.com

RESULTS
=======

JPPS published abstracts of 13 Cochrane system- atic reviews during this
period. These covered following topics,

1.  Antidepressant prevention of postnatal depression

2.  Antipsychotic drugs for non affective psychosis during pregnancy and
    postpartum

3.  Pharmacotherapy for post traumatic stress disor- der (PTSD)

4.  Psychosocial interventions for conversion disor- der

5.  Meditation therapy for anxiety disorders

6.  Psychosocial and pharmacological treatments for deliberate self harm

7.  Aripiprazole for schizophrenia

8.  Interventions for preventing depression after stroke

9.  Interventions to reduce weight gain in schizophre- nia

10. Exercise in prevention and treatment of anxiety and depression among
    children and young people

11. Drugs versus placebo for dysthymia

12. Marital therapy for depression

13. Behavioral and cognitive behavioral therapy for obsessive compulsive
    disorder in children & ado- lescents

The comments accompanying these CSR written by editor and associate
editor of the journal helped to put these reviews in context of practice
in developing countries.

In the inaugural issue, a Guest Editorial that high- lighted the
relationship between Cochrane Collabora- tion and JPPS was published.
Articles on evidence based practice, relevance of evidence based
guidelines in de- veloping countries and critical reviews related to
com- mon problems in developing countries were published.

DISCUSSION
==========

This brief article aims to summarize the experi- ences in dissemination
of CSR from a journal platform. The Journal of Pakistan Psychiatric
Society is a nascent journal which has played a pioneering role in
promoting evidence based practice and CSR in Pakistan. The ‘‘Cochrane
Corner’’ proved to be popular regular fea- ture with the readers. This
was appreciated by readers not only in developing countries but also, by
its wide readership, in many developed countries where the jour- nal is
disseminated.

Encouraged by feedback from the readers, number of other articles were
also published which helped to highlight the methodology and role of
systematic reviews in Evidence Based Medicine (EBM). As the journal is
also available free full text online,
`www.jpps.com.pk, <http://www.jpps.com.pk/>`__ it has helped to
disseminate the mes- sage very widely.

The feedback from the readers was very encour- aging. Many readers
commented with a pleasant sur- prise that a journal from developing
country has taken this initiative. Number of readers appreciated the
com- ments accompanying the CSR. One of the most useful aspects
identified by research workers was that the CSR abstracts and
accompanying comments helped to iden- tify the gaps in evidence which
could be used by the researchers to formulate appropriate research
questions for Randomised Controlled Trials

Effective dissemination of CSR is essential for pro- moting evidence
based practice in developing coun- tries. A similar strategy is adapted
by Chinese Journal of Evidence-Based Medicine (CJEMB). It is interesting
to note that recently Schizophrenia Bulletin, an interna- tional journal
published from a high income country (UK) has also started publishing
the Cochrane Corner as a regular feature.

The institutional, cultural and structural dimensions of developing
countries vary and the issues involved are complex2 and no single
strategy will be effective for one country. One of the strategy used in
China was to organize a group of professional consumers such as medical
and English major students, editors, public health researchers,
librarians and active patients . Al-

though the number of consumers involved remained low but the strategy
was found to be useful.

Our experience suggests that publishing regular feature in a scientific
journal is highly effective strategy in promoting evidence based
practice in developing countries and increasing the level of
practitioner’s knowl- edge in EBM. However, as this journal is limited
to men- tal health professionals, the impact of these publica- tions
remains largely limited.

The Cochrane Collaboration and other organiza- tions promoting evidence
based practice should pro- vide institutional support for this.
Providing expertise in selecting suitable CSRs and comments on these
reviews by the expert reviewers/editors which can help to high- light
the significance and relevance of the CSR for prac- tice in developing
countries can help to overcome the misconception that the systematic
reviews and EBM are not relevant to developing countries. With suitable
sup- port, many journals in developing countries can adopt this strategy
and this can provide an inexpensive form of promoting access to Cochrane
Collaboration outputs.

CONCLUSIONS
===========

Local journals can help to disseminate the evi- dence based summaries in
developing countries. The Cochrane Collaboration and other organizations
pro- moting evidence based practice should provide institu- tional
support and actively encourage the publishers of journals from
developing countries to publish evidence based summaries.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
================

The authors would like to thank Prof. Prathap Tharayan for assistance
and encouragement in publi- cation of ‘‘Cochrane Corner’’. He also
contributed a spe- cial article on the subject.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Crewe E, Young J. Bridging research and policy: con- text, evidence
   and links. Working paper 173, Overseas Development Institute, 111
   Westminster Bridge Road, London SE1 7JD UK.

2. Zhang M. Dissemination evidence by journals: making the medical
   journals as readable, reliable and acces- sible information resource
   for consumers. Cochrane Collaboration, Colloquia, Abstracts, Ottawa
   2004.

3. Zhang M, Liu X. How far away for consumers in devel- oping countries
   involving in the Collaboration? The ex- perience of the consumer work
   in China. Cochrane Collaboration, Colloquia, Abstracts, Ottawa 2004.
