   JPPS 2008; 5(2): 53-54 EDITORIAL

NEVER TREATED SCHIZOPHRENIA IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

   Saeed Farooq

One of the most significant recent developments in treatment of
schizophrenia has been the early inter- vention for psychosis.
Unacceptably long duration of untreated psychosis (DUP) has been
considered as a major challenge for psychiatric services. The studies
from developing countries report a DUP almost twice as long as that in
developed countries; thus necessitating an action for early
intervention1. An even more alarming trend reported in many studies is
large number of cases which remain untreated for many years, often in
inhu- man condition. Malik and Bokharey2 reported what they described as
‘human zoo’ for a group of patients which according to authors provided
‘cure’ for patients suffer- ing from schizophrenia “ chained to the
trees in the open spaces around the shrine— through the chilly winter
nights and the blazing heat of summers for days, months and at times for
years”.

   Souza et al3 identified 49 patients only in two months period in
   Darfur region of Sudan by active case findings. Some patients were in
   such dramatic situa- tions as being chained to their beds. Srinavasan
   et al4 describe a cohort of 72 never-treated chronic schizo- phrenia
   patents in Chennai, India. Similar untreated cohorts are rported from
   china and number of other devloping countries.

Almost all these studies report serious effects in term of
psychological, physical and social outcomes. A common problem is high
mortality. In rural China where very few patients received adequate
treatment, untreated patients were found to have marked social and
occupa- tional disability and a fourfold increase in mortality5,6.The
high mortality reported in these studies is not due to suicide, the
commonest cause of higher mortality in schizophrenia but due to
malnutrition, infectious disease and other physical causes.

Ironically, number of these studies have focused on these patients as
‘interesting’ cases, in which details and manifestations of a chronic
mental illness are ex- amined in microscopic details without much
attention to

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. Saeed Farooq,** MCPS, FCPS. Associate Professor and Head
   Department of Psychiatry, PGMI, Lady Reading Hospi- tal, Peshawar,
   Pakistan.

   E-mail: sfarooqlrh@yahoo.com

the challenges these cases pose for the service provi- sion. Few
isolated programmes have tried to address the need for provision of some
treatment for these pa- tients2. However there is need for more
systematic and coherent approach in addressing the large gap in treat-
ment these populations pose.

   Lack of treatment for many years in patients suffer- ing from
   Schizophrenia is related to many factors and there is little evidence
   for effective interventions to ad- dress this issue. Srinivasan et
   al4 found that unemployed status of male patients, living in a joint
   family setting and families initially unaware of the psychiatric
   nature of the problem were the factors that related to failure to
   seek treatment. Patient’s sex, age, education, marital status,
   economic status, age at onset and duration of illness, degree of
   disability and clinical symptoms (except self- neglect) were not
   related to taking treatment.

Cost of treatment is an important barrier. Medi- cines account for
20–60% of health spending in devel- oping and transitional countries,7
compared with 18% in countries of the Organisation for Economic
Co-opera- tion and Development8. Up to 90% of the population in
developing countries purchase medicines through out- of-pocket
payments,3 making medicines the largest fam- ily expenditure item after
food. People with severe men- tal illness who have increased difficulty
obtaining food, shelter and medical care9. are most vulnerable to these
effects.

There is urgent need to devise effective public health interventions to
improve the access to the phar- macological treatment for those
suffering from Schizo- phrenia in developing countries. Isolated
programmes in many countries have shown that it is possible to pro- vide
standardized regimen of antipsychotic treatment. However these
programmes have rarely been replicated outside model programmes. An
article in this issue10 describes such an approach. It is interesting to
note that the approach described in this article is based on prin-
ciples of DOTS, an intervention originally proposed for Tuberculosis.
Although TB has nothing in common with schizophrenia two disorders share
some rather inter- esting historic facts. Tuberculosis is perhaps the
only physical disorder which needed treatment in institutions like
schizophrenia .The stigma associated with TB has

   been bad as we have today for Schizophrenia. How- ever,
   implementation of an effective treatment at public health level
   changed the situation dramatically for Tu- berculosis. The success
   story of Tuberculosis demon- strates that an effective interventions
   applied optimally at the public health level is the most effective
   way of reducing the stigma. Interestingly, since DOTS like treat-
   ment approach was suggested for Schizophrenia, it has been advocated
   for other Non Communicable Disease as well to overcome the problem of
   poor access to the treatment. At present it seems that any
   intervention for psychosis is the early intervention for this serious
   disor- der in Low and Middle Income Countries (LAMIC). It is now time
   that early intervention for psychosis is consid- ered as major public
   health priority in developing coun- tries.

   REFERENCES

1.  Large M, Farooq S, Nielssen O, Slade T. Relationship between gross
    domestic product and duration of un- treated psychosis in low and
    middle income countries. Br J Psychiatry 2008; 193: 272-8.

2.  Malik SB, Bokharey IZ. Breaking the chains. Psychiat- ric Bull 2001;
    25: 273-5.

3.  Souza R, Yasuda S, Cristofani S. Treating Schizophrenia with DOTS in
    developing countries: One size does not fit all. PLos Med 2007; 4:
    e281.

4.  Srinavasan TN, Rajkumar S, Padmanath R. Initiating care for
    untreated schizophrenia patients and results of one year follow-up.
    Int J Soc Psychiatry 2001; 47: 73-80.

5.  Ran MS, Xiang MZ, Li SX, Shan YH, Huang MS, Li SG, et al. Prevalence
    and course of schizophrenia in a Chinese rural area. Aust NZ J
    Psychiatry 2003; 37: 452–7.

6.  Ran M, Xiang M, Huang M, Shan Y. Natural course of schizophrenia:
    2-year follow-up study in a rural Chinese community. Br J Psychiatry
    2001; 178: 154-8.

7.  WHO. Equitable access to essential medicines: a frame- work for
    collective action. Geneva: World Health Orga- nization, 2004.

8.  Organization for Economic Co-operation and Develop- ment. Drug
    spending in OECD countries up by nearly a third since 1998,
    according to new OECD data. [Online] 2004. [Cited on 2008, November
    30] Available from URL:
    `http://www.oecd.org/document/25/0,2340, <http://www.oecd.org/document/25/0%2C2340>`__
    en_2649_37407_34967193_1_1_1_37407,00.html

9.  Mojtabai R, Varma VK, Malhotra S, Mattoo SK, Misra AK, Wig NN, et
    al. Mortality and long-term course in schizophrenia with a poor
    2-year course: a study in a developing country. Br J Psychiatry
    2001; 178: 71–5.

10. Farooq S, Nazar J, Akhtar J, Irfan M, Naeem S. From DOTS to STOPS-
    Public health intervention for schizo- phrenia in low and middle
    income countries. J Pak Psych Soc 2008; 5: 65-8.
