JPPS 2007; 4(1): 2–3 EDITORIAL
==============================

CONVERSION DISORDER-A DILEMMA FACING THE PSYCHIATRIST IN DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES

Saeed Farooq
============

Conversion disorder is linked historically to the concept of hysteria.
It is one of the commonest diagnos- tic problem faced by psychiatrists
working in develop- ing countries. It in India, for example, the
prevalence of up to 31% is reported among inpatients1. The prevalence in
all psychiatric out patients setting in India was between 6-11%2 (Wig et
al, 1982). In Turkey among outpatients who were admitted to a primary
health care institution in a semi rural area, the prevalence of
conversion symp- toms in the preceding month was 27.2%3. In Egypt it is
one of the most frequently diagnosed condition4. In Pa- kistan
dissociative disorders are reported to be one of the commonest diagnoses
representing 12.4% and 4.8% of the admissions in inpatient psychiatric
units5,6.

Keeping in mind such a high prevalence and the therapeutic challenges it
offers it is surprising that there is very little if any scientific
research on the subject. This may be understandable for developed
countries as the disorder is rarely encountered in psychiatric practice
in these countries. But lack of literature from developing countries is
quite perplexing in view of the statistic just mentioned. It would be
interesting to examine how much attention is paid to this common
disorder in research and practice.

Conversion hysteria was perhaps the first psychi- atric diagnosis to
receive psychological treatment. It would not be an exaggeration to say
that much of the psychodynamic theory proposed by Freud is based on work
with patients suffering from hysteria. Since 1842 when Freud first drew
attention to the unconscious con- flicts underpinning the conversion
symptoms, there has been little scientific evaluation of the treatments
proposed for the disorder. On a systematic review of the literature for
interventions to treat Conversion Disorder Rudy et al could only
identify three randomised controlled trials7. These trials had a total
sample size of 119 in all the studies combined together. No definitive
intervention could be recommended by the authors.

   Even more interesting is the scarcity of literature on aetiology. The
   presence of psychological stressor is the key criterion in evolution
   of conversion symp-

   toms. For example, ICD-10 stipulates an “...evidence

for psychogenic causation, in the form of clear associa- tion in time
with stressful events and problems or dis- turbed relationship ...” as
important criterion for the di- agnosis8 While there is plethora of
studies on stressful life events preceding depression, an extensive
search for the literature on the subject, I could only identify few
studies which have systematically studied the stressful life events in
context of Conversion hysteria. Compared to vast literature on the role
of stressful life events in de- pression where these are not essential
criteria for diag- nosis, the amount and quality of literature in
conversion disorder is strikingly poor.

What about training and research. It is relatively difficult to examine
the education and training as empiri- cally as the literature on
aetiology and interventions. In order to get an idea of the place of
hysteria in training, I decided to look at the contents of questions in
theory paper of FCPS examination of the College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Pakistan considering that the examina- tion normally play a
steering role in what trainee read and learn. It also reflects the
importance we attach to a subject. I conducted a search of all the
question papers for final examination of FCPS over the last 3 years. In
a total of 114 questions, five definitely related to conver- sion
hysteria and a further two could possibly be consid- ered as related to
this subject. Being an examiner for several, years I can also confirm
that the subject rarely surfaced in practical examination for FCPS-II.

What does this lack of attention reflects?. Although this can be
attributed to general lack of research and systematic approach to the
subject on any aspect of mental health in developing countries, my
impression is that the problem is more deeply rooted. I feel that this
perhaps reflects the unconscious conflicts we face in our attitudes
about this disorder. Perhaps we have not been able to face the more deep
rooted problems in embrac- ing the basic issues which underpin the
aetiology and management of this disorder. The concept of conversion
disorder has always evoked strong emotions from Freud- ian times as it
challenges our basic notions about the concept of health and illness for
a person in whom we can not locate ‘pathology’. Conversion symptoms pro-

   voke a deep sense of frustration and anger in therapist

   **Correspondence:**

   **Saeed Farooq**, MCPS, FCPS.

   Associate Professor and Head Department of Psychiatry, PGMI, Lady
   Reading Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan

   E-mail: sfarooqlrh@yahoo.com

   when the patient neither present, nor behave like a “pa- tient” This
   is further aggravated by lack of any guidance in the literature on
   how to deal with these patients. Abuse by traditional healers is
   widely prevalent in those suffer- ing from conversion hysteria.
   Unfortunately, there is an-

   ecdotal evidence for inhuman treatment even by the men- tal health
   professionals.

   What needs to be done. Most of the studies report a high prevalence
   of the disorder amongst females, be- longing to the low and middle
   income group and in those having less education. The disorder has
   strong associa- tion with the socioeconomic status as is evident from
   decreasing incidence with improving socioeconomic conditions9. It
   appears that the incidence of disorder is perhaps a strong indicator
   of status of women in a par- ticular society. Therefore, the
   prevention of the disorder demands efforts on socioeconomic levels
   beyond the field of psychiatry itself. However, the mental health
   pro- fessionals will have to play a crucial role. Following needs to
   be done on urgent basis.

1. The most important step would be to develop the evidence base for
   treatment of conversion disor- der. A recent randomised controlled
   trial from Pakistan has demonstrated that brief behaviour therapy
   intervention is feasible and can be effec- tive in hospital
   setting10. There is urgent need for similar trials in community
   setting.

2. The professional bodies and the scientific journals in the region
   need to develope guidelines and re- search agenda to understand the
   aetiology man- agement of conversion disorder

3. The research on psychosocial factors need to in- form the policy on
   the prevention and providing appropriate services for the disorder.

Most importantly perhaps, we need to ask this question from ourselves.
Do we equate the disorder with malingering? This may be too basic or
perhaps too crude a question to be asked from a trained mental health
pro- fessional. However, I believe honest answer to this ques- tion can
help us to examine and understand our own beliefs, conflicts and
attitudes about the disorder some of which may be too deep rooted to be
conscious. Un-

educated, poor and voiceless women suffering most commonly from the
disorder certainly deserve a better deal from the mental health
professionals.

   **REFERENCES**

1.  Malik P, Singh P. Clinican. Characteristics and outcome of children
    and adolescent with conversion disorder. Indian Pediatrics 2002;
    39:747-52.

2.  Wig NN, Mangalwedhe K, Bedi H, Murthy RS. A fol- low-up study of
    hysteria. Indian J Psychiatry 1982;24: 120-5.

3.  Sagduyu A, Rezaki M, Kaplan I, Ozgen G, Gursoy- Rezaki B. Saglik
    ocagina basvuran hastalarda dissosiyatif (konversion) belirtiler
    (Prevalence of con- version symptoms in a primary health care
    center). Türk Psikiyatri Dergisi 1997; 8:161–9.

4.  Okasha A. Focus on psychiatry in Egypt. Br J Psy- chiatry 2004;
    185:266-72.

5.  Minhas FA, Farooq S, Rahman A, Hussain N, Mubasshar MH. Inpatient
    psychiatric morbidity in a tertiary care mental health facility: A
    study based on a psychiatric case register. JCPSP 2001; 11: 224-8.

6.  Malik SB, Bokhari IZ. Psychiatric admissions in a teaching hospital:
    A profile of 177 Patients. JCPSP 1995; 9: 159-361.

7.  Rudy R, House A. Psychosocial interventions for con- version
    disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005; 19: CD005331.

8.  WHO. ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders.
    Clinical description and diagnostic guide- lines. Geneva 1992.

9.  Nandi DN, Banerjee G, Nandi S, Nandi P. Is hysteria on the wane? A
    community survey in West Bengal, India.Br J Psychiatry 1992;160:
    87-91.

10. Khattak T, Farooq S. Behavior therapy in dissociative convulsions .
    JCPSP 2006;16:359-63.
