ABSTRACT
========

   **Inpatients Psychiatric Morbidity at Pakistan Institute of Medical
   Sciences (PIMS).**

   Rizwan Taj, Sabah Akhter, Zahid Nazar, Saeed Farooq

**Objective:** The present study aims to describe the socio-demographic
variables and the frequency of different diagnostic categories of the
patients admitted in Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences

   **Design:** Descriptive study.

**Place and Duration of Study:** Psychiatry Department, Pakistan
Institute of Medical Sciences, Islamabad. Data collection was done for
six months (July 2000 to January 2001).

**Subjects and Methods:** 113 consecutively randomized patients were
admitted in the psychiatry department at Pakistan Institute of Medical
Sciences. Patients were admitted to psychiatry Department Pakistan
Institute of Medical Sciences, Islamabad, between (July 2000 to January
2001). Three cases were excluded because of age group under 10,
restricting the analysis to 113 cases. Data was collected for the
following variables age, sex, duration of admission reason for admission
diagnosis and the treatment given during their stay.

**Result:** Of 113 patients, 64 were males and 48 were females between
the age group of 11 and 80 years. Data was established with reference to
the patients admitted with different psychiatric illnesses, their ages
and gender.

**Conclusion:** Our study found a trend toward a higher risk of
admission in different psychiatric disease with reference to different
age groups and genders.

   **KEY WORDS:** Diagnosis, Psychiatric services

INTRODUCTION
============

Psychiatric illnesses are very common and affect major strata of the
society all over the world. Prevalence of psychiatrist illness in
different population is estimated to be 15 to 20% in community and 30%
among general practice patients.\ **1,2** Prevalence among general
hospitals out patients and inpatients is estimated to be 20 to 30% and
25 to 40% respectively.\ **3,4** In Pakistan their have been few studies
examining the prevalence and patterns psychiatric morbidity in the
community and at the level of psychiatric outpatients and
inpatients.\ **5,6** We still need studies to estimate the prevalence
and pattern of psychiatric disorders in the community. The
epidemiological studies however, are very difficult and expensive to
conduct in a county with limited resources. The studies conducted at
tertiary care level can give a broad overview of pattern and
symptomatology of psychiatric disorders, especially for the severe
mental disorder. The present study aims to describe the
socio-demographic variables and the frequency of different diagnostic
categories of the patients admitted at Pakistan Institute of Medical
Sciences.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

Between 6th July 2000 to 5\ :sup:`th` January 2001, 116 patients were
admitted in the Department of Psychiatry at Pakistan Institute of
Medical Sciences, Islamabad. This hospital provides services to a large
geographical region of Islamabad and Rawalpindi territories. The
population served by this hospital is both urban and rural in nature.
Before admission, all patients were examined with specific attention to
the neurological system. Appropriate laboratory investigations were
requested to exclude possible physical illnesses. After admission all
the cases were discussed in the ward rounds. During this academic ward
all the patients, their histories, diagnosis and treatment are review.
The diagnosis was based on ICD-10 system of classification.\ **7** All
the patients presenting during six months period were included in the
study except for three patients who were excluded because they were
under 10 years of age thus restricting the analysis to 113 cases. All
the records of patients admitted during this period were retrieved and
the information was collected for the following variables: age, sex,
diagnosis, duration of admission and treatment.

RESULTS
=======

Out of the 113 patients, 64 (57%) were males and 49 (43%) were females.
Frequency of various psychiatric diagnosis, gender and relationship of
illness with age, are shown in table-I and table-II respectively.

Depression was the most common ailment affecting the patients as 18.7%
patients were found to be admitted with this disorder. Amongst the
patients with anxiety disorders, 16.7% of the patients were admitted
because they were suffering from Dissociative (Conversion) disorder out
of which 3.6% were males and 12% were females. 4% of the total neurotic
patients admitted or 0.9% of the total admissions were suffering from
post traumatic stress disorder. The other diagnostic categories of
patients suffering from anxiety disorder are shown in table-1.

Thirteen patients (11.6%) were admitted with Manic Depressive Psychosis,
out of which 11 were males hence (9.8%) and 2 were females (1.8%). Total
number of patients admitted in schizophrenia was 8.04%, 4% males and
4.5% were females. Other diagnosis categories in psychotic disorders are
shown in table-1.

Four patients were admitted with organic psychiatric disorders out of
which one male and one female was suffering form Alzheimer’s disease,
one male was suffering from Huntington’s chorea and one female was
suffering from epilepsy with behavioral disturbance. Drug dependence led
to 8% of the total admissions. Admissions due to drug induced extra
pyramidal syndrome were 4.46%.

The total admitted patients suffering from mental retardation with
Behaviour disturbances were 3.6%.

DISCUSSION
==========

In our study the 18.7% of the patients admitted were suffering from
depression. Depression is one of the most common mental illness. Most of
the patients suffering from depressive illness are treated as out
patients but some of the patients may need hospitalization. 21 patients
were admitted with depressive illness 12 were males and 9 were female
patients. Most of the patients were in the age range of 21 and 40.

Approximately 18.8 million American adults-or 9.5 percent ages 18 and
over, suffer from a depressive illness (major depression, bipolar
disorder, or dysthymia) each year women are nearly twice more likely to
suffer from major depression than men. While major depression can
develop at nay age, the average age at onset is the mid- 20s.\ **8**
Breuer and Freud viewed hysterical symptoms as arising from repressed
sexuality,\ **9** but this psychoanalytic view is less generally
accepted nowadays. An alternative behavioral model has been suggested in
which conversion symptoms are considered as a form of nonverbal
communication. **10, 11, 12.**

Although this study was limited to a small number of patients and
conducted only on inpatients, it shows many similarities, with most of
the previous studies conducted on conversion disorders. It tends to
affect the younger, less mature and less sophisticated person, a finding
common to most previous studies\ **13**. The predominance of females was
compatible with most of he previous studies conducted. Conversion
disorders represent consistent findings through out these years (4.8%).
This is similar to the patterns seen in the inpatient settings of
Pakistan\ **3**. The prevalence in out patient setting in India\ **14**
was between 6-11% of all psychiatric out-patients. On the contrary, in
the outpatients department of Bethlem and Maudsley Hospitals, London,
3.5% were diagnosed as “hysteria” in 1955 to 1957. In 1967 to 1969, only
0.5% were so diagnosed.\ **15** These findings support the notion that
the incidence and prevalence of conversion disorders although has
declined in the west but is still quite high in developing countries. In
this sample dissociative disorder was twice more common in females
compared to males (4.20% vs 60%). The predominance of females in
dissociative disorder is a well known finding in finding in psychiatric
epidemiology for which several explanations have been offered. A
plausible explanation might be that depressive disorders in females are
expressed in the form of dissociative disorders due to restrictions on
the females in our society to express the psychological distress openly.
This can also explain the much less prevalence of depression found in
this study. This hypothesis, however, needs to be tested in further
studies.

A very interesting finding is that neurotic disorders like generalized
anxiety disorder, phobic disorder, personality disorders and obsessive
compulsive disorders were much less common compared to say, for example
bipolar disorder (35% vs 11.5%). This is in no way an indication of low
prevalence of these disorders. This appears to be due to the fact that
these disorders are treated mostly in outpatient settings. As most of
our training takes place in the inpatient setting, the trainees are less
likely to see these conditions and develop the suitable skills in
diagnoses and management of these disorders which hitherto form a
significant proportion of psychiatric morbidity. Patel\ :sup:`16` echoed
similar concerns while commenting on psychiatric services in Africa as
trainees rarely encountered any case of anxiety and depression,
rendering training in these subjects merely a theoretical exercise.

With bipolar disorder, which affects approximately 2.3million American
adults or about 1.2 percent of Americans age 18 and older in a given
year- the average age at onset for a fist manic episode is during the
early 20s.\ **8** The total number of admissions of patients suffering
from Manic Depressive Psychoses was 11.6%. Most of the admitted cases
fell in the range of 21-40 years of age

In the study of schizophrenia, the population at risk is often
considered to be those in the age range of 15-54 **17**. The 6-month
period prevalence rate was 13/1, 000 and averaged 8.8/1,000\ **18.** Out
of the total of 9 patients admitted with schizophrenia 4 of them were
males and 5 were females, all of them were in the range 20-50 years of
age. Total admitted patients suffering from acute psychotic illness were
5.35%. Hence 6 admissions were done out of which 3 were males and 3 were
females. Patients who were admitted were very aggressive, acute
psychosis is not a common

diagnostic entity encountered in Western studies. Postpartum psychoses
represented 1.8% of total admissions during this period. With an
incidence of 1-2 per 100 live births this is not a common disorder in
western countries. However with high fertility rate in Pakistan, this is
relatively common disorder and the number of admissions during this
period represents this fact.\ **19** All the patients admitted during
this period with drug addiction (18% of all admissions) were male using
either one or combination of drugs and alcohol. The patients were
between 20 to 40 years of age. Drug use, particularly alcohol and
marijuana, which is common among young men and infrequent among women,
may contribute to the high rate of mental disorders in this population.
A relationship between drugs and psychosis has been suggested before, as
when Hammond and colleagues hypothesized that substance abuse results “
in increased morbidity and contributes to the observed male-
predominance among Palauan schizophrenics” **20**.

Five cases admitted were suffering from extra pyramidal syndrome out of
which 3 (2.7%) were male and 2(1.8% were female). Three patients were
suffering from Neuroleptic syndrome out of which 2 were male and 1 was
female. This is considerable physical morbidity resulting from use of
anti-psychotics\ :sup:`3`. This appears to be due to fact that anti-
psychotic use by inadequately trained healers is quite common. We have
observed that even the spiritual healers are using depot medication for
psychosis inappropriately.

CONCLUSION
==========

Our study found a trend toward a higher risk of admission in different
psychiatric disease with reference to different age groups and genders.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Regier DA, Boyd JH, Burke JD et al. One month prevalence of mental
    disorders in the united states archives of General Psychiatry 1988,
    45:977-86.

2.  Casey P.A. Guide to Psychiatry in primary care, 2\ :sup:`nd` ed UK.
    Washington Biomedical Publishing co, 1998 P.7.

3.  Malik SB, Bokhary 12. Psychiatric admissions in a teaching hospital:
    a profile of 177 patients JCPSP 1999; 9: 359-61.

4.  Gadet AA, Vahidy A. Mental Health marbiding pattern in Pakistan
    JCPSP 1999’ 9: 362-5.

5.  Mumford DB, Saeed K, Ahmad I, Cathy S, Mubashar MH. Strees and
    psychiatric disorders in rural Punjab a community surves Br J
    psychiatry 1996; 168:299-307.

6.  Gadit A, Vahidy AA, Shafique F. Mental Health Morbidity an experice
    in a community psychiatric clinic JCPSP, 1988; 8: 262-4.

7.  World Health organization 1992. The ICD-10 classification of mental
    and Behavioual disorders, WHO Geneva.

8.  Gregory I, Smeltzer D J, Community and Social Psychiatry, An
    essential of clinical practice Boston little brown 1983; P 139-48.

9.  Breuer j. Freud s. Studies in Hysteria: New York: Monograph 61,
    1895.

10. Choodoff P, Lyons H. Hysteria: the hysterical personality and
    hysterical conversion. Am J psychiatry 1958; 114: 734-40.

11. Chodoff P. The diagnosis of hysteria: an overview. Am J Psychiatry
    1974; 131:1073.

12. Rabkin R. Conversion hysteria as social maladaptation. Am J
    Psychiatry 1964; 27:349-63.

13. Katchadourian H, Racy J. The diagnostic distribution of treated
    Psychiatric illness in Lebanon. Br J Psychiatry 1969;115: 1309-22.

14. Wig NN, et al. A follow up study of hystera Ind Psychit 1982, 50:5.

15. Hare E. Triennial statistical report (1967-1969) of the Maudsley and
    Royal Bethem Hospital London: Bethlem and Maudsley Hospital 1967.

16. Patel V. Winston M. University of mental illness, revisted:
    assumptions, artifacts and new directions. Br. J Psychiatry 1994;
    1965:437-40.

17. Jablensky A, Sartorius N, Ernberg G, Anker M, Korten A, Cooper JE,
    et al.(1992). Schizophrenia: Manifestations, incidence, and course
    in different cultures. A world health organization Ten-Country
    Study. Psychological Medicine, Monograph Supplement 20, 1-97.

18. Burnhham MA, Hough RL, Esocbar JL, Karno M, Timbers DM, Telles CA,
    et al. (1987). Six month prevalence of specific psychiatric
    disorders among Mexican Americans and non Hispanic whites in Los
    Angeles.

19. Kendell RE chabelers L, Platz C. The epidemiology of puerperal
    psychoses. Br J psych 1987; 150-662-73.

20. Hammond, K.W., Kauders, F. R., & Mac Murray, J.P. (1983).
    Schizophrenia in Palau: Descriptive study. International Journal of
    Social Psychiatry, 24, 161-70.
