   JPPS 2008; 5(2): 105-111 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

DOUBLE BLIND PLACEBO CONTROLLED CLINICAL TRIAL EXAMINING THE
EFFECTIVENESS OF

   ST. JOHN’S WORT (HYPERICUM PERFORATUM) IN MILD TO MODERATE DEPRESSION

   Raza-ur-Rahman, Moin Ahmed Ansari, Zafar Hayder, Aftab Ahmed
   Siddiqui, Ishfaq A. Bukhari, Muhammed Abdul Qayyum

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objective:** To compare improvement in symptoms of mild to moderate
   depression after treatment with Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s Wort
   extract) and placebo.

   **Design**: Double blind randomized controlled trial.

   **Place and duration of study:** This study was conducted at the
   outpatient department of psychiatry at Civil Hospital, Karachi from
   December 2006 to November 2007.

   **Subjects and Methods:** This study is experimental, controlled
   randomized trial, done at out-patient department of Civil Hospital,
   Karachi on 112 patients who were assigned either St. John’s Wort or
   placebo group for treatment. Depression was measured at weekly
   interval using Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) for six
   consecutive weeks along with concurrent side effects.

   **Results:** 234 out of 350 initially selected patients were randomly
   assigned to two different groups A & B receiving St. John’s Wort and
   placebo respectively. The efficacy of the treatments was evaluated
   after 14, 28 and 42 days of the treatments through changes in HAM-D
   score compared to Day 0. The Mean HAM- D score on Day 0 of St. John’s
   Wort treated and placebo treated was 18.04 (SD=3.6) and 17.50 (SD=
   3.1) respectively. A marked reduction in HAM-D score was evident at
   14 to 42 days of the treatment in both groups, however at day 42 the
   reduction in HAM-D score observed with St. John’s Wort group was more
   from that of placebo.

   **Conclusion:** St. John’s Wort extract is more effective than
   placebo in the treatment of mild to moderate depression and have
   comparable safety and tolerability profile.

   **Key words:** Double-blind randomized controlled trial, Depression,
   Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s Wort), Placebo.

INTRODUCTION
============

Depression a common psychiatric disorder, affects mood, thoughts,
physical health, and behavior of the

   **Raza-ur-Rahman**, Assistant Professor, Depratment of Psy- chiatry,
   Civil Hopsital, Dow Univesity of Health Sciences Karachi, Pakistan.
   E-mail: razaur@yahoo.com

   **Moin Ahmed Ansari,** Depratment of Psychiatry, Liaquat Na- tional
   Hospital, Karachi.

   **Zafar Hayder,** Depratment of Psychiatry, Jinnah Postgradu- ate
   Medical Centre, Karachi.

   **Aftab Ahmed Siddiqui,** Department of Medicine, Liaquat Col- lege
   of Medicine & Dentistry, Darul Sehat Hospital Karachi.

   **Ishfaq A. Bukhari**, Medics Labaratories, North Karachi In-
   dustrial Area, Karachi, Pakistan.

   **Muhammed Abdul Qayyum**, Medics Labaratories, North Karachi
   Industrial Area, Karachi, Pakistan.

   **Correspondence: Dr Raza-ur-Rahman**

patient1. There is high prevalence of depression in Pa- kistani
population attributable perhaps to peculiar so- cioeconomic
conditions2-6. Among different barriers in successful treatment of
depression two main are ad- verse effect of standard antidepressant and
their high cost6. An effective, low cost, well tolerated anti-
depressant would thus be of tremendous clinical impor- tance.

Many treatment strategies have been tried for these problems, including
complimentary and alternative medi- cine (CAM). St. John’s Wort
(botanical name: *Hyperi- cum perforatum*) is a herbal medicine that is
being used for centuries7 and is highest OTC (over the counter) sell-
ing medicine in many developed countries8. It is one of the extensively
studied natural product9 funded by pres- tigious organization like
Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) of United
States National Institute of Health. Scientific evidence regarding the

   Table 1

   Cost Comparison in Pak Rs. of St. John’s Wort with other standard
   antidepressants

+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+
|                 | **Low |   |   |    **Hi |    **6 week |           |
|  **Ingredient** | est** |   |   | ghest** |             |           |
|                 |       |   |   |         |   Treatment |           |
|                 |       | * | * |         |    Cost**   |           |
|                 |       | * | * |         |             |           |
|                 |       | P | T |         |    **Lowest |           |
|                 |       | r | a |         |             |           |
|                 |       | i | b |         |   Highest** |           |
|                 |       | c | * |         |             |           |
|                 |       | e | * |         |             |           |
|                 |       | * |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | * |   |         |             |           |
+=================+=======+===+===+=========+=============+===========+
|    Impipramine  | 0.86  |   |   |         | 108.08      | 146.67    |
|    25mg         |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 1 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | . |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 1 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 6 |   |         |             |           |
+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+
|                 | 0.75  |   |   |         | 126.00      | 158.47    |
|   Amitriptyline |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|    25mg         |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 0 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | . |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 9 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 4 |   |         |             |           |
+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+
|    St. John’s   | 3.96  | — |   |         | 332.50      | —         |
|    Wort 450mg   |       |   |   |         |             |           |
+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+
|    Fluoxetine   | 4.70  |   |   |         | 197.40      | 1,587.60  |
|    20mg         |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 3 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 7 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | . |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 8 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 0 |   |         |             |           |
+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+
|    Citalopram   | 9.90  |   |   |         | 415.80      | 2,098.74  |
|    20mg         |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 4 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 9 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | . |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 9 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 7 |   |         |             |           |
+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+
|    Paroxetine   | 10.50 |   |   |         | 441.00      | 1,816.21  |
|    20mg         |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 4 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 3 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | . |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 2 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 4 |   |         |             |           |
+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+
|    Sertraline   | 6.00  |   |   |         | 756.00      | 5,798.06  |
|    50mg         |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 4 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 6 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | . |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 0 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 2 |   |         |             |           |
+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+
|    Venlafaxine  | 18.70 |   |   |         | 1,178.1     | 1,709.98  |
|    50mg         |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 2 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 7 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | . |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 1 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 4 |   |         |             |           |
+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+
|    Fluvoxamine  | 25.00 |   |   |         | 1,050.00    | 1,589.20  |
|    100mg        |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       |   |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 3 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 7 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | . |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 8 |   |         |             |           |
|                 |       | 4 |   |         |             |           |
+-----------------+-------+---+---+---------+-------------+-----------+

..

   Source: druginfosys.com

effectiveness of St. John’s Wort for depression is incon- sistent. There
are many studies that support usefulness of St. John’s Wort in treating
mild to moderate depres- sion10,12. A meta-analysis of 23 randomized
clinical trials of St. John’s Wort extract, involving 1757 patients, re-
vealed significant response as compared to placebo (15 placebo control
trial)13 and equal efficacy in com- parison to other antidepressants (8
antidepressant con- trol trial). There are other clinical trials which
revealed similar results in support of efficacy of St. John’s Wort, but
the study design and methodology have often been criticized14-16.
Wolke17 considered the criticized issues in randomized multi-center
double blind parallel group trial and in his trial he found St. John’s
Wort (500mg) is not only as effective as Imipramine (150mg) but also
signifi- cantly better tolerated. Similar results were observed by
Phillip18 in double blind placebo control comparison of St. John’s Wort
(1050mg) with Imipramine (100mg). Simi- lar results have also been
observed in comparative stud- ies with Fluoxetine19,20, Paroxetine21,
and Citalopram22. One common finding of all studies was better
tolerability of the St. John’s Wort. Trautman-Sponsel23 concluded that
when account of differing dose levels, standardiza- tion and methods of
evaluation are taken into account then St. John’s Wort extract is
efficacious and well toler- ated.

Besides many studies in support of efficacy of St. John’s Wort, two
large studies, one sponsored by NCCAM24, showed that the herb was no
more effective than placebo in treating major depression of moderate
severity. An analysis of the results of 37 clinical trials concluded
that St. John’s Wort may have only minimal beneficial effects on major
depression. However, the analysis also found that St. John’s Wort may
benefit people with minor depression; these benefits may be similar to
those from standard antidepressants. Overall, St. John’s Wort appeared
to produce fewer side effects

than some standard antidepressants19. The issue of com- pliance becomes
more important in patients with mild to moderate depression, who usually
tend to discontinue medication due to side effect7.

Keeping in mind the aforementioned facts the pri- mary objective of the
study was to evaluate the efficacy of St. John’s Wort 900 mg/day in
local population during the 6 weeks of acute treatment. Secondary
objectives were to assess the safety and tolerability of the treat-
ments investigated. The principal outcome measure was the change in the
total score on the Hamilton Rating Scale (HAM-D) 17-item version between
day 0 and end point.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

This was a 6-week randomized, double blind pla- cebo controlled trial
comparing the efficacy of St. John’s Wort extract 300 mg with placebo in
patients suffering from a mild to moderate depression. The investigation
was conducted at the out patient department of psychia- try at Civil
Hospital, Karachi. Ethical approval was taken before the start of the
study and all patients provided written informed consent.

Sample Size
-----------

112 patients with mild to moderate depression were included in the
study.

Sample Selection Technique
--------------------------

   Systemic randomization / convenience.

Inclusion Criteria
------------------

Patients of both sexes, between the ages of 18 to 65 with no associated
physical disease, who gave their consent, were recruited for the study.

Exclusion criteria
------------------

Any patients with depression secondary to organic illness and atypical
cases that may carry different diag- nosis were not included. Patient
belonging out side of Karachi were also not included because of inherent
dif- ficultly in follow-up.

Clinical assessment
-------------------

Base line investigation was carried out by Blood CPs & ESR, Serum
Createnin and LFT

Mild to moderate depression was assessed ac- cording to International
Statistical Classification of Dis- eases and Related Health Problems
(ICD-10, 10th Revi- sion, Version 2003; F32.0 Mild depressive episode or
F33.0 Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode mild and F32.1
Moderate depressive episode or F33.1 Recurrent depressive disorder,
current episode moder- ate). Participants were required to have a total
score between the ranges of 15-22 on 17 item Hamilton De- pression Scale
(HAM-D).

Investigational Treatments
--------------------------

Film coated tablets containing 300 mg dry extract of St. John’s Wort
(Hypericum perforatum) were used. Tablets containing placebo (a mix of
maize starch and dicalcium phopate) were indistinguishable from those
containing St. John’s Wort extract in all aspects of their appearance.
During the 6 weeks of randomized treat- ment all patients took 3 film
coated tablets per day, one in the morning, one in the afternoon and one
in the evening.

Sample Selection Procedure
--------------------------

All consecutive patients enrolled at out patient de- partment of
psychiatry, were screened by OPD doctors. Newly diagnosed patients of
depression were selected and Hospital Anxiety & Depression (HAD) scale
was applied, patients having high score on HAD scale (> 11) were
referred to the researcher.

Researcher assessed these patients in detail on semi structured
psychiatric interview based on Present State Examination (PSE)
questioner. The detailed psy- chiatric history of these patients was
taken on standard format and diagnosis of depression was made accord-
ing to ICD-10 criteria. Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM-D) was
administered on these patients to find out severity of depression. Base
line investigations such as complete blood count (CPC), erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR), serum createnin and liver function test (LFT)
were carried out on selected cases to exclude concur- rent illness.

The patients included in this study were divided randomly by balloting
into two identical groups (A & B) each group was prescribed medicine
labeled accord- ingly. One of these groups received St. John’s Wort ex-
tract Tablets 300mg thrice daily, while other group was given placebo.
Both the researchers and the patients were blinded to the treatment
being offered. Test drugs were packaged in identical containers clearly
marked

“Group A” and “Group B” under the supervision of a registered
pharmacist, who did not participate in alloca- tion of test drugs to the
patients. The test drugs were shipped to the department of psychiatry at
Civil Hospital where they were kept with the head researcher and were
released once the patients were assigned to a particu- lar group. The
code of the medicine was sealed and placed in a secure location and was
opened after com- piling the data.

Patients were followed up weekly for 6 weeks to assess improvement of
symptoms, side effects of drug and adjustment of dosage. HAM-D was
repeated on 2nd, 4th and 6th week to see improvement.

A specially designed check list was used for re- cording adverse effects
which included nausea, dizzi- ness, drowsiness, dryness of mouth and
skin allergies, there was also space provided for recording any other
adverse effects reported during the course of the treat- ment.

Patients were thoroughly questioned about ad- verse events in a general
inquiry during each visit. These were recorded & concurrent illness was
also dealt with.

Statistical Analysis
--------------------

Statistical analysis was done to correlate different therapeutic
variables (active drug and placebo) with ref- erence to the severity of
depression (according to rating scale used in this research) by using
t–test.

RESULTS
=======

In this 6-weak double blind placebo controlled study the efficacy of St.
John’s Wort was compared to placebo in mild to moderate cases of
depression. Total 234 patients out of 350 initially selected for the
study were randomly assigned to two different groups A & B. Both groups
were almost homogenous in terms of mean age and gender; there were more
female patients than male in both groups (Table 2). Patients assigned to
group ‘A’ received St. John’s Wort 300 mg thrice daily. Patients in
group ‘B’ received same dose of placebo. Patients in both groups were
observed on weekly fol- low-up basis for 6 weeks. 35 patients from St.
John’s Wort treated and 76 patients from placebo treated did not
maintain the 6 weeks follow-up and the primary rea- son for this
premature termination of the treatment could not be traced out (Figure
1).

Efficacy
--------

The efficacy of the treatments was evaluated after 14, 28 and 42 days of
the treatments through changes in HAM-D score compared to Day 0. The
Mean HAM-D score on Day 0 of St. John’s Wort treated and placebo treated
was 18.04 (SD =3.6) and 17.50 (SD =3.1) re- spectively as shown in Table
3. A marked reduction in HAM-D score was evident at 14 to 42 days of the
treat- ment in both groups, however at day 42 the reduction in HAM-D
score observed with St. John’s Wort group was different from that of
placebo (Figure 2). The percentage

   Table 2

   Base line characteristics of patients with mild to moderate
   depression treated with St. John’s Wort (SJW) 300 mg thrice daily or
   placebo

+--------------------+-----------------+------------------+-----------+
|    *               |    **SJW        |    **Treatment   |    **P –  |
| *Characteristics** |    (n=56)**     |    Placebo       |           |
|                    |                 |    (n=56)**      |   Value** |
|                    |    **Mean       |                  |           |
|                    |    (SD)**       |    **Mean (SD)** |           |
+====================+=================+==================+===========+
|    Age (years)     |    33.89        |    36.29         |    0.28   |
|                    |    (10.884)     |    (12.478)      |           |
+--------------------+-----------------+------------------+-----------+
|    HAD Score       |    17.83        |    17.57 (3.996) |    0.7    |
|                    |    (4.573)      |                  |           |
+--------------------+-----------------+------------------+-----------+
|    HAM-D Score at  |    18.04        |    17.50 (3.116) |    0.4    |
|    inclusion       |    (3.593)      |                  |           |
+--------------------+-----------------+------------------+-----------+
|    **Sex**         |    **% (n)**    |    **%(n)**      |           |
+--------------------+-----------------+------------------+-----------+
|    Male            |    23.2 (13)    |    21.4 (12)     |           |
+--------------------+-----------------+------------------+-----------+
|    Female          |    76.8 (43)    |    78.6 (44)     |           |
+--------------------+-----------------+------------------+-----------+

.. image:: media/image1.png
   :width: 5.39337in
   :height: 5.48208in

Fig. 1: Screening and follow-up compiliance of the patients with mild to
moderate depression treated with St. John’s Wort 300 mg thrice daily or
placeo.

   .. image:: media/image2.png
      :width: 2.79359in
      :height: 3.105in

Fig. 2: Change from base line in mean HAM-D scores in patients with
mildto moderate depression after 14, 28 & 42 days of treatment with SJW
and Placebo.

reductions for both treatments are shown in Figure III; the data
demonstrate that patients treated with St. John’s Wort exhibited greater
improvements as compared to placebo treated group, indicating
effectiveness of St. John’s Wort in the treatment of mild to moderate
depression.

Safety and tolerability
-----------------------

A good tolerability profile was observed with both the treatments.
Nausea and headache were the most common side effects reported in both
groups of the pa- tients. However dry mouth and dizziness was more fre-
quent with St. John’s Wort treatment, compared to pla- cebo (Table 3).
The incidence and severity of the ad-

   Table 3

   Number of patients with mild to moderate depression who experienced
   adverse effects

   during 6 weeks treatment with St. John’s Wort (SJW) 300 mg thrice
   daily or placebo.

+--------------------------+---------------------+--------------------+
|    **Adverse Effects**   |    **SJW (n=56)**   |    **Placebo       |
|                          |                     |    (n=56)**        |
+==========================+=====================+====================+
|    Nausea                |    16 (28.5%)       |    8 (14.3%)       |
+--------------------------+---------------------+--------------------+
|    Dry mouth             |    8 (14.3%)        |    0 (0.0%)        |
+--------------------------+---------------------+--------------------+
|    Headache              |    16 (28.5%)       |    16 (28.5%)      |
+--------------------------+---------------------+--------------------+
|    Dizziness             |    12 (21.4%)       |    4 (7.1%)        |
+--------------------------+---------------------+--------------------+
|    Palpitations          |    4 (7.1%)         |    0 (0.0%)        |
+--------------------------+---------------------+--------------------+
|    Photosensitivity      |    4 (7.1%)         |    4 (7.1%)        |
+--------------------------+---------------------+--------------------+

Fig.3: Percentage drop in HAM-D score in patients with mild to moderate
depression after 6 weeks treatment with SJW and Placebo

verse effects observed were not to the extent that would make the
patients reluctant in taking the medication. In the placebo treated
group 2 patients were withdrawn prematurely because of the development
of severe symp- toms of depression.

DISCUSSION
==========

.. _efficacy-1:

Efficacy
--------

The results of this study demonstrate the efficacy of 300 mg thrice
daily of St. John’s Wort as compare to placebo in patients with mild to
moderate depression at the interval of 6 weeks. This finding was stable
across several validated investigators. Over the first four weeks, the
mean decreases in HAM-D scores were nearly the same with no statistical
difference. It was about 7.7 points in St John’s Wort group and 6.8 in
placebo group. Over the full 6 weeks, mean decreases in HAM-D scores
were approximately 10 points for St John’s Wort group and 8 points for
the placebo group; the difference of 2 points was significant.

On a descriptive level, the antidepressant effects of St. John’s Wort
and placebo were comparable during the first four weeks of treatment,
indicating that without a placebo run in phase, factors other than the
pharmaco- logical action of St. Johns’ Wort extract may have ini- tially
contributed to the observed relief of depressive symptoms. However, the
majority of patients random- ized to placebo showed only limited or no
improvement between day 28 and day 42.

The drop in mean HAM-D scores after 42 days treatment with St. John’s
Wort (900mg/day) in our study

were comparable with results reported by Kasper et al25 with St. John’s
Wort (1200mg/day) for same duration of treatment. However there was a
minor difference in the placebo group of our and the Kasper study. The
drop in mean HAM-D scores in the placebo group in the present study was
slightly higher than reported by Kasper for placebo group.

.. _safety-and-tolerability-1:

Safety and tolerability
-----------------------

For both treatment-groups, the highest frequen- cies of adverse events
were observed during the first two weeks of acute treatment. Because
this effect was observed in both treatment groups, it is likely to have
been related to a non-specific, non-drug- related effect based on the
patients’ and investigators’ expectations or to the patients’ initial
severity of depres- sion (known to increase vulnerability to various
kinds of adverse experiences). During the 6-week acute treatment, the
St. John’s Wort group showed a relatively higher frequency of adverse
events than the placebo group. Potentially attributable adverse events
included gastrointestinal disorders, headache, dizzi- ness, dry mouth,
and photosensitivity reactions (Table- 3). Number of patients
complaining of headache was identical (28.5%) in both groups this
appears more be- cause of the symptoms of depression than due to ad-
verse effect of active drug. In the Kasper25 study St. John’s Wort
extract had no meaningful influence on labo- ratory measures, physical
findings, vital signs or ECG parameters.

CONCLUSION
==========

Although larger sample size is needed, the find- ings from our current
study demonstrate that both treat- ments alleviated the symptoms of mild
to moderate de- pression but St. John’s Wort 900 mg was more effective
than placebo in the treatment of mild to moderate de- pression. Both
treatments showed comparable safety and tolerability profile, however
there was a slightly higher incidence of side effects in St. John’s Wort
group compare to placebo.

Given the low cost of St. John’s Wort extract it may have a role in
treatment of patients with mild to moder- ate depression who cannot
afford standard antidepres- sants or who cannot tolerate standard
antidepressants due to adverse effects.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
========================

The study was funded by Medics Laboratories in- cluding provision of
Deprisin® Tablets (St. John’s Wort) 300 mg and manufacturing of placebo
with similar shape and color.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Gelder M, Gath D, Mayo R, Cowen P. Mood disorder. In: Oxford
    Textbook of Psychiatry. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford university press,
    1996: 197-245.

2.  Mirza I, Jenkins R. Risk factors, prevalence, and treat- ment of
    anxiety and depressive disorders in Pakistan: systematic review. BMJ
    2004; 328: 794-9.

3.  Ahmed I, Saeed K, Mubashir MH, Latif S, Mumford DB. Minor
    psychiatric morbidity and socioechnomic factor. J Coll Physicians
    Surg Pak 2001; 11: 215-8.

4.  Saeed K, Sultan S, Mubashir SS, Doger I, Mumford DB, Mubashir MH.
    Comparision of self-reporting question- naire and Bedford somatic
    inventory as screening in- struments for psychiatric morbidity in
    community set- ting in Pakistan. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak 2001;
    11: 229-31.

5.  Ahmed I, Saeed K, Mumford DB, Latif S, Mubashir MH. Social stress
    and psychiatric morbidity in rural Paki- stan. J Coll Physicians
    Surg Pak 2001; 11: 239-41.

6.  Naqvi HA. Depression in primary care: clinical epidemi- ology &
    clinical decision analysis- an analytical review. J Pak Psych Soc
    2006; 3: 6-11.

7.  Gaster B, Holroyd J. St John’s Wort for depression. A systemic
    review. Arch Intern Med 2000; 160: 152-6.

8.  Lecrubier Y, Clerc G, Didi R, Kieser M. Efficacy of St. John’s Wort
    extract WS 5570 in major depression: A double-blind,
    placebo-controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry 2002; 159: 1361-6.

9.  Pies R. Adverse neuropsychiatric reactions to herbal and
    over-the-counter “antidepressants”. J Clin Psychia- try 2000; 61:
    815-20.

10. Hyperisi H. WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants. Vol 2.
    Geneva: World Health Organization, 2002:149-71.

11. Lecrubier Y, Clerc G, Didi R, Kieser M Efficacy of St. John’s wort
    extract WS 5570 in major depression: a double-blind,
    placebo-controlled trial. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol 2005; 15:
    293-301.

12. Kalb R, Trautmann-Sponsel RD, Kieser M Efficacy and tolerability of
    hypericum extract WS 5572 versus pla- cebo in mildly to moderately
    depressed patients. A ran- domized double-blind multicenter clinical
    trial. Pharmacopsychiatry 2001; 34: 96-103.

13. Linde K, Ramirez G. St John wort for depression – an overview and
    meta-analysis of rendamized clinical trials. BMJ 1996; 313: 253-8.

14. De Smet PA, Nolen WA. St. John wort as an antidepres- sant
    [Editorial]. BMJ 1996; 313: 241-2.

15. Linde K, Berner M. Has Hypericum found its place in antidepressant
    treatment? [Commentary] BMJ 1999; 319:-1539.

16. Houghton PJ. St. John’s Wort for depression. BMJ 1996; 313: 1204-5.

17. Woelk H. Comparision of St John wort and Imipramine for treating
    depression: randimized controlled trial. BMJ 2000; 321: 536-9.

18. Philipp M, Kohnen R, Hiller K. Hypericum extract versus Imipramin or
    placebo in patients with moderate depres- sion: Randomized
    multi-center study of treatment foe eight weeks. BMJ 1999; 319:
    1534-9.

19. Schrader E. Equivalence of St. Johns wort extract (Ze177) and
    fluoxetine: a randomized control study in mild – moderate
    depression. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2000; 15: 61-8.

20. Fava M, Alpert J, Nierenberg AA, Mischoulon D, Otto MW, Zajecka J,
    et al. A Double-blind, randomized trial of St John’s wort,
    fluoxetine, and placebo in major de- pressive disorder. J Clin
    Psychopharmacol 2005; 25: 441-7.

21. Szegedi A, Kohnen R, Dienel A, Kieser M. Acute treat- ment of
    moderate to sever depression with hypericum extract WS5570 (St
    John’s wort): randomized controlled double blind non-inferiority
    trial versus paroxitine. BMJ 2005; 330: 755-9

22. Gastpar M, Singer A, Zeller K. Comparative efficacy and safety of a
    once-daily dosage of hypericum extract STW3-VI and citalopram in
    patients with moderate de-

..

   pression: a double-blind, randomised, multicentre, pla-
   cebo-controlled study. Pharmacopsychiatry 2006; 39:

   66-75.

23. Trautmann-Sponsel RD. St Johns wort extract in the treatment of
    depression – an effective and well toler- ated antidepressant. The
    Europian Phytojournal 1996;1: 44-9.

24. NMCA facts; St. John’s Wort and Depression. [Online] 2007 [Cited on
    2008, Sep 20]. Available from URL:
    http://nccam.nih.gov/health/stjohnswort/ sjwataglance.htm.

25. Kasper S, Anghelescu IG, Szegedi A, Dienel A, Kieser

..

   M. Superior efficacy of St John’s wort extract WS® 5570 compared
   toplacebo in patients with major de- pression: a randomized,
   double-blind, placebo-con- trolled, multi-center trial
   [ISRCTN77277298]. BMC Med 2006; 23: 4-14.
