   JPPS 2006; 3(1): 49–51 THE COCHRANE CORNER

ABSTRACTS OF COCHRANE SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS

In this issue three Cochrane Systematic Reviews from the Cochrane
Library have been selected. These highlight three interventions for the
disorders we face quite commonly in our practice.

1. The systematic review on pharmacological treat- ment of PTSD provides
   an evidence based insight for our efforts to cope with the burden of
   this disor- der which we are going to face in earthquake af- fected
   areas.

2. The review on the psychosocial interventions for conversion disorders
   states what we have sus- pected for a long time; we do not have much
   evi- dence for any of the psychosocial interventions applied for this
   disorder This may be surprising in view of the fact that this
   disorder provided the ba- sis of initial psychoanalytic formulations.
   This is a real challenge for all clinicians and research work- ers in
   developing world, particularly in this region where this disorder
   constitutes a major cause of psychiatric morbidity. Only three trials
   with a total of 119 participants were identified. In this context
   most recent randomized controlled trial on behav- ior therapy for
   this disorder published in Journal of College of Physicians and
   Surgeons Pakistan (JCPSP 2006, 16(5): 359-363) should be seen as a
   welcome addition to the literature and the findings need to be
   replicated in other studies with larger sample size and more robust
   methodology.

3. Finally the review by Krisanaprakornkit et al in- vestigates the
   effectiveness of a novel intervention, the meditation therapy in
   treating anxiety disorders. This review highlights the range of
   interventions used in the anxiety disorder. The reviewers con- cluded
   that there are not enough randomized con- trolled trials on the
   subject. This is perhaps under- standable and the fact that they were
   able to lo- cate *any* trial is encouraging. After all there is no
   Meditation Therapy Inc. to sponsor the trials on meditation therapy
   or for that matter on any psy- chological intervention!

**The Editor**

PHARMACOTHERAPY FOR POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (PTSD)
=========================================================

   Stein DJ, Ipser JC, Seedat S

ABSTRACT
--------

   Background: Post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a prevalent and
   disabling disorder. Evidence that PTSD is

   characterised by specific psychobiological dysfunctions has
   contributed to a growing interest in the use of medi- cation in its
   treatment.

   Objectives: To assess the effects of medication for post traumatic
   stress disorder.

   Search strategy: We searched the Cochrane Depres- sion, Anxiety and
   Neurosis Group specialised register (CCDANCTR-Studies) on 18 August
   2005, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL)
   (The Cochrane Library issue 4, 2004), MEDLINE (January 1966

   to December 2004), PsycINFO (1966 to 2004), and the National PTSD
   Center Pilots database. Reference lists of retrieved articles were
   searched for additional studies.

*Selection criteria*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of pharma- cotherapy for PTSD.

*Data collection and analysis*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two raters independently assessed RCTs for inclu- sion in the review,
collated trial data, and assessed trial quality. Investigators were
contacted to obtain missing data. Summary statistics were stratified by
medication class, and by medication agent for the selective seroto- nin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Dichotomous and con- tinuous measures were
calculated using a random ef- fects model, heterogeneity was assessed,
and subgroup/ sensitivity analyses were undertaken.

*Main results*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

35 short-term (14 weeks or less) RCTs were in- cluded in the analysis
(4597 participants). Symptom se- verity for 17 trials was significantly
reduced in the medi- cation groups, relative to placebo (weighted mean
dif- ference -5.76, 95% confidence intervals (CI) -8.16 to - 3.36,
number of participants (N) = 2507). Similarly, sum- mary statistics for
responder status from 13 trials dem- onstrated overall superiority of a
variety of medication agents to placebo (relative risk 1.49, 95% CI 1.28
to 1.73,

number needed to treat = 4.85, 95% CI 3.85 to 6.25, N = 1272).
Medication and placebo response occurred in 59.1% (N = 644) and 38.5%
(628) of patients, respec- tively. Of the medication classes, evidence
of treatment efficacy was most convincing for the SSRIs.

Medication was superior to placebo in reducing the severity of PTSD
symptom clusters, comorbid de- pression and disability. Medication was
also less well tolerated than placebo. A narrative review of 3 mainte-
nance trials suggested that long term medication may be required in
treating PTSD.

*Authors’ conclusions*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Medication treatments can be effective in treating PTSD, acting to
reduce its core symptoms, as well as associated depression and
disability. The findings of this review support the status of SSRIs as
first line agents in the pharmacotherapy of PTSD, as well as their value
in long-term treatment. However, there remain important gaps in the
evidence base, and a continued need for more effective.

   The full text of the review is available in *The Cochrane Library*
   (ISSN 1464–780X)

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006 Issue 2.

Copyright © 2006 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

PSYCHOSOCIAL INTERVENTIONS FOR CONVERSION DISORDER
==================================================

   Ruddy R and House A

.. _abstract-1:

ABSTRACT
--------

   Background: Conversion disorder is an alteration or loss of physical
   functioning suggestive of a physical disorder that is thought to be
   due to a psychological stressor or conflict. The fact that many
   theories about the cause of conversion disorder focus on
   psychological and social factors would suggest that a psychosocial
   intervention might be of most benefit.

   Objectives: To investigate the efficacy of psychosocial interventions
   on people diagnosed with conversion dis- order compared with standard
   care, a biological inter- vention or another psychosocial
   intervention.

   Search strategy: We searched the Cochrane Depres- sion, Anxiety and
   Neurosis Group Trials Register (May 2004), various databases on OVID
   (February 2004), handsearched reference lists and textbooks on
   conver- sion disorder and contacted relevant authors.

.. _selection-criteria-1:

*Selection criteria*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We included all randomised controlled trials that compared psychosocial
interventions for conversion dis- order with standard care or other
interventions (biologi- cal or psychosocial).

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-1:

*Data collection and analysis*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We reliably selected, quality assessed and ex- tracted data from the
studies. For dichotomous outcomes we calculated a relative risk with its
associated 95% con- fidence interval and a number needed to treat. For
con- tinuous data we calculated a weighted mean difference.

.. _main-results-1:

*Main results*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The search identified 260 references, 217 were clearly not relevant to
this review and excluded on the

basis of their titles and abstracts, 40 more were excluded after reading
the full papers (the reasons are given in the excluded studies tables)
and only three studies (total n

=119) met the inclusion criteria. One study was con- cerned with
paradoxical injunction therapy and the other two studied the value of
hypnosis. The three studies had different interventions and control
groups so the results could not be combined. All of the studies were of
poor methodological quality and it is therefore difficult to place much
value on the results of the studies. We were un- able to include some
data because of poor reporting.

.. _authors-conclusions-1:

*Authors’ conclusions*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Randomised studies are possible in this field. The use of psychosocial
interventions for conversion disor- der requires more research and it is
not possible to draw any conclusions about their potential benefits or
harms from the included studies.

   The full text of the review is available in *The Cochrane Library*
   (ISSN 1464–780X)

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006 Issue 2.

Copyright © 2006 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

MEDITATION THERAPY FOR ANXIETY DISORDERS
========================================

   Krisanaprakornkit T, Krisanaprakornkit W, Piyavhatkul N, Laopaiboon M

.. _abstract-2:

ABSTRACT
--------

   Background: Anxiety disorders are characterised by long term worry,
   tension, nervousness, fidgeting and symp- toms of autonomic system
   hyperactivity. Meditation is an age-old self regulatory strategy
   which is gaining more interest in mental health and psychiatry.
   Meditation can reduce arousal state and may ameliorate anxiety symp-
   toms in various anxiety conditions.

   Objectives: To investigate the effectiveness of medita- tion therapy
   in treating anxiety disorders.

   Search strategy: Electronic databases searched include
   CCDANCTR-Studies and CCDANCTR-References, complementary and
   alternative medicine specific data- bases, Science Citation Index,
   Health Services/Technol- ogy Assessment Text database, and grey
   literature data- bases. Conference proceedings, book chapters and
   ref- erences were checked. Study authors and experts from
   religious/spiritual organisations were contacted.

   Selection criteria: Types of studies: Randomised con- trolled trials.

   Types of participants: patients with a diagnosis of anxiety
   disorders, with or without another comorbid psy- chiatric condition.

Types of interventions: concentrative meditation or mindfulness
meditation.

Comparison conditions: one or combination of 1) pharmacological therapy
2) other psychological treat- ment 3) other methods of meditation 4) no
intervention or waiting list.

Types of outcome: 1) improvement in clinical anxi- ety scale 2)
improvement in anxiety level specified by trial lists, or global
improvement 3) acceptability of treat- ment, adverse effects 4) dropout.

.. _data-collection-and-analysis-2:

*Data collection and analysis*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Data were independently extracted by two review- ers using a
pre-designed data collection form. Any dis- agreements were discussed
with a third reviewer, and the authors of the studies were contacted for
further in- formation.

.. _main-results-2:

*Main results*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Two randomised controlled studies were eligible for inclusion in the
review. Both studies were of moder- ate quality and used active control
comparisons (another type of meditation, relaxation, biofeedback).
Anti-anxi- ety drugs were used as standard treatment. The dura- tion of
trials ranged from 3 months (12 weeks) to 18 weeks. In one study
transcendental meditation showed

a reduction in anxiety symptoms and electromyography score comparable
with electromyography-biofeedback and relaxation therapy. Another study
compared Kundalini Yoga (KY), with Relaxation/Mindfulness Medi- tation.
The Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale showed no statistically
significant difference between groups. The overall dropout rate in both
studies was high (33-44%). Neither study reported on adverse effects of
meditation.

.. _authors-conclusions-2:

*Authors’ conclusions*
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The small number of studies included in this re- view do not permit any
conclusions to be drawn on the effectiveness of meditation therapy for
anxiety disorders. Transcendental meditation is comparable with other
kinds of relaxation therapies in reducing anxiety, and Kundalini Yoga
did not show significant effectiveness in treating obsessive-compulsive
disorders compared with Relax- ation/Meditation. Drop out rates appear
to be high, and adverse effects of meditation have not been reported.
More trials are needed.

   The full text of the review is available in *The Cochrane Library*
   (ISSN 1464–780X)

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006 Issue 2.

Copyright © 2006 The Cochrane Collaboration. Pub- lished by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.
