JPPS 2008; 5(1): 1-2 EDITORIAL

   PSYCHOSIS ASSOCIATED WITH EPILEPSY: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES

IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Saeed Farooq

Developing countries bear more than 90% of the total burden of disease
caused by epilepsy worldwide as estimated by Disability Adjusted Life
Years1. About 80-98% of patients suffering from epilepsy in the devel-
oping countries are untreated1,2. The discrimination, stigma and
ignorance about the disorder are widely prevalent in developing
countries. A recent survey from Turkey showed that 70% of people thought
that epilepsy resulted from supernatural causes2. The prospects of
marriage for a girl suffering from epilepsy are often bleak in our
country.

Now consider someone having two disorders epi- lepsy and psychosis, both
associated with the worst stigma. People suffering from epilepsy have an
in- creased risk of suffering from psychotic symptoms3,4. The prevalence
of schizophrenia in people with epilepsy varies between 3% and 7%
(prevalence in the general population is 1%)4. In Iceland a case
controlled study found that although there was no excess of psychiatric
illness in people with epilepsy, among those who were psychiatrically
ill a disproportionate number were suf- fering from psychotic disorder5.
Two national inpatient registers for epilepsy and for psychosis
respectively were used to compare the subsequent incidence of schizo-
phrenia in people who had at some point undergone admission to hospital
for epilepsy with that in the gen- eral population6. A standardized
incidence ratio of 1.48 for all epilepsy and 2.35 for temporal lobe
epilepsy was found which suggests epilepsy as a risk factor for schizo-
phrenia. These studies have many methodological limi- tations, such as a
failure to use strictly defined and inter- nationally recognized
diagnostic criteria for schizophre- nia and samples drawn from the
neurology facilities which are not representative of the prevalent
population with epilepsy. However, the results do indicate the con-
siderably heightened risk for psychosis in patients with epilepsy.

   Since clinical seizures are the outstanding fea- ture of epilepsy,
   psychotic syndromes have generally been classified in the literature
   according to their tem- poral relationship to seizure itself, as
   ictal, postictal and interictal psychosis. An ictal psychosis can
   result from status epilepticus of a non-convulsive nature. The psy-
   chosis usually lasts for hours to days and conscious- ness is
   invariably impaired 3,4. The most common asso- ciation is with
   partial complex status. In the interictal psychosis the presence of
   psychotic episodes is not

   directly related to the occurrence of seizures. This can be either
   brief or chronic3. Chronic interictal psychosis closely resembles
   schizophrenia. Nearly half (45%) of the participants in the Slater
   study had a chronic psy- chosis7. In a 10-year follow-up study in
   Japan, 64% of the participants had a chronic psychosis8. Postictal
   psy- chosis is the most common form of psychosis found in people with
   epilepsy4. The psychosis, which comprises affective, schizophrenic,
   and organic symptoms, may last for up to a week. The psychotic
   symptoms are pleo- morphic (persecutory, grandiose, referential,
   somatic, and religious delusions, catatonia, hallucinations, etc.).
   The affective symptoms (manic or depressive) are often prominent9.

The treatment of epilepsy as well as psychotic symptoms is very
challenging. In patients treated with therapeutic doses of the more
commonly used antide- pressants and antipsychotics, seizure incidence
rates have been reported to range from approximately 0.1% to
approximately 1.5% (incidence of the first unprovoked seizure in the
general population is 0.07 to 0.09)10. Amongst the antipsychotics,
clozapine is the most epi- leptogenic. Seizures are reported in 0.3% to
5% of people treated with therapeutic doses11. To complicate matters
further the anticonvulsant drugs have been reported to precipitate
psychosis. There are reports that zonisamide, the most commonly used
add-on treatment in Japan, is associated with psychoses12. Several cases
of psycho- sis have also been reported during add-on therapy with newer
antiepileptic drugs such as vigabatrin, felbamate, lamotrigine,
tiagabine, and topiramate. In addition psy- chosis has also been
reported in association with clobazam, phenytoin, carbamazepine,
barbiturates, ethosuximide and benzodiazepines13-14.

Surprisingly, however there is little reliable objec- tive evidence for
the efficacy of antipsychotic in those suffering from psychosis
concomitant with epilepsy. On a systematic search of literature we could
find only one randomized trial evaluating the effectiveness of an an-
tipsychotic (Olanzapine) in patients suffering from epi- lepsy which
enrolled only 16 patients15.

The need for RCTs in this area is much more than realized in view of the
general impression that anti- psychotics are generally epileptogenic
drugs. This how- ever does not seem to be born out by clinical studies,
especially in those suffering from psychosis. It is reported that the
use of Clozapine, arguably most epileptogenic

antipsychotic was not associated with increased risk of epileptic
seizures11. The use of Clozapine in six patients with epilepsy and
severe psychosis suggested that none of the reported patients had an
increase of their seizure frequency; in contrast, three patients had a
substantial reduction of seizures12. Similarly, another descriptive
study with Thioridazine in 100 institutionalized patients with epilepsy
and behavioral symptoms reported that 41% of patients had reduction in
seizures after the improvement of their behavioral symptoms16. It is
possible that improvement in sleep, decreased stress and possible
interaction of psychotropic drugs with antiepileptic increasing the
levels of later could re- sult in improvement in the seizures. These
assertions however need to be tested in randomized controlled trials.

It should be possible to conduct the pragmatic ran- domized controlled
trials recruiting those exhibiting psy- chotic symptoms in a specified
temporal relationship with epilepsy in developing countries in view of
the high prevalence of epilepsy in many developing countries. The
feasibility of such trials is further enhanced by the fact that in many
developing countries including Paki- stan psychiatrists treat a
substantial number of people suffering from epilepsy. These trials need
to include the outcome measures related to seizure control such as
change in the frequency and duration of seizures which remain as matter
of primary concern in the clinical prac- tice in addition to the outcome
of psychotic symptoms. A recent trial from Bangladesh addressing the
complex issue of treatment of childhood epilepsy with pheno- barbitone
is an illustration of what can be achieved in a developing country
setting with limited resources but creative thinking17. Psychosis
associated with epilepsy is a major challenge for clinicians and
researchers. This also provides a unique opportunity for gaining
insights in two complex disorders which must be taken up by clinicians
and academicians in the developing coun- tries.

   REFERENCES

1.  Shorvon SD, Farmer PJ. Epilepsy in the developing countries: A
    review of epidemiological, socio-cultural and treatment aspects.
    Epilepsia 1988; 29:S36-54.

2.  Aziz H, Guvenar A, Akhtar SV, Hassan KZ. Comparative epidemiology of
    epilepsy in Pakistan and Turkey: Popu- lation-based studies using
    identical protocols. Epilepsia 1997; 38:716-22.

3.  Sachdev P. Schizophrenia-like psychosis and epilepsy: the status of
    the association. Am J Psychiatry 1998; 155:325-36.

4.  Toone BK. The psychoses of epilepsy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
    2000; 69:1-3.

5.  Stefansson SB, Olafsson E, Hauser WA. Psychiatric morbidity in
    epilepsy: A case study of adults receiving disability benefits. J
    Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1998; 64:238-41.

6.  Bredkjaer SR, Mortensen PB, Parnas J. Epilepsy and non-organic
    non-affective psychosis. National epidemio- logic study. Br J
    Psychiatry 1998; 172:235-9.

7.  Slater E, Beard AW, Glithero E. The schizophrenia-like psychoses of
    epilepsy. Br J Psychiatry 1963; 109:95- 150.

8.  Onuma T, Adachi A, Hisano T, Uesugi S. 10-year follow- up study of
    epilepsy with psychosis. Jpn J Psychiat Neurol 1991; 45: 360-1.

9.  Logsdail SJ, Toone BK. Post-ictal psychosis. A clinical and
    phenomenological description. Br J Psychiatry 1988; 152:246-52.

10. Pisani F, Oteri G, Costa C, Di Raimondo G, Di Perri R. Effects of
    psychotropic drugs on seizure threshold. Drug Safety 2002; 25:
    91-110.

11. Langosch JM, Trimble MR. Epilepsy, psychosis and clozapine. Human
    Psychopharmacology 2002; 17: 115-9.

12. Matsuura M, Trimble MR. Zonisamide and psychosis. J Epilepsy 1997;
    10:52-4.

13. Ferrie CD, Robinson RO, Panayiotopoulos CP. Psychiat- ric and severe
    behavioural reactions with vigabatrin: a review. Acta Neurologica
    Scandinavica 1996; 93:1-8.

14. Sander JW, Hart YM, Trimble MR, Shorvon SD. Vigabatrin and
    psychosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychia- try 1991; 54:435-9.

15. Farooq S, Sherin A. Interventions for psychotic symptoms concomitant
    with epilepsy. Cochrane Data- base of Systematic Review. Cochrane
    Library 2008 (In Press).

16. Pauig PM, Deluca MA,Osterheld RG. Thioridazine hy- drochloride in
    the treatment of behavioral disorders in epileptics. Am J Psychiatry
    1961; 832-3.

17. Banu SH, Jahan M, Koli UK, Ferdousi S, Khan NZ, Neville

..

   B. Side effects of phenobarbital and carbamazepine in childhood
   epilepsy: randomized controlled trial. BMJ 2007; 334: 1207.
