   JPPS 2008; 5(2):101-104 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

ASSOCIATION OF LIPID PROFILE WITH DEPRESSIVE FEATURES IN YOUNG
HYPERTENSIVES

   Ravi Gupta, Ram Kumar Solanki, Vaibhav Dubey, Purav Kumar Midha,
   Vijay Pathak

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objectives:** To find out (a) the correlation of various components
   of serum lipids with depression score;

   (b) whether severity of depression differ between the people with
   normal serum lipids & dyslipidemia; and (c) whether the lipid
   components differ between depressed and non-depressed people.

   **Design:** Cross Sectional Cohort study.

   **Place and duration of the study:** This study was conducted at
   Sawai Man Singh Medical College and Hospital, Jaipur, India from
   January 2001 to June 2002.

   **Subjects and Methods:** 100 young primary hypertensive subjects
   were included in this study. Their fasting blood lipid profile was
   ascertained and their depressive feelings were rated with the help of
   HAM-D.

   **Results:** In this study, total lipids, high density lipoprotein,
   low density lipoprotein, very low density lipoproteins and
   triglycerides were positively correlated with the HAM D score.
   Depressed subjects (HAMD>17) had higher levels of total lipids
   (P=0.002), HDL (P=0.04), VLDL (P=0.02) and TG (P=0.001). Similarly
   subjects with higher cholesterol levels (P=0.05), normal HDL
   (P=0.003), normal LDL (P<0.001); higher VLDL (P=0.002) and higher TGs
   (P<0.001) had higher scores on HAM-D.

   **Conclusions:** This study suggests that low HDL, high LDL protects
   from the depression. On the other hand, high cholesterol, VLDL and TG
   increase the risk of depression.

   **Key words:** Hypertension, Young, Lipid profile, Depressive
   features.

INTRODUCTION
============

The correlation between the serum lipids and de- pression is debatable.
Many attempts have been done to find out the correlation of
hypercholesterolemia with depression. While some reports say that low
serum cho- lesterol is associated with depression, other demonstrate
higher depressive scores in patients with high choles- terol levels1-3.

Correlation of low low-density-lipoproteins (LDL) has been shown with
the depression1; similarly, low

   **Ravi Gupta,** Department of Psychiatry, SMS Medical College, JLN
   Marg, Jaipur, India.

   Sleep and Headache Care, 1061, Kissan Marg, Barkat Nagar, Jaipur,
   India.

   `E-mail:sleep_headache_doc@yahoo.co.in <mailto:sleep_headache_doc@yahoo.co.in>`__

   **Ram Kumar Solanki,** Department of Psychiatry, SMS Medi- cal
   College, JLN Marg, Jaipur, India.

   **Vaibhav Dubey,** Department of Psychiatry, SMS Medical Col- lege,
   JLN Marg, Jaipur, India.

   **Purav Kumar Midha,** Department of Psychiatry, SMS Medi- cal
   College, JLN Marg, Jaipur, India.

   **Vijay Pathak,** Department of Cardiology, SMS Medical Col- lege,
   JLN Marg, Jaipur, India.

   **Correspondence: Dr. Ravi Gupta**

high-density-lipoprotein (HDL) and high triglyceride (TG) are reported
to be associated with depression in an- other study4. However, Ergun et
al5 & Deisenhammer et al6 did not find any correlation between these
param- eters. Huang et al7 reported the role of TG, VLDL as the possible
biological markers for depressive syndromes.

Not only the depression but also the suicidality is associated with the
lipid levels. Lalovic et al8 repor- ted higher suicidal rates among
biological relatives of subjects with partial deficiency of 7-dehydro-
cholesterol reductase enzyme. According to Rabe-Jablonska et al1, low
cholesterol & low LDL may be helpful in determining the suicidality
among de- pressed. Kim et al9 reported higher incidence of suicide among
patients with low serum cholesterol. However, these studies are limited
in number and results are con- flicting.

Looking from the other perspective, depression is a state of constant
stress and stress usually leads to the activation of HPA axis. This, in
turn, may lead to dyslipide- mia. Hence, we hypothesized that
dyslipidemia should accompany depression10.

Hence, present study was designed to assess: (a) the correlation of
various components of serum lipids with depression score; (b) to find
out whether severity of

   depression differ between the people with normal se- rum lipids &
   dyslipedemia; and (c) to find out whether the lipid components differ
   between depressed and non- depressed people.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

In this study subjects with history of hypertension were recruited from
the outpatient department of cardi- ology after taking written informed
consent. Hyperten- sion was defined as systolic blood pressure more than
140 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure more than 90 mmHg on three
different occasions. Subjects who did not have working knowledge of
English language, those having any other medical disorder at the time of
interview, those suffering from secondary hypertension, those with
history of substance use (except for tobacco and alcohol) or chronic
inflamma- tory illness or endocrinopathies or congestive heart failure
or myocardial infarction or arrhythmias or neuro- logical or the other
psychiatric illness were excluded. Illiterate subjects and those with
major sensory disabil- ity or family history of psychiatric illness in
the first de- gree relative were also not included. Diagnosis of disor-
ders listed in exclusion criteria was made with the help of history,
physical examination, routine laboratory in- vestigations and wherever
required special laboratory tests. It was done to ensure the picking up
of uncompli- cated hypertension even from the cardiology depart- ment.

After inclusion in the study, subject’s demographic data and details
regarding illness e.g., duration of hy- pertension, average systolic and
diastolic blood pres- sure since onset of illness (calculated by
records) were recorded.

Current alcoholism for this study was defined as anyone who was a social
drinker or alcohol abuser at any point of time in his life and at least
in past six months never met the criteria for alcohol dependence and
took at any amount of alcohol in past fifteen days. Similarly, current
smoker was defined as one who was smoking occasionally or meeting the
criteria for nicotine abuse at any point of time in his life but at
least in past six months never met the criteria for nicotine dependence
(through smoking) and smoked at least one cigarette in past fif- teen
days.

In this study, depression was assessed with the help of Hamilton Rating
Scale for Depression (HAM- D)11. This is an objective scale that does
not require the subjects to be familiar with the language of the scale
that is English. This is a commonly used scale to assess the severity of
depression in our population. The cut-off value of 17, which indicates
the presence of moderate depression, was chosen arbitrarily to diagnose
presence of depressive symptoms\ **.** Those who scored score greater
than 17 were termed “depressed” for the present study. We emphasize here
that it should not be confused with clinical depression.

For the assessment of lipid profile, subjects were asked to come next
day with overnight fasting & then the blood sample was drawn. Samples
were sent to same laboratory to avoid error in the measurements. The
lipid profile was estimated with the help of commercially avail- able
kit in the hospital laboratory. Cut off values to de- fine dyslipedemia
were as follows: Total Cholesterol > 200mg%, HDL <40 mg%, LDL > 130mg%,
VLDL >35mg% & TG >160 mg%12.

Statistical analysis was done with the help of SPSS v 11.0 for Windows.
To find out the correlation between the HAM-D scores & various lipid
components we used Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient; To find out the
differ- ence between the means of two groups we used one tailed t test.

RESULTS
=======

In this study, mean age of the subjects was 52 years and 76.47% were
male. 86.89% subjects had studied for twelve to fifteen years and none
of them was illiterate. Only 17.64% were current smokers, and 5.88% were
current alcoholics. However, none of them fulfilled the criteria for
alcohol-dependence syndrome.

Mean systolic blood pressure was 136.68 *+* 27.22 mmHg and mean
diastolic blood pressure was 89.7\ *+*

   18.32 mmHg. Serum Total lipids were 669 *+* 220.4 mg%; total
   cholesterol 197.83 *+* 66.92 mg%; HDL 41.54 *+* 8.21 mg%; LDL 111.33
   *+* 66.92 mg%; VLDL 40.6 *+* 24.1 mg% and serum triglycerides were
   195.48 *+* 112.72 mg%. Approximately 30% subjects had depression
   according to HAM-D.

   Correlation of HAM-D score with lipid profile is shown in Figure 1.

|image1|\ |image2|

   Fig. 1: Correlation of Lipid Profile with HAM-D score Table 1 shows
   the levels of various components

   |image3|\ |image4|\ |image5|\ |image6|\ |image7|\ |image8|\ of lipid
   profile in depressed and non-depressed patients. It is noticeable
   that total lipids, VLDL and TG were higher in depressed subjects.
   More interestingly, HDL was higher in depressed subjects while LDL
   was not differ- ent among them.

   Table 1

   Difference between the mean serum lipid levels between depressed &
   Non depressed subjects.

+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| **Variable**  |    **Non        |    **Depressed** |    **One       |
|               |    Depressed**  |                  |    tailed ‘t’  |
|               |                 |                  |    test**      |
+===============+=================+==================+================+
| Total lipids  |    645.41 *+*   |    77            |    0.002\*     |
|               |    249.38       | 3.07\ *+*\ 93.59 |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Total         |    201          |    19            |    0.34        |
| Cholesterol   | .43\ *+*\ 77.21 | 6.69\ *+*\ 31.68 |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| HDL           |                 |                  |    0.04\*      |
|               | 40.83\ *+*\ 7.9 | 44.82\ *+*\ 8.41 |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| LDL           |    116.88 *+*   |    102.3 *+*     |    0.08        |
|               |    72.51        |    25.27         |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| VLDL          |    38.35 *+*    |    47.20 *+*     |    0.02\*      |
|               |    26.62        |    15.3          |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| TG            |    181.11 *+*   |    237.4 *+*     |    0.001\*     |
|               |    129.6        |    29.4          |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+

..

   Table 2

   Severity of HRSD scores between people with normal & abnormal serum
   lipids

+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| **Variable**  |    **Status**   |    **HAM-D       |    **One       |
|               |                 |    score**       |    tailed t-   |
|               |                 |                  |    test**      |
+===============+=================+==================+================+
| Total         |    Normal       |    12.09 *+*     |    0.05\*      |
| Cholesterol   |    Increased    |    7.17          |                |
|               |                 |                  |                |
|               |                 |    12.31 *+*     |                |
|               |                 |    5.75          |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| HDL           |    Normal       |    13.26 *+* 6.9 |    0.003\*     |
|               |    Decreased    |                  |                |
|               |                 |    10.45 *+*     |                |
|               |                 |    5.89          |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| LDL           |    Normal       |    20.75 *+*     |    0.000004\*  |
|               |    Increased    |    6.89          |                |
|               |                 |                  |                |
|               |                 |    8.0 *+* 3.37  |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| VLDL          |    Normal       |    9.91 *+* 6.02 |    0.002\*     |
|               |    Increased    |                  |                |
|               |                 |    13.91 *+*     |                |
|               |                 |    6.61          |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+
| TG            |    Normal       |    8.18 *+* 4.02 |    0.0000006\* |
|               |    Increased    |                  |                |
|               |                 |    15.4 *+* 6.6  |                |
+---------------+-----------------+------------------+----------------+

When the HAM-D scores were compared between normolipidemic &
hyperlipidemic subjects, we found that persons with high Cholesterol,
VLDL & TG had signifi- cantly higher scores on HAMD. While the subjects
with decreased HDL & increased LDL had lower scores on the depression
scale (Table 2).

DISCUSSION
==========

One of the main findings of the study was poor correlation of the lipid
profile with HAM-D scores, sug- gesting that lipid profile may not have
direct implication on the depressive features. However, it must be
remem- bered that what we have assessed is depressive fea- tures and not
the clinical depression which was not seen in any of the subjects
included in this study. It was inter- esting to note that contrary to
all other parameters of lipid profile, only total cholesterol was
negatively corre- lated with the severity of depressive features. This
is contrary to the findings of Nakao and Yano2 who re- ported higher
prevalence of depression in hypercholes- terolemic subjects. They also
found that smoking, alco- hol, exercise did not influence the
cholesterol levels.

They demonstrated that hypercholesterolemic subjects develop depression
in the following year. This finding was seen in the present study also
where, hypercholes- terolemia was found to be associated with the high
HAMD scores. However, the difference was too less to be clinically
significant in this study population. In addi- tion, few other studies
did not find any correlation be- tween cholesterol and depression making
the issue debatable1-3,10.

Very low density lipoproteins and triglycerides were higher in the
depressed patients and vice-versa, subjects with higher TG and VLDL
levels had higher scores on the depressive scales. This suggests the
pres- ence of chronic stress among depressed patients. Stress is known
to increase the serum cortisol level and conse- quently mobilizes the
fat from the adipose tissue to pre- pare the body to combat the
stress10. Similar results were also reported previously4,7. Going along
with the issue of serum cholesterol in depressed patient, contradictory
studies on this matter are also available5,6.

Many hypotheses have been proposed to explain this association- Firstly,
serum lipids may affect the struc-

   ture of the membrane of neurons, thus affecting neu-
   rotransmission.14 Secondly, serum lipids may affect the diffusion of
   the amino acids & other substances that may affect the synthesis of
   neurotransmitters; or lastly, dyslipedemia may induce the
   atherosclerosis in the end arteries of the brain thus causing micro
   infarcts that may further induce the depression.

   However, only few studies are available on this issue and this
   requires further research. Although the results of the present study
   open a new area for re- search in this specified group, yet they
   should be inter- preted in the light of the methodological
   limitations. Firstly, depression was not diagnosed according to the
   DSM or ICD criterion. Only the depressive affect & its severity were
   taken into account. Secondly, we had taken the sample from the
   hospital thus sample bias is there and findings do not represent the
   community. Still the results have important clinical implications in
   a special population. Thirdly, the sample size is small owing to the
   limited resources and time. Future studies with bet- ter resources &
   larger sample size are needed. Fourthly, our results show the
   isolated affect of depression & hy- pertension due to the strict
   exclusion criterion. Such kind of subjects may not be usual in
   clinical practice, so the results should be interpreted with caution.
   In addition, additive effects of other pathologies should be borne in
   mind while comparing our findings with that of the clini- cal
   population. Fifth, due to the technical limitations we did not get
   the sreum cortisol measurement done for these patients. This
   measurement could have been more helpful in detection of
   pathophysiology. Lastly, cross sec- tional design of our study did
   not allow us to find if treat- ment of depression or lipid
   abnormalities can have an effect in either direction.

CONCLUSION
==========

This study suggests that lipid profile may affect the depressive
symptomatology in young hypertensive pa- tients. This may have important
therapeutic implications.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Rabe-Jablonska J, Poprawska I. Levels of serum total cholesterol and
    LDL-cholesterol in patients with major depression in acute period
    and remission. Med Sci Monit 2000;6:539-47.

2.  Nakao M, Yano E. Relationship between major depres- sion and high
    serum cholesterol in Japanese men. Tohoku J Exp Med 2004:204:
    273-87.

3.  Kilkens TO, Honig A, Maes M. Fatty acid profile and affective
    dysregulation in irritable bowel syndrome. Lipids 2004;39:425-31.

4.  Petrlova B, Rosolova H, Hess Z, Podlipny J, Simon J. Depressive
    disorders and the metabolic syndrome of insulin resistance. Semin
    Vasc Med 2004;4:161-5.

5.  Ergun UG, Uguz S, Bozdemir N, Güzel R, Burgut R, Saatçi E, Akpinar
    E. The relationship between choles- terol levels and depression in
    the elderly. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2004;19:291-6.

6.  Deisenhammer EA, Kramer-Reinstadler K, Liensberger D, Kemmler G,
    Hinterhuber H, Fleischhacker WW. No evidence for an association
    between serum cholesterol and the course of depression and
    suicidality. Psychiatry Res 2004;121:253-61.

7.  Huang TL, Chen JF. Lipid and lipoprotein levels in de- pressive
    disorders with melancholic feature or atypical feature and
    dysthymia. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2004;58:295-9.

8.  Lalovic A, Merkens L, Russell L, Arsenault-Lapierre G, Nowaczyk MJ,
    Porter FD, Steiner RD, Turecki G.. Cholesterol metabolism and
    suicidality in Smith- Lemli-Opitz syndrome carriers. Am J Psychiatry
    2004;161:2123-6.

9.  Kim YK, Myint AM. Clinical application of low serum cho- lesterol as
    an indicator for suicide risk in major depres- sion. J Affect Disord
    2004;81:161-6.

10. Berne C, Bjornetorp P. The metabolic syndrome. In: Stress in health
    and disease. Arnetz BB, Ekman R (Eds). Wiley India Pvt Ltd, New
    Delhi; 2006: 317-32.

11. Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. J Neurology Neurosurgery
    Psychiatry 1960; 23: 56-62.

12. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
    Cholesterol in Adults. Executive Summary of the Third Report of the
    National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on
    Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in
    Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III). JAMA. 2001;285:2486-97.

13. Steegmans PH, Hoes AW, Bak AA, van der Does E, Grobbee DE. Higher
    prevalence of depressive symp- toms in middle-aged men with low
    serum cholesterol levels. Psychosom Med 2000; 62: 205-11.

14. Vevera J, Fisar Z, Kvasnicka T, Zdenek H, Stárková L, Ceska R, et
    al. Cholesterol-lowering therapy evokes time- limited changes in
    serotonergic transmission. Psychia- try Res 2005; 133: 197-203.

.. |image1| image:: media/image1.png
.. |image2| image:: media/image2.png
.. |image3| image:: media/image3.png
   :width: 0.11529in
.. |image4| image:: media/image4.png
   :width: 0.13215in
.. |image5| image:: media/image5.png
   :width: 0.19615in
.. |image6| image:: media/image6.png
   :width: 0.17958in
.. |image7| image:: media/image7.png
   :width: 0.25617in
.. |image8| image:: media/image8.png
   :width: 0.13556in
