   JPPS 2009; 6(1): 3-4 GUEST EDITORIAL

WE CAN TALK … BUT CAN WE COMMUNICATE?

   David Kingdon

In 2006, the American Journal of Psychiatry pub- lished an editorial
‘Are we still talking to our patients with schizophrenia?’1 in response
to a review article on cognitive therapy for schizophrenia. It supported
en- gaging in direct discussions with people experiencing psychosis
about what they said – why they believed the government or their
neighbours were conspiring against them or what exactly the voices they
heard were saying. Evidence now supports skilled intervention for
psycho- sis using exploration, formulation and discussion 2,3 and this
has been reinforced in the recently revised NICE guidelines4.

However, do techniques developed in the UK with predominantly white
patients work elsewhere - in the US, China, or Pakistan? How important
is cultural influ- ence on psychological intervention? In the UK, it has
emerged that people from black & minority ethnic com- munities have not
been doing as well with CBT as white patients5. In Pakistan, evidence
has also emerged that simply applying unmodified CBT in depression can
lead to high drop-out rates and poor response 6. Successful modification
is possible 7 but requires due attention to cultural factors. These
factors can be advantageous, e.g. much greater involvement of families,
as well as compli- cating, e.g. in development of a fully collaborative
thera- peutic relationship. Similarly work with Black & Ethnic Minority
(BME) groups in the UK has shown that routes to services and models of
psychosis differ and influence intervention8. Style of interaction also
seems important, for example, with very differing expectations of
therapist self-disclosure between the two groups studied – Black
African/African-Caribbean & South East Asian Muslim. Self-disclosure was
expected by the former but not the later.

   **Correspondence:**

   **Prof. David Kingdon**, Professor of Mental Health Care Deliv- ery,
   University of Southampton, Royal South Hants Hospital, Southampton
   UK. E-mail: `dgk@soton.ac.uk. <mailto:dgk@soton.ac.uk>`__

But how we talk and succeed in communicating goes beyond cultural
issues. Stigmatisation and discrimi- nation seriously affect people who
are making recover- ies from mental illnesses. We are trying to convince
people that it is ‘Time-to-Change’ but are we communi- cating clearly
what we want them to change to? Cur- rently the way we talk about mental
health issues may be increasing confusion and discrimination. We use
terms like schizophrenia which are stigmatising through its erroneous
associations and intensely disliked by most of those to whom the term is
given9. ‘Personality disor- der’ is no better: over-generalising,
arguably insulting and degrading to people who have often suffered ap-
palling trauma and distress in their lives. It is not a useful term in
clinical practice, rarely used directly with pa- tients. Even anxiety
and depression are used in ways which confuse – is depression a mental
illness or a nor- mal reaction?

One conclusion coming from a session on ‘Drop Schizophrenia?’ at the
2009 Annual Conference of the American Psychiatric Association and from
a debate in the British Journal of Psychiatry10 is that we need to work
with people who have used mental health services, and also the general
public, to develop terms for the new revisions of ICD & DSM which are
clear and acceptable to them.

We have been making the case for ‘the schizo- phrenias’ to be replaced
by early-onset (‘stress-sensi- tivity’), late-onset
(‘anxiety-precipitated’), drug-related and traumatic psychosis 9.
Kraepelin divided early on- set schizophrenia from the late onset
paranoid disor- ders but this distinction appears to have survived only
in division of schizophrenia from delusional disorders. There is
evidence to support ‘stress-sensitivity’ as being important in early
schizophrenia possibly related to criti- cism or bullying in relatively
shy or schizoid individuals. With later onset, personal relationships
have developed but anxiety symptoms can be misinterpreted delusionally,

e.g. stomach pains could be misperceived as poisoning or criticism at
work as conspiracy, and systematised into broad self-perpetuating
‘explanations’. There is also a group of patients who develop persistent
symptoms af- ter use of stimulant or hallucinogenic drugs at the time of
their first psychotic episode. This group differs to some extent from
the ‘stress-sensitive’ group in being more sociable with more prominent
positive and less negative symptoms. Lastly trauma in childhood in the
form of physical, sexual or emotional abuse occurs in some patients with
a diagnosis of schizophrenia and the term ‘traumatic’ psychosis can be
helpful in defining the relevant problems that require psychological
work

We have also suggested substituting personality disorder with terms such
as complex PTSD for the ‘bor- derline’ group 11 as Personality Disorder
is a much mis- used term and over-inclusive. Depression also is broad
and confusing: CBT studies in this area are suggesting that sub-division
may be helpful into following catego- ries. ‘Social’ depression where
overwhelming life events have occurred, requiring a problem-solving and
short- term supportive response: ‘Perfectionist’ depressed patients are
those who strive to achieve but in failing in some way become
self-blaming and depressed with per- sistent negative beliefs about
themselves:

Whereas the dependent group have lost supports which they need to cope
and become anxious, de- pressed and ‘needy’. Work focuses on developing
cop- ing, relationship and life skills12. Maybe these terms can be
useful or maybe not – there may be alternative con- cepts and
terminology which are more acceptable and valid but at least we need to
start the discussion.

Explanations also need to be refined and clarified using widely-accepted
normalising vulnerability-stress models 13 ‘We all get stressed, we just
react differently’: some get anxious, some depressed, and others drink
too much, work too hard or get confused. Responses differ according to
temperament, genetics, previous experiences, available supports and the
type of stress: broadly whether the experience involves loss or threat.

Mental symptoms are rather like physical ones. We all get physical
symptoms – a cold, the flu, or a cut, and we get mental symptoms –
anxious, distressed, fright- ened even depressed. Usually it is
transient and we get on with life: sometimes we make adjustments, take
time off work or just ease back a bit. We may need help from friends and
family if they can offer it – or treatment in which case being described
as physically or mentally ‘ill’ is meaningful. We may have lasting
effects from the physical or mental illness and be disabled by these ef-
fects – permanently or temporarily. But we should be able to expect
care, consideration and support whether these problems, illnesses or
disabilities are mental or physical.

We can talk. But we need to develop simple clear explanatory models of
mental health issues, terms ac- ceptable to those they affect and ways
of communicat- ing effectively.

   REFERENCES

1.  Keith SJ. Are We Still Talking to Our Patients With Schizo- phrenia?
    Am J Psychiatry 2006; 163:362-4.

2.  Kingdon DG, Turkington D. Cognitive therapy of schizo- phrenia.
    Guilford: New York, 2005.

3.  Wright J, Turkington D, Kingdon D, Basco M. Cognitive therapy for
    severe mental illness: an illustrative guide. APPI: Washington DC,
    2008.

4.  National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Clinical Guide- line:
    Schizophrenia (CG1). Department of Health: Lon- don, 2009.

5.  Rathod S, Kingdon D, Smith P. Turkington D. Insight into
    schizophrenia: the effects of cognitive behavioural therapy on the
    components of insight and association with sociodemographics—data on
    a previously pub- lished randomised controlled trial. Schizophrenia
    Res 2005; 74: 211-9.

6.  Naeem F, Waheed W, Gobbi M, Ayub M, Kingdon D. Development and
    preliminary evaluation of a cul- turally sensitive CBT for
    depression in Pakistan: Findings from Developing
    Culturally-Sensitive CBT Project (DCCP). Behav Cogn Psychother 2009.
    (Under review).

7.  Rahman A, Malik A, Sikander S, Roberts C, Creed F. Cognitive
    behaviour therapy-based intervention by com- munity health workers
    for mothers with depression and their infants in rural Pakistan: a
    cluster-randomised con- trolled trial. Lancet 2008; 372: 902-9.

8.  Rathod S, Phiri P, Gobbi M, Kingdon D. Developing Culturally
    Sensitive CBT for Psychosis in BME communi- ties. Poster
    Presentation at Royal College of Psychia- trists Annual Meeting:
    Liverpool, 2009.

9.  Kingdon D, Gibson A, Kinoshita Y, Turkington D, Rathod S, Morrison
    A. Acceptable terminology and subgroups in schizophrenia: an
    exploratory study. Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2008; 43:
    239-43.

10. van Os J. Author’s reply. Br J Psychiatry 2009; 194: 570.

11. Kingdon D. DSPD or ‘Don’t Stigmatise People in Dis- tress’: Invited
    commentary on Challenges in the treat- ment of dangerous and severe
    personality disorder. Adv Psychiat Treat 2007; 13: 333-5.

12. Kingdon D, Finn M. Tackling mental health crises. Routledge: London,
    2006.

13. Turkington D, Rathod S, Siddle R, Pelton J, Kingdon D. Back to life,
    back to normality. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 2009.
