   JPPS 2008; 5(1): 34-35 CASE REPORT

ZALEPLON ABUSE & DEPENDENCE IN A CASE OF GERIATRIC DEPRESSION

   Avinash De Sousa

ABSTRACT
========

   Zaleplon is a commonly prescribed short acting non benzodiazepine
   hypnotic that is used in the treatment of insomnia. We present a case
   of a 72 year old lady with geriatric depression with Zaleplon abuse
   and treatment with Sertraline and Chlordiazepoxide.

   **Key words:** Zaleplon Abuse, Geriatric Depression.

INTRODUCTION
============

Zaleplon is a commonly prescribed short acting non benzodiazepine
hypnotic that potentiates GABA an

inhibitory neurotransmitter with a selective binding to the omega 1 (BZ
receptors) of the GABA receptors. It is

breathlessness, agitation, depressive features, anxiety and panic
attacks. Once she had increased the dose of Zaleplon the initial
response prompted her to stop Sertraline hence there was a rebound of
her depressive features that led to further consumption of Zaleplon.

   :sup:`1` :sup:`A` The dose of Zaleplon was tapered over one week

known to have a very short half life and promote sleep initiation rather
than sleep maintenance1. Zaleplon has shown to improve sleep latency and
sleep quality in older patients with insomnia2. There are no reports of
Zaleplon abuse to the best of our knowledge though driving impairment
and perceptual impairments have been reported3, 4. Several cases of
Zolpidem abuse, a drug of the same family however exist5, 6. This is the
first case report of Zaleplon abuse in an elder woman with geriatric
depression.

CASE HISTORY
============

Ms A was a 72 year old Indian woman who came as an out patient with
symptoms of geriatric depression. She was previously treated for
depression, anxiety and insomnia 2 years prior to her visit. She had
discontinued her previous medication 6 months prior to her visit due to
complete remission of her symptoms. She was treated previously with
Sertraline and Clonazepam. In addition to her depressive symptoms like
sadness of mood, hope- lessness, crying spells and decreased appetite
she also complained of inability to fall off to sleep with sleep la-
tency being 1-2 hours. She was started on Sertraline 25mg twice a day
and Zaleplon 10mg at night for her sleep initiation problem. She did not
follow up for 8 months after this first visit and then presented 8
months later with Zaleplon Abuse and Dependence.

She had increased the dose of Zaleplon on her own using upto 80-100mg
per day in the last 4 months. She presented with severe tremors, excess
sweating,

   **Correspondence :**

   **Dr. Avinash De Sousa,** Consultant Psychiatrist, Carmel, 18 St.
   Francis Avenue, Willingdon Colony Santacruz West Mumbai-54, India.

while Chlordiazepoxide was initiated in a dose of 200mg over 24 hours.
Immediate relief from all symptoms was experienced when Zaleplon 20mg
was consumed by the patient. The patient is presently being managed with
no symptoms on Sertraline and Chlordiazepoxide. Her family members
administer the medication on a daily basis.

DISCUSSION
==========

This case demonstrates the risk of abuse and de- pendence with Zaleplon
in high doses even in the geri- atric population. Zaleplon has been used
in elderly pa- tients for the management of insomnia even in the pres-
ence of medical illnesses7, 8. Zaleplon has been widely implicated in
problems related to initiation of sleep9. Al- though effective in short
term usage Zaleplon needs to be monitored when used in patients. Side
effects like illusions, hallucinations and delirium have been noted with
these drugs10-12. An important feature in the case was the relief from
most of her symptoms with the ad- ministration of Zaleplon. Being a non
benzodiazepine hyponotic does not spare it totally of addictive poten-
tial13. Though the at risk populations are not well de- fined, the use
of Zaleplon in elderly patients needs to be viewed stringently to
prevent such cases from occur- ring.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Sanger DJ, Morel E, Perrault G. Comparison of the phar- macological
    profiles of the hypnotic drugs zaleplon and zolpidem. Eur J
    Pharmacol 1996 ; 313 : 35-42.

2.  Hedner J, Yaeche R, Emilien G, Farr I, Salinas E. Zaleplon shortens
    subjective sleep latency and improves sleep quality in elderly
    patients with insomnia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2000 ; 15 : 704-12.

3.  Bhatia MS, Arora M, Bhatia SK. Perceptual disturbances with
    Zaleplon. Psychiatr Serv 2001; 52: 109-10.

4.  Stillwell ME. Zaleplon and driving impairment. J Foren- sic Sci 2003
    ; 48: 1-3.

5.  Darcourt G, Pringuey D, Salliere D, Lavoisy J. The safety and
    tolerability of zolpidem – an update. J Psychopharmacol 1999 ; 13 :
    81-93.

6.  Ravishankar A, Carnwath T. Zolpidem tolerance and dependence – 2
    case reports. J Psychopharmacol 1998; 12 : 103-4.

7.  Ramakrishnan K, Scheid DC. Treatment options for in- somnia. Am Fam
    Physician 2007; 76: 517-26.

8.  Cranwell-Bruce LA. Hypnotic sedative drugs. Medsurg Nurs 2007; 16:
    198-200.

9.  Dolder C, Nelson M, McKinsey J. Use of non benzodiaz- epine
    hypnotics in the elderly : Are all the agents same. CNS Drugs 2007;
    21: 389-405.

10. Stone JR, Zorick TS, Tsuang J. Dose related illusions and
    hallucinations with Zaleplon. Clin Toxicol 2008; 46: 344-5.

11. Kamel NS, Gammack JK. Insomnia in the elderly: cause, approach and
    treatment. Am J Med 2006; 119: 463-9.

12. Bain KT. Management of chronic insomnia in elderly patients. Am J
    Geriatr Pharmacother 2006; 4: 168-92.

13. Israel AG, Kramer JA. Safety of Zaleplon in the treatment of
    insomnia. Ann Pharmacother 2002; 36: 852-9.
