   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 102-104

ABREACTION
==========

REVISITED
=========

   CASE REPORT

TREATMENT OF PTSD BY ABREACTION
===============================

   Fawad Kaiser, Hamayon B Dewan

ABSTRACT
--------

   This paper describes the successful treatment of a 38year old man
   with a three months history of PTSD. The distressing dreams began
   shortly after the October earthquake after he had witnessed his
   family members dying under the collapsed roof. Previous psychiatric
   treatment including psychotherapy had failed to bring about any
   improvement. Abreaction was induced by the oral administration of
   sodium amytal and methylphenidate. Patient was interviewed on more
   than one occasions while he was under the influence of these drugs.
   After six sessions the nightmares stopped and normal sleep was
   restored. Two months after his discharge from the clinic there had
   been no recurrence. Drug-induced abreaction is a valuable technique
   in particular clinical cases. By using the oral route, its
   complications and inconveniences can be reduced.

   **Key words**: Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, nightmares, abreaction

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is a psychi- atric disorder that
can occur following the experience or witnessing life-threatening events
such as military com- bat, natural disasters, terrorist incidents,
serious acci- dents or violent personal assaults like rape1. Most survi-
vors of trauma return to normal given a little time. How- ever, some
people will have stress reactions that do not go away on their own, or
may even get worse over time. These individuals may develop PTSD. People
who suf- fer from PTSD often relive the experience through night- mares
and flashbacks, having difficulty in sleeping, and feel detached or
estranged, and these symptoms can be severe enough and last long enough
to significantly impair the person’s daily life2.

PTSD is one of the most prevalent psychiatric dis- orders in young
adults3. Early diagnosis and treatment of PTSD are essential to avoid
possible long- term neu- ropsychiatric changes in brain physiology and
function. If untreated, PTSD often contributes to substance abuse and
the development of other co-morbid psychiatric dis- orders such as
depression4. Once PTSD is diagnosed, drug treatment should begin with
anti-depressant therapy5. If anti-depressants do not improve the sleep
disruption, adjunctive treatment with cognitive behav- ioral therapy or
other agents should be considered.

   **Fawad Kaiser,** MBBS, MRCPsych, LLM, MSc, DAMP Asst Professor Shifa
   College of Medicine,Consultant Psychiatrist Shifa International
   Hospital, Islamabad E-mail: fawad_Kaiser@hotmail.com

   **Hamayon B Dewan,** MBBS, MRCPsych, Dip Forensic Psychiatry,
   Constultant Psychiatrist, Care Principle Limited, Suffolk, United
   Kingdom

   **Correspondence: Dr. Fawad Kaiser**

The condition of many victims of shell shock after the First World War
showed that the sequelae of ex- treme psychological trauma sometimes
included hor- rific night dreams6. In the case we are describing the
precipitating events occurred after the earthquake in AJK. Showing no
tendency to resolve spontaneously, these symptoms persisted for five
months with undiminished malignancy and only brief remissions. Since
conven- tional methods failed to result in any improvement, the disorder
was treated successfully with serial abreac- tion, a form of therapy
that is currently not very popular and is considered by some authorities
to be obsolete.

CASE HISTORY
------------

The patient, a 38year old banker by profession, informed us on admission
that the persistent of his night- mares and his failure to seek any
relief from previous psychiatric treatments had brought him to the verge
of suicide. His medical records revealed that he had been hospitalized
on two occasions, mostly with the same complaint, and that his
nightmares had not responded to anti-depressants, neuroleptics,
anxiolytics or cogni- tive behavior therapy

The patient’s nightmares began one month after the earthquake disaster
when he had witnessed those horrifying incidents. His elder brother, who
had recently returned from UK after completing his education died
crushed under the rubble while the patient was stand- ing in front of
him. On the day after his brother’s funeral the patient heard the sad
news that his wife and young- est daughter succumbed from the fatal
injuries they had received in the earthquake. Five days later he and his
friend heard a scream while walking in town. Entering the shop from
which it came, they were confronted with the half mutilated bodies of
two young children who were gasping their last breadth stuck under the
rubble.

In his dreams, the patient saw a burnt face in black attire with a spade
in his hand he referred to him as the “caretaker”. Night after night, he
had to watch reproductions of these incidents and listen to the
accompanying screams. From time to time the “caretaker” would say, “I
think you need me”. He would describe the dream where the “caretaker”
would be running around him and he would see the dead ends and lonely
streets. All this seemed to be in slow motion.

In the final phase of the nightmare, which he de- scribed, he seemed to
be wrestling with the “caretaker” and struggling to wake up. During such
times he made frightening feral noises, which had been heard by the
nursing staff during his periods of hospitalization. He mentioned that
on many occasions he had hurt himself while struggling and the
self-inflicted injuries included a dislocated shoulder, bruised eyes and
a broken nose. He had an on going fear that anyone who might try to wake
him up during his nightmare would be vulnerable to a serious harm.

Due to the nightmares his father refused to sleep in the same room. He
would not sleep with his infant son, thinking that he might fall asleep
and inflict some injury. He was very depressed as a result of these re-
strictions and this led to series of hospitalization in the past. He was
able to resume to work but was frustrated by his inability to perform at
his best. Although he was physically strong and healthy, he was in
reduced cir- cumstances, living alone in a house that had belonged to
his parents. He had placed his mattress directly on the floor and other
potentially dangerous items had been removed from the bedroom. During
child hood he had spent ten years of his life in a boarding house and as
a gesture of defiance, he had decided that he would never permit his
child to go away from him. This en- hanced self control was evident when
attempts were made to treat the disorder with inter personal psycho-
therapy. He gave an emotionless account of his life history, including
the traumatic events. At times it ap- peared during the sessions as if
he was reading televi- sion news.

Taking into account the suppressed emotions en- gendered by the trauma
it was decided to consider treat- ment with serial abreaction. To induce
the abreaction state, the patient was given 300mg of sodium amytal and
80mg of methylphenidate by mouth. These quanti- ties have been reported
to be effective in other cases of Posttraumatic stress disorder7.
Abreaction sessions began 25minutes after the drugs were ingested and
abreactions took place twice weekly and a single ses- sion lasted for
1-2 hours. During these sessions a fe- male nurse was present to monitor
the vital signs. While the patient was under the influence of the two
drugs he talked freely about the life events, expressing anger, sadness,
guilt, fear and remorse, wringing his fingers and clenching his fists
with frequent tearful episodes.

   He recalled the deaths of his brother and wife, for some of which he
   blamed himself. He described his feelings of helplessness and
   suppressed anger during these sessions.

   The patient attended outpatient clinic for 6 weeks and the course of
   treatment was stopped after 6 ses- sions. During closure, he admitted
   that he had talked about every significant feature of his personal
   history. Moreover, he had become desensitized and even when he was
   under the influence of the two drugs he was able to discuss the most
   horrific aspects of the earthquake trauma without experiencing
   painful emotion. He con- firmed that the nightmares, having gradually
   diminished, had now totally stopped. He was seen for a follow up 4
   weeks after the discharge when he stated that he had experienced only
   one nightmare since leaving the hos- pital. The “caretaker” had not
   returned and he was go- ing to bed with confidence and averaging 6hrs
   of com- fortable sleep.

DISCUSSION
----------

PTSD is treated by the combination of cognitive behavior therapy CBT and
drug therapy preferably SSRI’s. There is no definitive treatment but
some treat- ments appear to be quite promising, especially CBT, group
therapy and exposure therapy. Exposure therapy involves having the
patient repeatedly relive the fright- ening experience under controlled
conditions to help him or her work through the trauma8. Studies have
also shown that medications help ease associ- ated symptoms of
depression and anxiety and help with sleep.

Drug facilitated interviewing techniques achieved peek popularity into
the early 1940’s9. During this pe- riod psychiatrists were enthusiastic
advocates of abre- action therapy and it was considered that the future
of narcosynthesis was infinite and endless10. Since then, interest in
this technique has waned and result from the recent British survey
suggests that abreaction may be entirely abandoned11. The reasons for
the rejection of drug facilitated interviewing may be found in the way
in which the procedure is usually carried out, which in- volves
intravenous injection of sodium amytal or an- other phenobarbitone.
Psychiatrists are generally un- comfortable with parenteral
administration and they have concerns about side effects such as the
laryngospasn or respiratory depression. These prob- lems can be safely
overcome if given by mouth and in moderate amounts.

   The case described above shows that even the latest anti-depressant
   drugs have limitations in treating PTSD and abreaction was successful
   where other meth- ods had failed. It can be argued that abreaction
   therapy may be of extraordinary value in certain cases and that it is
   a technique that should be made available to every practicing
   psychiatrist12.

REFERENCES
----------

1. Howorth P. The treatment of shell shock. Psychiat Bull 2000;
   24:225-7.

2. Blumenthal D. Quality of Care: What Is It? N Engl J Med 1996; 335:
   891-94.

3. Fontana AF, Rosenbeck RA. Effects of compensation- seeking on
   treatment outcomes among Veterans with Posttraumatic stress dsorder.
   J Nerv Ment Dis 1998; 186: 223-30.

4. Blake DD. Rationale and Development of the Clinician- administered
   PTSD Scales. PTSD Res Quart 1994; 5: 1-2.

5. Davidson JR. Biological therapies for Posttraumatic stress disorder:
   An Overview. J Clin Psychiatry 1997; 58 (Suppl 9): 29-32.

6. Friedman MJ, Rosenbeck RA. PTSD as a Persistent Mental Illness. In:
   Soreff SM. The seriously and persis-

..

   tently mentally ill: The state of the art treatment hand- book.
   Washington: Hogrefe & Huber; 1996: 369-89.

7.  Denson R. Abreaction. Psychiat Bull 2002; 26:276.

8.  Johnson DR, Rosenbeck RA, Fontana A, Lubin H, Charney D. Outcome of
    Intensive Inpatient Treatment for Combat related PTSD. Am J
    Psychiatry 1996; 6: 771-7.

9.  Dysken MW, Chang SS, Casper RC, Davis JM. Barbitu- rate-facilitated
    interviewing. Biol Psychiatry 1979; 14: 421-32.

10. Tilkin L. The present state of narcosynthesis using so- dium
    pentothal and sodium amytal. Dis Nerv Syst 1949; 110: 215-8.

11. Wilson S. Survey of the use of abreaction by consultant
    psychiatrists Psychiat Bull 2002; 26: 58-60.

12. Naples M, Hackett TP. The amytal interview: history and current
    uses. Psychosomatics 1978; 19: 98-105.
