   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 113-114

   CONFERENCE REPORT

2ND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON SCHIZOPHRENIA (IConS II)

   Muhammad Irfan

Walking on the foot steps of the 1st International Conference on
Schizophrenia (IConS I), Schizophrenia Research Foundation (SCARF)
organized the 2nd Inter- national Conference on Schizophrenia (IConS II)
on Oc- tober 13-15, 2006 Chennai, India. It was really an out- standing
conference and for me to attend this, was in- deed a stimulating
experience. But before looking at the conference itself, I will like to
introduce SCARF.

   SCHIZOPHRENIA RESEARCH FOUNDATION (SCARF)

**SCARF** is the acronym for the **Schizophrenia Re- search Foundation**
which since 1984 has committed itself to schizophrenia care and
research. Founded by a group of philanthropists and mental health
professionals led by Dr. M. Sarada Menon, an internationally known
psychiatrist, SCARF has established itself as a center of repute in
rehabilitation and research. It is a Collaborating Centre of the World
Health Organization for Mental Health Research and Training and the WPA
anti-stigma site. Currently Dr. R. Thara, who is one of the founder
members of SCARF, has been the director of SCARF for 11 years.

SCARF provides a comprehensive, totally free treatment package
comprising of Out-patient care, free medication for the needy, a well
worked out, individually tailored rehabilitation programme and an
employment bureau which seeks to find jobs for the disabled.

   **SCARF’S Awareness materials**

SCARF has developed awareness and educa- tional material for the
families in the form of booklets, “Facts for the Family” on Crisis
Management and medi- cation and a film on the same topic called “FACES”.
It has also worked to create awareness among the health workers and
School teachers.

   **IConS II of SCARF:**

I had read about SCARF and the IConS I confer- ence but I was amazed
when I received the invitation letter for the conference well in time to
go on with my visa process. The conference was due on Oct.13 to Oct.15,
2006 on the theme “Blending schizophrenia care with research - Global
perspectives”.

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. Muhammad Irfan,** Department of Psychiatry, PGMI, Lady Reading
   Hospital, Peshawar.

   E-mail: mirfan78@yahoo. com.

A total number of 372 delegates participated in it with more than 80
from outside India. There was repre- sentation from 15 countries (UK,
USA, Canada, Norway, Sri Lanka, Iran, Malaysia, Romania, Pakistan,
Switzer- land, Australia, New Zealand, Italy, Hong Kong and In- dia).

The important feature of the conference was the first international
short film competition & film festival **‘Frame of Mind’** dedicated to
erase the stigma surround- ing mental health issues, held on 6th October
to 8th October 2006, a week before the conference. The con- test seeked
to counter negative, inaccurate and clichéd images of people with mental
illness and to create clean, accurate, realistic and optimistic view
point.

   The inaugural session was on the 12th October followed by 3 intensive
   days of research and clinical presentations by researchers from all
   over the world, coupled with a display of posters representing many
   disciplines. I really enjoyed the opportunity to be a part of all the
   important sessions as there was a lively forum to discuss various
   issues regarding Schizophrenia.

*Day 1, 13th October, 2006:*
============================

   · The day started with the first plenary session chaired by A
   Jablensky, Professor of Psychiatry and Clini- cal Neuroscience,
   University of Western Australia. I reached the conference venue,
   Savera Hotel well be- fore the start of the Plenary. The conference
   opened with a presentation by Saraceno Bernadetto, Director, Division
   of Mental Health, WHO, on ‘Psychiatry between broad holistic thinking
   and narrow bio-medical practice’. He emphasized that Psychiatrists
   should promote com- prehensive services which put service users at
   the cen- tre of attention. Then was the turn of Mohan Isaac from
   Australia, who compared Australia and India’s approach in ‘Delivery
   of mental health services in Australia and India: Any lessons to be
   learnt?’ He was followed by a delightful lecture by Max Birchwood,
   Director, Birming- ham Early Intervention Services, UK on ‘Do as I
   say; Cognitive therapy for command hallucinations’. It was a trial
   carried on 38 patients and the results supported the efficacy of
   cognitive therapy for command hallucination and were consistent with
   social rank theory.

   Then started 2 simultaneous symposia in both the halls. On one side
   it was a symposium ‘Intervention for psychoses’. Esteemed speakers
   like C. Andrade, Judith Jaeger and Tim Lambert highlighted different
   pharma- cological interventions for schizophrenia. I attended the

   symposia in the other hall on, ‘Early Psychoses: Con- cept and
   Intervention’. Eric Chen and Christy Hui from Hong Kong discussed the
   issue regarding their own perspective. Byron Good from Harvard, USA
   was the last speaker to deliver his lecture on ’Rapid Onset Psy-
   choses in Java: Reflections on 10 Years of Research’.

   The post lunch symposia in hall 1 was ‘Panel on Rehabilitation:
   Global Trends’. The speakers concluded that the psychiatric
   rehabilitation care delivery system in developing countries is in a
   predicament now. It needs to review its position, direction of future
   development, define its priorities and draw an action plan to meet
   the changing needs of people living with schizophrenia. The symposia
   in hall 2 was on ‘Topics of Interest’ and the speakers expressed
   their views on various topics.

   In the final plenary session of the day, Vikram Patel, Reader in
   International Mental Health, from Goa, India, talked about ‘Scaling
   up treatments for chronic psycho- ses in developing countries’ and
   Vaughan Carr from Newcastle, Australia, discussed ‘A Neuroscience
   Net- work for Schizophrenia Research’. Both the lectures were really
   very interesting and stressed the need for provid- ing essential
   antipsychotic medication for those suffer- ing from schizophrenia.

*Day 2, 14th October, 2006:*
============================

The first plenary session started with John McGrath from Queensland,
Australia, who explained ‘Variations in the incidence of schizophrenia:
data versus dogma’ and then Graham Thornicroft, from Kings College Lon-
don, UK highlighted ‘The Global Pattern of Discrimina- tion against
People with Schizophrenia’.

The post lunch symposia was on ‘Indian Research’ chaired by IRS Reddy.
Ajit Avasthi and Sandeep Grover from Chandigarh, India produced their
original research in an excellent way. I really enjoyed the presentation
of Sandeep Grover on ‘Cost of Illness of Schizophrenia’, as JPPS
recently published a review article on the sub- ject by the same author
and I had gone through it many a times. JK Trivedi from Lucknow, India
presented his case on ‘Burden of Care on Key Relatives of Schizo-
phrenia’. In hall 2, the symposia was on,’ Genetics and Schizophrenia’
chaired by Smita Deshpande. The sym- posia was highly informative and
ended the day on a thoughtful note.

*Day 3, 15th October, 2006:*
============================

In the first plenary A Jablensky scholarly discussed, ‘Schizophrenia:
One Disorder or Several?’ He pointed that phenotypic variability and
genetic heterogeneity have been confounding the search for the causes of
schizophrenia since the inception of the diagnostic cat- egory.

The morning symposia was on ‘Rural Mental Health’ chaired by S Rajkumar
from Newcastle, Austra- lia, who himself along with other speakers
elaborated

various problems regarding rural mental health in a com- prehensive
manner. In the other hall, the symposia was on ‘First Episode Psychoses’
and the speakers includ- ing Max Birchwood were very thoughtful in their
expres- sions.

On the final afternoon, the symposia was on ‘Com- munity mental health’.
Dr. R Thara and other speakers were very elaborate during the symposia.
In the hall 2, the symposia on ‘Current Topics’ was very interesting and
had diverse topics for the lectures including, ‘Late life schizophrenia’
by Tataru Nicole from Romania.

There were 100 posters put up over the complete duration of conference
and were a treat to watch con- cerning various important issues.

   **Post Conference workshop:**

Another highlight of the conference was the work- shop on ‘Research
Methodology and Clinical Trials’ which was held on 16th October 2006.
The Faculty in- cluded Dr. Tonmoy Sharma, Dr. Roger Bullock and Dr.
Jyotsna Shinde.

   The course was in two parts

Part 1: Research Methods in CNS studies including Clinical Trials

-  Protocol writing, study design, Sample size calcu- lation etc

-  Can academics and business go hand in hand?

-  Clinical trials: overview, drug development pro- cess, key
   stakeholders, international and national guidelines.

Part 2: Assessment of Cognition in Clinical Practice and clinical trials
using computerized batteries

-  What is cognition, How is it assessed, Why is it required?

-  What to look for in a protocol?

-  Cognition assessment paper pencil tests vs. com- puterized tests.

-  Advantages of electronic data capture.

-  Various players in the industry who offer cognition assessment.

The second half of the course included a hands- on training on a
computerized clinical tool for clinical practice and clinical trials.

**In a nutshell**, the conference was very well orga- nized and all the
scientific sessions and programmes were well in time. The hospitality of
the organizers was commendable and the professionalism was up to the
mark. For their marvelous efforts, hats off to them.

The conference gave me the opportunity to meet even those researchers
whose articles are regularly being published in JPPS and interaction
with them was productive and after coming back from the conference, I am
now eagerly looking forward to attend IConS III.
