   JPPS 2007; 4(2): 123-124

CORRESPONDENCE

Content

\* Muslim Psychiatrists and Islam

\* Drug Addiction in Pakistan: A Neglected Agenda

   CORRESPONDENCE

MUSLIM PSYCHIATRISTS AND ISLAM
==============================

   Dear Sir,

   Prof. Mufti has raised some very important issues in his article
   about psychiatry and spirituality1. Whilst some psychiatrists are
   only recently coming to realise the importance of religiosity, it
   seems our patients beat us to it long ago. Psychiatrists in Islamic
   countries will be familiar with the phenomena of a. traditional
   healers being the first port of call for Muslim patients and b. the
   attribution of mental health-related symptomatology to Jinn
   Possession and Magic. In Malaysia, for instance, three quarters of
   Malays newly presenting to psychiatric services will consult a
   “Bomoh” (a type of witch doctor utilising a combination of herbs,
   Islam and spirits) be- fore they come to the psychiatrist2.

We must look at ourselves to try to understand why so many Muslim
patients are coming into treatment at an advanced stage of illness.
Muslim doctors often struggle to reconcile modern medicine with the fact
that Jinn Possession and Magic are legitimate and orthodox Islamic
beliefs. It is hardly surprising that Muslim pa- tients are distrustful
of mainstream medical doctors in contrast to traditional healers who are
perceived to be cognisant of the spiritual dimension of illness even
though many of them, such as the Malay Bomohs, are engaged in highly
unorthodox and sometimes pagan practices.

Recent research in the United States suggests that psychiatric patients
are probably quite right to be con- cerned3. Not only were psychiatrists
found to be the least religious of all physicians, even religious-minded
physi- cians were less likely than non-religious physicians to refer
patients to psychiatrists. These findings may not necessarily generalise
to psychiatrists in the Islamic world but they are nevertheless cause
for concern. There are a number of papers in the literature which
strongly point towards the protective benefits of religiousness in
patients with respect to mental health.

   In the world of evidence-based medicine, the Mus- lim psychiatrist
   should, therefore, have no fear of com- bining an Islamic approach
   with modern medicine. The way forward is to find an acceptable medium
   between rejection of Jinn Possession, Magic and the like and the
   other extreme of total attribution of symptoms to these

   phenomena and this requires the understanding and practice of Islam
   on the part of the psychiatrist. Clearly, evidence-based mental
   health in an Islamic setting should not be restricted to the study
   and appraisal of medicines but also of religious beliefs with the
   help of authoritative Islamic scholars.

REFERENCES
----------

1. Mufti K A. Psychological Medicine, Spirituality and Is- lam. J Pak
   Psychiat Soc 2007; 4: 55-6.

2. Salleh R S. The Consultation of Traditional Healers by Malay
   Patients. Med J Malaysia 1989; 44: 3-13.

3. Curlin FA, Odell S V, Lawrence R E, Lantos JD, Meador KG, Koenig H G.
   The Relationship Between Psychiatry and Religion Among U.S.
   Physicians. Psychiatr Serv 2007; 58: 1193-8.

..

   **Dr. Reehan Sabri,** MBBS MSc MRCPscyh, Consultant Psy- chiatrist,
   Mental Health Unit, RIPAS Hospital, Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei
   Darussalam.

   E-mail: reehansabri@hotmail.com

DRUG ADDICTION IN
=================

   PAKISTAN: A NEGLECTED AGENDA

Dear Editor,

World Health Organization defines health as ‘a state of complete
*physical, mental* and *social* well-being and not merely the absence of
disease or infirmity’. Though, all encompassing, this definition hardly
brings relief to countless individuals with mental illness, who suffers
in silence. It is estimated that around 25% World population suffer from
any mental disorder during any time in their life. At a particular time
roughly around 450 Million are estimated to have a diagnosable mental
ill- ness around the globe. This has led to huge burden of disease in
terms of economics liability and quality of life. A World Bank Report
(1993) estimates global burden of disease, a marker of magnitude of
mental health prob- lems, to be 10.5%. This is estimated to increase up
to 15%, if unchecked by 20201. A major determinant in behaviour related
problem is the menace of substance abuse. Though, there are flurry of
reports and original articles on the risk factors and determinants of
substance use in Pakistan, the bigger, geo-political situation is hardly
ever talked about.

Substance misuse is a poly-faceted problem. There are many factors which
determine its ubiquitous use in the context of Pakistan. Personality and
mental health vulnerability is only one factor. Availability of harm-
ful substance is another important factor in determining the magnitude
of this problem. National Survey on Drug Abuse 1993 is the last
available representative survey carried out by Pakistan Narcotic Control
Board. Accord- ing to the survey there are 3 Million drug addicts in
Paki- stan of which 51% are heroin abusers. Concerning fact is that 72%
of drug users are in the age range of 24-30 years. Pakistan Narcotic
control board was dismantled in 19932.

Recently United Nation’s anti-narcotics chief warned that Afghanistan
burgeoning opium production was leading to the emergence of new “golden
Triangle” of lawlessness on the country’s borders with Pakistan, Iran
and Turkmenistan. “Illegality is very pervasive and trafficking (is)
going on,” said Antonio Maria Costa, executive director of the UN’s
Office on Drugs and Crime.

Afghanistan is a land lock country. Mountain re- gions in Pakistan
provide entry and exit point for trade and trafficking. Recent reports
show that Afghanistan saw a record harvest of 8,200 metric tons (9,000
short tons) of opium in 2007, a 34% increase over 2006. The export value
of the country’s opium is estimated at $4 billion (euro 2.73 billion),
up 29% on last year and equal to more than half of Afghanistan’s legal
gross domestic product.

Tribes in NWFP, Pakistan have traditional link with Afghanistan, making
easy flow of people and products in and out of the area. Concurrently
political unrest has allowed a culture of lawlessness, thereby
developing a tax free black economy in Pakistan. The narcotics smuggled
through these regions finds market in US and other countries of American
Continent. Since heroin, cannabis and opium products are readily
available, vul- nerable individuals fall prey to them. In the context of
Pakistan, this is considered to be a collateral damage.

Although the burden of mental health problem is great, little has been
done to change the prevailing cir- cumstances. The National Action Plan
for Non-commu-

nicable disease (NAP-NACD) have been charted which gives mental health
problems a public health perspec- tive. Though this is a good step in
the right direction, more needs to be done. World health Organization,
leads National program for mental health (NPMH) is also there, giving a
five yearly plan since 1987. These are small flickers in the darkness of
ignorance. Most programs are based on data that have unsound base. We
are in need of more Population based surveillance. Steps should also be
taken in creating awareness – which is pre- requisite for behavioral
change.

A strong political will is required in order to ad- dress the root
causes behind the menace of drug use. Kalashnikov Culture needs to be
curtailed if we are to address the lawlessness that goes with the drug
traffick- ing. It has been proven vividly, through robust research that
availability of the misused substance has a strong determining influence
on the over-all prevalence of the problem3. Other psycho-social
determinants also needs be addressed besides this political will.

.. _references-1:

REFERENCES
----------

1. Murray CJ, Lopez AD. The Global Burden of Disease: A comprehensive
   assessment of Mortality and Disability from Disease, Injury and Risk
   Factors in 1990 and pro- jected to 2020. Boston: Harvard School of
   Public Health, WHO and World Bank 1996.

2. Pakistan Narcotic Control Board (PNCB): National Sur- vey on Drug
   Abuse in Pakistan – 1993. [Online] 1994 [Cited on 25 November 2007]
   available from: `http://www .pakistan.gov
   .pk/divisions/ <http://www.pakistan.gov.pk/divisions/>`__
   ContentInfo.jsp?DivID=11&cPath=101_106_286& ContentID=2992.

3. Gelder M, Mayou R, Cowen P. Misuse of Alcohol and Drugs. In: Shorter
   Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry, 4th ed. Oxford University Press; 2001:
   533-79.

..

   **Sajjad Hussain,** MBBS, Research Associate, Department of
   Psychiatry, Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan

   **Haider A. Naqvi,** MBBS, FCPS, Assistant Professor, Depart- ment of
   Psychiatry, Aga Khan University, Stadium Road, Karachi. Pakistan.
   E-mail: `haider <mailto:haider.naqvi@aku.edu>`__\ .naqvi@aku.edu

   **Correspondence: Dr. Sajjad Hussain**
