Toluene- Inhalation Dependence
==============================

   M.S Bhatia, Manish Khand Pal, Shruti Srivastavis, Harsh Sharma

ABSTRACT
========

Inhalants are defined as volatile substances which produce psycho-active
effects after their fumes are inhaled. Their effects include euphoria,
excitement, and sensation of floating and heightened power. Commonly
abused inhalants are gasoline (petrol), varnish, nail polish remover,
spray paints, liquid shoe polish, aeroplane glue etc. We report a case
of toluene dependence.

INTRODUCTION
============

Inhalants are defined as volatile substances which produce psycho-active
effects after their fumes are inhaled\ :sup:`1`. Their effects include
euphoria, excitement, sensation of floating and heightened
power\ :sup:`2`. The typical withdrawal syndrome begins 24-48 hours
after cessation of use and lasts for 2-5 days\ :sup:`3`. Some
researchers\ :sup:`4,5` had reported inhalant dependence to be
exclusively an adolescent problem whereas others found it also common in
children\ :sup:`6`. Commonly abused inhalants are gasoline (petrol),
varnish, nail polish remover, spray paints, liquid shoe polish,
aeroplane glue etc. From India, there are only few case
reports\ :sup:`7,8` of petrol dependence and kerosene abuse. There is no
case report of toluene dependence from India.

CASE REPORT
===========

Mr M, a 24 years old college student was brought to the psychiatry
outpatient department by his parents with complaint of toluene abuse for
nine months. The patient was apparently well nine months back when he
started inhaling diluent (5 to8 bottles/day) available along with white
fluid used for removing typed matter. This he started after being told
by his close friend who himself was inhaling the same along with other
colleagues. Over a period of time, he found that he needed increase in
the amount (upto 8-12 bottles/day) and duration to get the same effect.
In the college hostel, he was inhaling toluene alone. The family members
came to know about his toluene inhaling behaviour and tried to stop him
from doing so but they had to face a number of hostile and aggressive
encounters from the patient. This had resulted in that the patient had
stopped visiting them at the weekends. When the parents became strict
and took him out of the hostel, the patient had no choice but to come
for treatment.

Mr M reported that after inhaling toluene, he had a pleasant feeling,
sense of well-being and increased confidence. There was loss of appetite
and he had tremors in hands and headache. He was also avoiding social
functions. When the patient was unable to take his regular dose, he
showed irritability, nervousness, sad mood, decreased concentration,
lethargy and difficulty in sleeping. The symptoms are seen a day after
the cessation of inhalation, lasting for a couple of days or till he
procured the next dose of inhalant.

There was no past or family history any psychiatric disorder or drug
abuse. His developmental and school history was uneventful. He was
eldest of three siblings and came from a middle socio-economic status.

Mental state examination showed his preoccupation with thoughts of
procuring the inhalant. He was irritable. There was no perceptual or
thought disorder. His orientation and memory were intact. The
investigations ( X-ray chest, EEG, CT scan head, haemogram, liver and
kidney function tests were normal.

DISCUSSION
==========

Inhalant dependence is described as a peer oriented and peer perpetuated
male predominance activity\ :sup:`9`. This was found in the present case
but he was continuing it alone in hostel. Inhalant abuse had been
described as a problem of children or adolescents\ :sup:`4-6` but the
present case was an adult. Personality disorder, poor interpersonal
relationship, underlying psychiatric disorder and unsuccessful school
experience had been described as important factors in the onset or
perpetuation of inhalant abuse\ :sup:`9,10` but in the present case,
none of these factors were found.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Frank J, Ayd Jr. Lexicon of Psychiatry, Neurology and Neurosciences.
    BI Waverly Private Limited, New Delhi, 1995.

2.  Wright SP, Potlier A, Taylor J. Tends in death associated with abuse
    of volatile substances. Br Med J 1992;305:692.

3.  American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
    of Mental Disorders, 4\ :sup:`th` ed (DSM-IV). American Psychiatric
    Association, Washington DC,1994.

4.  Watson JM. Solvent abuse by children and young adults : a review. Br
    J Addiction 1980;75:27-36.

5.  Khantzian EJ, McKenna GJ. Acute toxic and withdrawal reactions
    associated with drug use and abuse. Ann Int Med 1979;90:361-72.

6.  Epstein MH, Wieland WF. Prevalence survey of inhalant abuse. Int J
    Addiction 1978;13:271-84.

7.  Pahwa M, Baweja A, Gupta V, Jiloha RC. Petrol-inhalation dependence:
    a case report. Indian J Psychiatry 1998;40:92-4.

8.  Das PS, Sharan P, Saxena S. Kerosene abuse by inhalation and
    ingestion. Am J Psychiatry 1992;149:710.

9.  Cohen S. Inhalants. In : Duport R, Goldstein A, Oâ€™Donnel J (Eds).
    Handbook on Drug Abuse. US Government Printing Press, Washington
    DC,1979.

10. Korman M. Clinical evaluation of psychological factors. In : Sharp
    CW, Brehin ML (Eds). Review of Inhalants : Euphoria to Dysfunction.
    US Government Printing Press, Washington DC,1977.
