JPPS 2007; 4(2): 78-82 REVIEW ARTICLE

RELIGION, FAITH AND PSYCHIATRY (A REVIEW)

Avinash De Sousa

ABSTRACT
========

   This article aims to explore the relationships between religion and
   psychiatry, its implications for the treatment of mental disorders,
   the use of religion, religious beliefs and spiritual texts in psycho-
   therapy and clinical psychiatric practice. This article tries to
   bring out the importance and relevance of religion and spirituality
   into modern day clinical practice.

   **Key words**: Religion, Faith, Psychiatry.

INTRODUCTION
============

Clinical experience suggests that considering re- ligion and
spirituality can be important in treatment. In an era of burgeoning
neuroscience research emphasis, there seems to be an increased interest
in religion and spirituality. There are attempts to see religion and
spiri- tuality from perspectives of developmental psychopa- thology as
well as in the form of risks and protective factors for mental illness.
The competent psychiatrist is a diagnostician, healer, physician and a
therapist. Any factor such as religion and spirituality that may amelio-
rate or cause distress must be a part of the psychiatrist’s
armamentarium. Today there is a growing amount of literature on the
effects of religion and spirituality on mental illness, as well as on
how to work with religious and spiritual issues in treatment. There is
also an in- creasing epidemiological database of studies on reli- gion
and spirituality that has resulted in them coming under more careful
scientific scrutiny1. One often asks if religion and spirituality are
just components of culture? Religion and spirituality are at times
subsumed under the broader aspects of culture but are never fully de-
fined or predicted by it, more so in nations like India where the
cultural landscape becomes more culturally and ethnically diverse. In
fact it is wise to say that reli- gion and spirituality actively shape
and are shaped by the cultures from where they arise.

Relevant Terminology
--------------------

The domain of religion and spirituality introduces a number of terms to
the clinician. This is often confus- ing and bewildering for the busy
clinician. There remains considerable diversity in the various terms
used but a general consensus has evolved over the last few de-

   **Correspondence :**

   **Dr. Avinash De Sousa,** Consultant Psychiatrist & Director, Get
   Well Clinic and Nursing Home, Mumbai, India

cades. The term *‘religion’* refers to an organized system of
principles, beliefs, rituals, practices and related sym- bols that
brings the individual closer to the sacred or ultimate truth or reality.
The term *‘spirituality’* includes religion and relationships with
others in a faith based community. It includes an individual’s search
for under- standing of life’s deepest mysteries and the most per-
plexing questions about what is sacred, transcendent or of ultimate
importance2.

   A third term used increasingly is *‘worldview’* which refers to an
   intellectual construction or belief system which is a philosophy of
   life that addresses life’s most basic questions of the origins,
   purpose, the meaning of suffering and death and what constitutes a
   good life3. This may be a part of a belief system of an organized
   religion or may stand on its own. Many other terms need to be
   mentioned at this point. The term *‘religious prefer- ence’* refers
   to an individual’s claim of belonging to a particular religious
   group. The term *‘Church affiliation’* refers to belonging to a
   church, temple, mosque or other house of worship and having one’s
   name on the roll or membership list. *‘Church involvement’* refers to
   atten- dance, participation in groups and committees and pro- viding
   financial support but must not be mistaken for piousness, religious
   piety or sincerity of personal faith. *‘Religious beliefs’* refers to
   belief in God and the teach- ings found in the sacred religious
   texts. *‘Personal reli- gious behavior’* is distinct from church or
   group religious behavior and includes individual prayer, meditation,
   study of religious texts and other behaviors that are re- quired and
   seen as spiritually beneficial from the individual’s faith
   tradition4. These terms shall help the busy clinician identify with
   the patient and the family and their tradition irrespective of their
   specific faith. One point noteworthy is that the literature in the
   field now distinguishes appropriately and accurately between re-
   ligion and spirituality. *‘Intrinsic religiosity’* is a term used to
   describe religious people that derive significance and life direction
   from their religious beliefs. *‘Extrinsic religi-*

   *osity’* is a term that describes the characteristics of people that
   appear to be interested in organized religious belief systems to
   achieve a non religious goal4.

Religion and Health
-------------------

Religious and spiritual outlooks often determine attitudes towards diet,
exercise, sexuality, reproduction, education, parenting, death and
dying, peer relation- ships, medical decision making and attitudes
towards medications and the medical fraternity. Many research- ers have
stated that the strength and prevalence of reli- gious beliefs must be
considered in clinical decision making during both physical and mental
health5. It is the outcome of various studies that physicians must con-
sider the religious orientation of their patients while di- agnosing and
implementing treatment plans6-9. A sur- vey conducted amongst patient
revealed that 75% felt the need for physicians to address spiritual
issues as a part of medical care while 40% felt that they want their
physician to discuss their religious faith with them10. Earlier
assessment of religious beliefs were considered unnecessary and
inappropriate11-12 while religious com- mitment has also been seen as
few as a cause of future psychiatric disorder to come13. Even
psychiatrists in the past have felt that religious commitment was
irrelevant and even pathological in the clinical setting14.

However, today there is a growing need to incor- porate the study of
religions and spirituality in medical schools at both an undergraduate
and post graduate level15. A review over a ten year period of studies
pub- lished in the Journal of Family Practice revealed that 81% had a
positive association between religion and physical health, 15% were
neutral while only 4% re- vealed a negative association16. These studies
involve diverse study population with diverse clinical disorders,
various ages, nationalities, both sexes and different ex- perimental
methods. An association between religion, faith and mental health
assessed in two leading jour- nals between 1978 and 1989 revealed that
84% showed a positive association between religion and mental health.
Only 2.7% of these studies showed a harmful association17.

In most areas of research, findings are more likely to be published when
they attain statistical significance and cohere with the expectations
that the field has de- veloped in those areas of research. A similar
bias may examine the highly optimistic corpus of literature on re-
ligion, faith and mental health. Religion and faith have always been
secondary in most medical studies that have addressed them. The findings
on religion and mental health are often found buried in a table as an
after thought in the discussion section of the article18. Several
reviews suggest that psychiatry’s negative im- pact of religion and
faith are not based on research but rather on a skewed view of clinical
experiences or worse still, personal biases against religion and
spirituality19.

   Today clinicians must agree that patients may have different belief
   systems and faiths though all these sys-

tems share common goals and have points of common concern. Clinicians
are advised to be *ecumenical* in their approach which refers to having
a welcoming atti- tude towards a wide range of beliefs and practices20.

Religion, Faith and Substance Abuse
-----------------------------------

Religious commitment may be related to lower lev- els of substance
abuse. Numerous studies have linked drug abuse to a lack of purpose in
life along with a lack of religiosity21-22. Religiously committed people
are noted to consume lesser amounts of alcohol and drugs and are less
likely to suffer from clinical and social conse- quences like ardent
substance abusers23. Numerous studies have predicted that religion
separates those who do not take to substance abuse24 and the same has
been replicated in studies amongst adolescents25. Religious commitment
is known to increase church attendance, influence and adherence to the
norms of the religious groups and a reduction in the intake of alcohol
and drugs. It also promotes friendship with peers that do not con- sume
drugs and alcohol. It enhances physical and men- tal health that in turn
reduces the risk of substance abuse. Parental influences through
religious beliefs and faith have shown to influence substance use in
adolescents26. Community studies have shown a positive relationship
between personal religious beliefs and reduced sub- stance use amongst
adolescents and adults27. However religious outlook has had little to do
with substance abuse among those arrested for excess alcohol28. Reli-
gious coping mechanisms are also known to improve management of life
events and thus reduces the risk of moving towards substance abuse29.

Religion, Faith, Depression and Suicide
---------------------------------------

On the whole, religious involvement seems to have an inverse
relationship with depression and suicide. Religious beliefs appear to be
associated with lower levels of hopelessness and with less depression30.
A lack of spiritual support as denoted by low rates of church attendance
has been associated with higher rates of depression31. Gender
differences in the protective ben- efits of religiousness against
depression have been con- sistently reported while the mechanisms for
them are not clear. Researchers have shown that perhaps males report a
more legalist view of God and hence derive less comfort and support from
the relationship32. High levels of spiritual and religious belief have
been correlated with low suicide rate in the community33. This is
strongly linked to high levels of orthodox belief and religious devotion
and not to church attendance. The protective benefits of religion in
depression and suicide are linked not only to measures of personal
religious devotion but is also linked to parental religiousness34. A
review that analyzed sixteen studies on religion and suicide found that
religious commitment was inversely related to the occurrence of suicide
in 81% cases35. A nationwide in- crease in suicide rates with overall
decline in church attendance rates has also been noted36-37.

Religion, Faith and Sexuality
-----------------------------

People who are more religious, have often a nega- tive attitude towards
premature sexuality and in turn delay sexual behavior. Adolescents
involved in religious life are 50% less likely to engage in sexual
intercourse than their non religious peers32. The religious involvement
of the family has been found to play an important role in delaying
sexual intercourse38. One study has however found that church going
women were less likely to use contraceptive methods resulting in a
greater risk of un- safe sexual behavior and unwanted pregnancies39. Re-
ligious orientation of parents influences the ideals about marriage,
family size, power, intimacy, gender roles as well as methods of rearing
and disciplining children40-41.

Religion, Faith and Schizophrenia
---------------------------------

Religious practices are common amongst schizo- phrenic patients all over
the world42-45. Homicides have been perpetrated by religiously deluded
patients. The plucking of the eyes and other body parts are known in
cases of schizophrenia that have taken statements from the Bible
literally. There has also been studies that have described the relation
between anti Christ delusions and violence in schizophrenia46-49.
Religious practices in schizophrenic patients have been associated with
a higher rate of developing religious delusion though not always
necessary50-51. Many patients with schizophre- nia take medications,
visit psychiatrists and yet perform rituals and undergo exorcisms while
they visit faith heal- ers52. Religious commitment reduces the
co-morbidity of substance use along with the occurrence of suicide in
schizophrenia53-54.

In a study of inpatients with schizophrenia, people with religious
delusions were also more severely ill, had more hallucinations and were
ill for longer periods of time50. All over the world the prevalence of
religious de- lusions amongst schizophrenics varies. There is a rate of
21% reported in Germany compared to 7% in Japan55, 21% in Austria
against 6% in Pakistan56 and 36% in USA57. Compared to the secular
methods of coping, re- ligion and spirituality can offer an answer to
the prob- lems of human insufficiency. Thus it is not surprising that
patients with schizophrenia use religion to cope. The studies on
religion and schizophrenia bear essentially on the acute phase of the
illness while only a few stud- ies examine patients in remitted states
when this aspect can be ascertained58. Based on the role theory and
depth psychology, religion provides patients with identifica- tion
models which with the active support of the reli- gious community, can
facilitate recovery59.

The relationship between religion and schizophre- nia ranges from the
worst to the best. In each patient often we may be able to point out a
specific pattern of the relationship between religion and the existent
psy- chosis. Considering religion and spirituality in the treat- ment of
those suffering from schizophrenia may help to reduce pathology, enhance
coping and foster recovery.

The Neurobiology of Religion
----------------------------

Religious experiences are brain based like any other human experience.
With the development of ad- vances in neurosciences, scientists are now
able to ex- plore the neural correlates of religion and spirituality.
Among some of the important results studies have shown that the
temporolimbic system is the substrate for reli- gious-numinous
experience60. The right temporal lobe is seen to be activated in
mystical states61 versus the left temporal lobes that is activated in
religious delusions62. The biological basis of spirituality lies in the
serotoner- gic system63. There is also a specific ‘God Spot’ in the
brain that is activated in spirituality studies64.

Conclusions and Implications
----------------------------

In this review I have tried to be consistent with scientific facts and
yet hope that it shall be able to help the clinician who treats problems
influenced by the patient’s and family’s religious faith and spiritual
posi- tion. I have tried to be as descriptive and neutral as possible in
the spirit of scientific discourse. It is implicit that in issues such
as religion, faith and psychiatry, all individuals including clinicians
have their own personal views no matter how they express it. I have
limited dis- cussions to general issues and specific faiths that are
commonly encountered in routine clinical practice. Ex- clusion of any
specific faith in the discussion has been dictated solely by space
constraints. I hope that this ar- ticle serves as a springboard for
future reflection, dia- logue and scientific study in India of the role
of religion and spirituality in modern day psychiatry and clinical
practice. If it does then probably I have achieved my goal.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Josephson AM, Dell ML. Religion and spirituality in child and
    adolescent psychiatry : a new frontier. Child Psych Clin North Amer
    2004; 13: 1-15.

2.  Koenig HG, McCullough ME, Larson DB. Handbook of Religion and
    Health. New York : Oxford University Press; 2001.

3.  Freud S. The question of a weltanschauung. In : Strachey J,
    translator & editor. The Standard Edition of the com- plete
    psychological works of Sigmund Freud, vol 22. London : Hogarth
    Press; 1962: 158-67.

4.  Hoge DE. Religion in America. In : Shafranske EP, edi- tor. Religion
    and the clinical practice of psychology. Wash- ington DC : American
    Psychological Association ; 1996: 21-42.

5.  Larson DB, Larson SS. The Forgotten Factor in Physical and Mental
    Health : What Does Research Show. Rockville Md : National Institute
    for Healthcare Research; 1994.

6.  Andreasen NJ. The role of religion in depression. J Re- ligion
    Health 1972 ; 11 : 153-66.

7.  Chu C, Klein HE. Psychological and environmental vari- ables in the
    outcomes of black schizophrenics. J Natl Med Assoc 1985; 77: 793-6.

8.  Frank JD. Persuasion and Healing: A comparative study of
    Psychotherapy. Baltimore Md : John Hopkins Univer- sity Press; 1973.

9.  Lukoff D, Lu F, Turner R. Towards a more culturally sen- sitive
    DSM-IV : psychoreligious and psychospiritual prob- lems. J Nerv Ment
    Dis 1992; 180: 673-82.

10. King DE, Bushwhick B. Beliefs and attitudes of hospital patients
    about faith, healing and prayer. J Fam Pract 1994; 39: 349-52.

11. McKee D, Chappel N. Spirituality and medical practice. J Fam Pract
    1992; 35: 201-8.

12. Deikman A. Comments on the GAP report on mysticism. J Nerv Ment Dis
    1977; 165: 213-17.

13. Watters W. Deadly Doctrine : Health, Illness and Chris- tian God
    talk. Buffalo NY: Prometheus Books ; 1992.

14. Kuhn CC. A Spiritual inventory for the medically ill pa- tient.
    Psychiatr Med 1988; 6: 87-100.

15. Barnard D, Dayringer R, Cassel CK. Towards a person centered
    medicine : religious studies in the medical cur- riculum. Acad Med
    1995; 70: 806-13.

16. Craggie FC, Larson DB, Liu Y. References to religion in the Journal
    of Family Practice : dimensions and valence of spirituality. J Fam
    Pract 1990; 30: 477-80.

17. Larson DB, Sherrill KA, Lyons JS, Cragie FC Jr, Thielman SB,
    Greenworld MA, et al. Association between religious commitment and
    mental health reported in the Ameri- can Journal of Psychiatry and
    the Archives of General Psychiatry. 1978-1989. Am J Psychiatry 1992;
    149: 557-9.

18. Cooper HM. The Integrative Research Review. Beverly Hill Calif :
    Sage Publications; 1994.

19. Koenig HG, editor. Handbook of Religion and Mental Health. San Diego
    (CA): Academic Press; 1998.

20. Mead FS, Hill SS. Handbook of denominations in the United States.
    11th ed. Nashville TN: Abingdon Press; 2001.

21. Heather N, Miller WR, Greeley J, editor. Self Control and the
       Addictive Behavior. Sydney, Australia: McMillan Publishing; 1991:
       262-79.

22. Larson DB, Wilson WP. The religious life of alcoholics. South Med J
       1980; 73: 723-7.

23. Mood RD, Mead L, Pearson T. Youthful precursors of alcohol abuse in
       physicians. Am J Med 1990 ; 88 : 332-6.

24. Gorusch RL, Butler MC. Initial drug use : a view of pre- disposing
       social psychological factors. Psychol Bull 1976; 3 : 120-37.

25. Hays RD, Stacy AW, Widaman DMR, Arnold S, Prince LM. Multistage path
       models of adolescent alcohol and drug use: a reanalysis. J Drug
       Issues 1985; 16: 357-69.

26. Merrill RM, Salazar DR, Gardner NW. Relationship between family
       religiosity and drug use behavior amongst youth. Soc Beh
       Personality 2001; 29: 347-58.

27. Wills TA, Yaeger AM, Sandy JM. Buffering effect of reli- giosity for
       substance abuse. Psychol Addict Behav 2003; 17: 24-31.

28. Bahr SJ, Hawk RD, Wang G. Family and religious influ- ences on
    adolescent substance abuse. Youth Soc 1993; 24: 443-65.

29. D’Onofrio BM, Murrelle L, Eaves LJ, McCullough ME, Landis JL, Maes
    HH. Adolescent religiousness and its influence on substance use :
    preliminary findings from the Mid Atlantic School Age Twin Study.
    Twin Res 1999; 2: 156-68.

30. Murphy PE, Ciarrocchi JW, Piedmont RL, Cheston S, Peyrot M, Fitchett
    G. The relation of religious beliefs and practices, depression and
    hopelessness in persons with clinical depression. J Consult Clin
    Psychol 2000; 68: 1102-6.

31. Wright LS, Frost CJ, Wisecarver SJ. Church attendance,
    meaningfulness of religion and depression symptoma- tology among
    adolescents. J Youth Adolesc 1993; 22: 559-68.

32. Spika B, Hood RW, Gorusch RL. The Psychology of Religion. Englewood
    (NJ): Prentice Hall; 1985.

33. Neeleman J, Wessely S, Lewis G. Suicide acceptability in African and
    white Americans. J Nerv Ment Dis 1998; 186: 12-6.

34. Mahoney A, Pargament KI, Tarakeshwar N, Swank AB. Religion in the
    home in the 1980s and the 1990s : meta analytic review and
    conceptual analysis of the links be- tween religion, marriage and
    parenting. J Fam Psychol 2001; 15: 559-96.

35. Gartner J, Larson DB, Allen G. Religious commitment and mental
    health : an empirical review of literature. J Psychol Theol 1991;
    19: 6-25.

36. Stack S. The effect of decline of institutionalized religion on
    suicide : 1954-1978. J Sci Study Religion 1983; 22: 239-52.

37. Martin WT. Religiosity and United States suicide rates 1972-1978. J
    Clin Psychol 1984; 40: 1166-9.

38. Murstein BI, Mercy T. Sex, drugs, relationships, contraception and
    the fear of disease on the college campus over 17 years. Adolescence
    1994; 29: 303-22.

39. Studer M, Thornton A. Adolescent religiosity and contraceptive
    usage. J Marriage Fam 1987; 49: 117-28.

40. Danso H, Hunsberger B, Pratt M. The role of parental religious
    fundamentalism and right wing authoritarianism in child rearing
    goals and practices. J Sci Study Reli- gion 1997; 36: 496-511.

41. Strayhorn JM, Weidman CS, Larson D. A measure of religiousness and
    its relation to parent and child mental health variables. J
    Community Psychol 1990; 18: 34-43.

42. Kirov G, Kemp R, Kirov K, David AS. Religious faith after psychotic
    illness. Psychopathology 1998; 31: 234-45.

43. Kroll J, Sheehan W. Religious beliefs and practices amongst
    inpatients at Minnesota. Am J Psychiatry 1989; 146: 67-76.

44. Brewerton TD. Hyperreligiosity in psychotic disorders. J Nerv Ment
    Dis 1994; 182: 302-4.

45. Neeleman J, Lewis G. Religious identity and comfort beliefs in three
    groups of psychiatric patients and a group of medical controls. Int
    J Soc Psychiatry 1994; 40: 124-34.

46. Kraya N, Patrick C. Folie a deux in the forensic setting. Aus NZ J
    Psychiatry 1997; 31: 883-8.

47. Field H, Waldfogel S. Severe ocular self injury. Gen Hosp Psychiatry
    1995; 17: 224-7.

48. Waugh A. Auto castration and biblical delusions in schizo- phrenia.
    Br J Psychiatry 1986; 149: 656-9.

49. Silva JA, Leong GB, Weinstock R. Violent behaviors as- sociated with
    anti Christ delusions. J Forensic Sci 1997; 42: 1058-61.

50. Siddle R, Haddock G, Tarrier N, Faragher EB. Religious delusions in
    patients admitted to the hospital with schizo- phrenia. Soc
    Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2002; 37: 130-8.

51. Getz DE, Fleck DE, Strakowski SM. Frequency and severity of
    religious delusions in Christian patients with psychosis. Psychiatry
    Res 2001; 103: 87-91.

52. Pfiefer S. Demonic attributions in non delusional disor- ders.
    Psychopathology 1999; 32: 252-9.

53. Kendler KS, Liu XO, Gardner CO, McCullough ME, Larson D, Prescott
    CA. Dimensions of religiosity and their relationship to the lifetime
    occurrence of schizo- phrenia and substance use disorders. Am J
    Psychiatry 2003; 160: 496-503.

54. Koenig HG, Larson DB, Larson SS. Religion and coping in serious
    medical illness. Ann Pharmacother 2001; 35: 352-9.

55. Tateyama M, Asai M, Kamisada M, Hashimoto M, Bartels M, Heimann H.
    Comparison of schizophrenic delusions between Germany and Japan.
    Psychopathology 1993; 26: 151-8.

56. Stompe T, Friedman A, Ortwein G, Strobl R, Chaudhry HR, Najam N, et
    al. Comparison of schizophrenic delu- sions between Austria and
    Pakistan. Psychopathology 1999; 32: 225-34.

57. Appelbaum PS, Robbins PC, Roth LH. Dimen- sional approach to
    delusions : comparison across types and diagnoses. Am J Psychiatry
    1999; 156: 1938-43.

58. Murphy M. Coping with the spiritual meaning of psycho- sis.
    Psychiatr Rehabil J 2000; 24: 179-83.

59. Fallor RD. Spiritual and religious dimensions of mental illness
    recovery narratives. New Dir Ment Health Serv 1998; 35-44.

60. Pietrini P. Towards a biochemistry of the mind ? Am J psychiatry
    2003; 160: 1907-8.

61. Saver JL, Rabin J. The neural substrates of religious experience. J
    Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 1997; 9: 498-510.

62. Puri BK, Lekh SK, Nijran KS, Bagary MS, Richard- son AJ. SPECT
    neuroimaging in schizophrenia with religious delusions. Int J
    Psychophysiol 2001; 40: 145-8.

63. Borg J, Andree B, Soderstrom H, Farde L. The seroto- nin system and
    spiritual experiences. Am J Psychiatry 2003; 160: 1965-9.

64. Zohar D, Marshall I. Spiritual intelligence: the ultimate
    intelligence. New York: Bloomsburg Publishing, 2000.
