   JPPS 2007; 4(2): 69-70 EDITORIAL

SHARING MENTAL HEALTH RESEARCH AMONGST LOW AND MIDDLE INCOME COUNTRIES.
IS THERE A ROLE FOR A JOURNAL OF MENTAL HEALTH IN

   DEVELOPING COUNTRIES?

   Saeed Farooq

   The state of research and scientific publications from Low and middle
   income countries (LAMIC) has been highlighted as one of the most
   significant hurdle in meet- ing the challenge of an enormous burden
   of mental health problems in these countries. A number of studies
   have shown that mental health research publications from developing
   countries constitute only small propor- tion of the total research
   output on mental health from the world1-3.

Journals published from developing countries can help to overcome this
information gap but these are fac- ing insurmountable hurdles. A recent
WHO statement4 has described these problems succinctly:

“A major impediment in accessing mental health research from low and
middle income countries is the lack of visibility of journals published
in these countries. *Most of them are not indexed in international
databases and are often not available beyond their country or re- gion
of origin.* These journals are published under strained circumstances,
in that they often lack sound financial support and have a hard time
becoming self- sufficient. They also have difficulty in obtaining
suitable articles for publication because their author pool is lim-
ited; moreover, influential authors from this pool prefer to publish
their best research in indexed journals”.

This statement, particularly the sentences in ital- ics (my emphasis)
highlights the real problem i.e. these journals are limited to mostly
their country or region of origin. As most of these journals are not
indexed in ma- jor data bases, wider global community lacks access to
them. Most importantly however, mental health profes- sionals in the
developing countries have limited or no access to their contents. It can
be safely said that psy- chiatrists in Pakistan have much easier access
to, say for example, British journal of psychiatry than to the In- dian
journal of psychiatry and vice versa.

This has serious implications for services and re- search in developing
countries. It is essential for re- searchers and practitioners to share
information about mental health issues and research amongst these coun-
tries. Almost all the developing countries are struggling

   **Correspondence :**

   **Dr. Saeed Farooq,** MCPS, FCPS, Associate Professor and Head
   Department of Psychiatry, PGMI, Lady Reading Hospi- tal, Peshawar,
   Pakistan. E-mail: sfarooqlrh@yahoo.com

   to provide services in a situation characterized by a large gap
   between the demand and the resources. The con- figuration of mental
   health services in these countries is entirely different from that in
   the developed nations. This means that I can learn much more from
   studies carried out in India or Nigeria than those conducted in UK.
   With the exception of perhaps strictly biological research the
   studies from developed countries are much less relevant for
   practitioners in the developing countries. It is there- fore
   crucially important that the research findings from developing
   countries are disseminated more widely to the readers in low and
   middle income countries than to the global community in general.

   Take an example. We recently conducted a sys- tematic literature
   search for studies on the relationship between duration of untreated
   psychosis (DUP) and outcome of psychosis in Low and Middle Income
   Coun- tries. Two previous systematic reviews published in lead- ing
   international journals on the subject could identify only two studies
   from low and middle income countries5,

6. Using a more comprehensive search strategy for iden- tifying such
studies, we were able to identify 11 studies, mostly published in non
indexed journals. More impor- tantly, we found that studies from low and
middle in- come countries reported a high mortality (up to 6.7 times!)
mostly from physical causes in those with a longer DUP, as one of the
major outcomes. None of the studies from developed countries reported
this outcome. This obvi- ously has significant implications for services
and the treatment of the psychosis in these countries.

In this context, perhaps it can be argued that although journals
published from developing countries provide a platform for the
researchers whose hard work is not published in international journals,
but at the same time the research is limited to a particular region or
country.

Those familiar with the present scene of interna- tional mental health
literature from developing coun- tries can easily confirm that
international journals do not provide a viable alternative. Patel &
Sumathipala2 re- viewed psychiatric research published in six leading
psychiatric journals between 1996 and 1998. They found that countries
outside the Western cultural world con- tributed only about 6% of the
published literature and the proportion of publications from low- and
middle-in- come countries was even lower (3.2%). Subsequently Patel and
Kim showed that only 3.7% of the published

   research in six high-impact general psychiatric journals emerged from
   low- and middle-income countries7.

The indexing services such as Medline provide little hope for overcoming
these barriers to information between developing countries. Western
Indexing ser- vices cover some 3000 journals, of which 98% are from the
developed world8. The whole of Latin America ac- counted for 0.39% of
the total number of articles refer- enced by Medline in 1996, down from
a “high” of 2.03% in 19669. Moreover getting the journals indexed is a
long tedious process requiring resources which many mental health
journals from developing countries are not able to afford.

The solution must lie in strengthening the local journals and increasing
collaboration between the sci- entific bodies sponsoring these journals.
The journals published from low and middle income countries pro- vide a
vital vehicle for the authors and researchers to have some visibility
for their research, if any. These journals are a catalyst for
identifying the proper research questions, sharing the ideas amongst
research workers and wide dissemination of information. Following steps
can help to overcome information barrier between low and middle income
countries.

1. Journals from developing countries should make more use of the
   Internet to facilitate the accessibility. The journals, which can
   afford the cost of publication, should also be able to meet the
   expense of a web site. It is not only important to be part of World
   Wide Web but it is also equally important that the information about
   the free access is widely disseminated. Directory of Open Access
   Journals (http://www.doaj.org) provides a valu- able resource for
   this.

2. The journals from these countries need to collabo- rate with each
   other. There is much need for “twinning” or “pairing” arrangements
   amongst these journals. These may include exchange of journals and
   cross pub- lication of contents, abstracts and articles. This is
   widely practiced in Western scientific literature. For example
   British Journal of Psychiatry publishes the contents of the American
   Journal of Psychiatry and vice versa.

3. The scientific societies sponsoring these journals need to take more
   initiatives in enhancing this collabo- ration. Scientific meetings
   and conferences organized jointly by these societies is now a common
   occurrence but there is rarely any effort to promote the scientific
   literature amongst low and middle income countries. It should be
   possible, for example to publish a joint supple- ment of the journals
   sponsored by these societies on the occasion of such joint
   conferences.

However, we need to realize that almost all the journals published from
low and middle income coun- tries, like the one in your hand, are the
publications of particular national organization, limited in their scope
to the national and regional audience. Therefore a case can be made for
a journal of mental health devoted to the research from developing
countries. The journals

devoted to one disease such as Tuberculosis or a re- gion are
commonplace in other fields of Medicine. There are number of journals in
Medicine which are devoted to the health problems of low and middle
income coun- tries. Practically all the journals on Tropical Medicine
can be considered to belong to this category. In fact, our colleagues in
Psychology realized much earlier that the psychological issues in
developing countries need a separate forum. The journal titled as
‘Psychology and Developing Societies’ published by Sage Publications is
aimed at providing ‘better perspective on the role of psychology in the
developing world’.

A journal that aims to publish the findings of re- search carried out in
the developing countries will help to overcome these geographical
boundaries and help to address a wide information gap that exists at
present for research in developing countries. In present era of Internet
publication it should not be difficult to bring out such a journal. It
will also help to disseminate the re- search findings, which are
relevant to the services and research for developing countries. From the
experience of editing a journal I can say there is a big demand and need
for such a journal along with a live and kicking JPPS!

   REFERENCES

1. Okasha A, Karam E. Mental health services and research in the Arab
   world. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1998; 98: 406-13.

2. Patel V, Sumathipala A. International representation in psychiatric
   literature. Br J Psychiatry 2001; 178: 406-9.

3. Parker G, Parker K. A profile of regional psychiatry publishing: home
   and away. Aust NZ J Psychiatry 2002; 36: 693-6.

4. World Health Organization & Joint Editors. Galvanizing mental health
   research in low- and middle-income coun- tries: role of scientific
   journals. Bull World Health Organ 2004; 82: 226-8.

5. Marshal M, Lewis S, Lockwood A, Drake R, Jones P, Croudace T.
   Association between duration of untreated psychosis and outcome in
   cohorts of first episode pa- tients. Archives of General Psychiatry
   2005; 62: 975-83.

6. Perkins DO, Gu H, Boteva K, Lieberman JA. Schizo- phrenia: A Critical
   Review and Meta-Analysis Relation- ship between Duration of Untreated
   Psychosis and Outcome in First-Episode. American Journal of Psychia-
   try 2005; 162: 1785-804.

7. Patel V, Kim YR. Contribution of low- and middle-income countries to
   research published in leading general psy- chiatry journals,
   2002-2004. Br J Psychiatry 2007; 190: 77-8.

8. Zielinski C. New equities of information in an electronic age. BMJ
   1995; 310: 1480-1.

9. Rosselli D. Latin American biomedical publications: the case of
   Colombia in Medline. Med Educ 1998; 32:274-7.
