   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 74–77 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

FREQUENCY, CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND

   CO-MORBIDITIES OF ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER PRESENTING
   TO A CHILD PSYCHIATRIC CLINIC AT A UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL IN PAKISTAN

   Ehsan-ullah Syed, Haider Naqvi, Sajida Abdul Hussein

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objective:** This study was aimed to describe the frequency, gender
   ratio, clinical characteristics and co morbidities of ADHD in
   Pakistani population.

   **Design:** Descriptive study

   **Place and duration of study:** Department of Psychiatry of Aga Khan
   University Karachi from June 2002 to June 2004.

   **Subjects and Methods:** We reviewed the case records of 166
   consecutive referrals at our child psychiatric clinics during the
   above mentioned time period .

   **Results:** Clinical notes of 166 patients presenting to child
   psychiatric clinic from July 2002 to July 2004 were reviewed. Sixty
   three (34%) children were diagnosed with ADHD. Gender ratio was 1 to
   5 for females to males. Females presented more with in-attentive type
   of disorder as opposed to males who had more hyper-active, impulsive
   symptamatology. One third of the sample had co morbid psychiatric
   illnesses. Mental retardation and depression was more prevalent in
   our sample. Developmental abnormalities were also reported in one
   third of the cases. Family history of psychiatric illness was present
   in 50 % of cases.

   **Conclusion:** The syndrome of ADHD has broadly similar prevalence,
   clinical characteristics and co morbidities in clinical population in
   Pakistan to that reported in the literature from studies in Western
   countries.

   **Key words:** ADHD, Child psychiatry, Pakistan.

INTRODUCTION
============

Attention deficit Hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is among the most
prevalent mental disorder in children and is characterized by three core
symptoms of inatten- tion, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. It is one of
the most difficult diagnoses to categorize as evident form chang- ing
definition criteria observed in the revisions of Diag- nostic and
statistical manual 1-3. The prevalence of ADHD

in the general population of school age children is about 3% to 5% in
the west 4, 5. Epidemiological studies report

   the gender ratio of 4 to 1, while clinical studies report the gender
   ratio of 9 to 16.

Medline search showed no published studies on ADHD from Pakistan. In
neighboring country India only few studies has evaluated the ADHD and
these report a prevalence ranging from 5% to 10% 7-9. Reports from
community based epidemiological sample gave a lower prevalence estimates
from Al Ain, Arabian peninsula10. However, prevalence estimates vary
according to the diagnostic criteria used, population sampled and infor-

   mants interviewed.

   **Ehsan-ullah Syed**, M.B.B.S. Diplomat American board of psy-
   chiatry and neurology, The Aga Khan University, P.O. Box 3500,
   Stadium Road. Karachi, Pakistan. Tel: 021-4930051 ext 4692. Fax:
   021-493 4294.
   `E-mail:ehsan.syed@aku.edu <mailto:ehsan.syed@aku.edu>`__

   **Haider Naqvi,** M.B.B.S. F.C.P.S. Senior Instructor, Department of
   Psychiatry

   **Sajida Abdul Hussein**, MSc. Research officer, Department of
   Psychiatry. Department of Psychiatry, The Aga Khan Univer- sity,
   Karachi

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr Ehsan-ullah Syed**

   Pakistan is a south-east Asian country with a popu- lation of 140.7
   million. There are 20.39 million children in school, more boys than
   girls. There is no data on school attendance. Services available for
   children are limited to major urban centers of the country which
   comprises of 30% of the whole population. Total numbers of registered
   psychiatrist are not more than 320, with only two registered child
   psychiatrist for the whole popula- tion. There are no specialized
   in-patient child psychiat- ric units 11. Predominance of American
   research in the this field and apparent difference in the prevalence
   of ADHD, or hyperkinesis, as defined by World Health Or-

ganization (WHO) ICD, has led to the impression that this is largely an
American disorder and is much less prevalent else where12. Therefore
there is a need to study the sociodemographic and clinical
characteristics of ADHD in developing country like Pakistan. This study
was aimed to describe the frequency, gender ratio, clini- cal
characteristics and co-morbidities of ADHD in Paki- stani population.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

Aga Khan University is a 500 bedded tertiary care unit that caters to
the needs of the largest metropolitan city, Karachi and rest of the
country. Department of Psy- chiatry comprises of two full time child
psychiatrists. Only the first author (ES) practices as a specialist
child psy- chiatrist. Children are seen on referral from school teach-
ers, specialists or on request of parents. Medical record is maintained
by health information management sys- tem (HIMS) through seven digit
confidential file. Files not in use for more then five years are scanned
through com- puters, for economy of space and data to be retrieved when
required.

We reviewed the case records of 166 consecutive referrals from June 2002
to June 2004. . Comprehensive diagnostic interview with the parents was
used as op- posed to rating scale. Complete physical and neurologi- cal
examination was carried out to rule out other condi- tions which may be
responsible for child’s behavior. Data was extracted from specifically
designed data-extraction form. Software of SPSS (Version 10) was used in
order to process the data.

RESULTS
=======

Socio-demographic characteristics: Out of 63 pa- tients 51(80.19% )were
male while the rest were female (19.10%). 37% patients were less than 5
years of age. 49% children were in the age range of 6 and 10 years and
19 % children were in the age range of 11 and 15. Further details of
socio-demographic characteristics are shown in table 1.

   Table 1

   Socio-demographic Characteristics

+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| **Variable**                  |    **Frequency** |                  |
|                               |                  |   **Percentage** |
+===============================+==================+==================+
| **Education**                 |                  |                  |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Pre school                    |    11            |    17%           |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Primary school                |    30            |    48%           |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Secondary School              |    03            |    4.2%          |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Home tutoring                 |    01            |    2.1%          |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Special Education             |    01            |    2.1%          |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| No Education                  |    17            |    2%            |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| **Family type**               |                  |                  |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Nuclear                       |    20            |    31%           |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Extended                      |    19            |    30%           |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| **Referral source**           |                  |                  |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Medical professionals         |    30            |    48%           |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Parents                       |    32            |    50%           |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+
| Schools                       |    01            |    2%            |
+-------------------------------+------------------+------------------+

Presenting Symptoms
-------------------

Out of 166 patients seen during the duration of two years 63 patients
were diagnosed with ADHD repre- senting 34 % of total sample. Forty four
percent children presented with the complaint of inattention while
hyperactivity was present in 48 % cases. In 35% children anger and
aggressiveness was the primary reason for consultation while 6.3% cases
reported agitation. Speech delay was the reason for consulta- tion in
14.3 % cases. 20.6 % children were aggressive towards other s while 6 %
children’s had history of seri- ous self-harm and self mutilation. A
small minority (5.4%) presented with the complaints of agitation and
opposi- tional symptoms.

Co-morbidities
--------------

Psychiatric co-morbidities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   ADHD was the principle diagnosis in 56 children out of 63(88.88%)
   while other diagnostic categories were given secondary consideration.
   In the remaining 7 chil- dren(11.11%) ADHD was a secondary diagnosis
   while they had other primary diagnoses. 16.7 % children had Mental
   retardation. 8.4% children’s had depressive dis- order. 19.7% had
   enuresis while encoperesis was present in 4.8% children. Learning
   disability was present in 16 % patients. Small minority had pervasive
   develop- mental disorder (PDD), Autism, Obsessive compulsive disorder
   (OCD), Epilepsy, adjustment disorder and spe- cific developmental
   disorder (table-2).

Developmental co-morbidities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

   In the whole sample with ADHD, 14.3 % patients had gross motor while
   23.8 % had fine motor delay. Speech delay was recognized in 27%
   patients. No pa- tient had been to speech therapist while only one
   child had seen a pediatrician in the past. Six percent children had a
   birth complication in the form of prolonged ob- structed labor
   associated with apnea and pre-mature birth in one child.

Medical co-morbidities
----------------------

Asthma and other allergic conditions were present in 14.3 % patients and
4 % patients had anemia. 6.3 % patients had different type of infections
with tuberculo- sis and other agents while 6 % patients had history of
febrile seizures.

Family Psychiatric history
--------------------------

Among the sample with ADHD 50% children had a family history of any
psychiatric illness. Amongst these 74.6% of the first degree relatives
while 25% of the seconddegree relatives had any psychiatric disorder.

Management
----------

Pharmacological: Stimulants (Methylphenidate) were prescribed in 31 %
patients while 11 % children’s were on antidepressant medications. Small
minority was on antipsychotic and anti-anxiety medication. There were no
medications prescribed in 49 % chil- dren and primarily managed on
non-pharmacological means.

Table-2
~~~~~~~

   **First three diagnostic codes given to patients, based on DSM-IV
   criteria.**

+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
|    **Primary          |    **Co morbid       |    **Co morbid        |
|    Diagnosis**        |    Diagnosis 1**     |    Diagnosis 2**      |
+=======================+======================+=======================+
|    ADHD\* 56 (88.9%)  |    ADHD\* 07 (11.1)  |    Mental retardation |
|                       |                      |    03 (4.8%)          |
+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
|    Depression 02      |    Depression01      |    Borderline         |
|    (3.2%)             |    (1.6%)            |    intelligence       |
|                       |                      |    01(1.6%)           |
+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
|    Mental Retardation |    Mental            |    Adjustment         |
|    01(1.6%)           |    Retardation       |    disorder 01 (1.6%) |
|                       |    07(11.1%)         |                       |
+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
|    Borderline         |    Epilepsy 02(3.2%) |    OCD+ 01(1.6%)      |
|    intelligence       |                      |                       |
|    01(1.6%)           |                      |                       |
+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
|    Speech disorder    |    Speech disorder   |    Speech disorder 05 |
|    01(1.6%)           |    03(4.8%)          |    (7.9%)             |
+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
|    PDD*\* 01 (1.6%)   |    PDD*\* 01 (1.6%)  |    Autism 01 (1.6%)   |
+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
|    Others 01 (1.6%)   |    Autism 01 (1.6%)  |    Seizure disorder   |
|                       |                      |    01 (1.6%)          |
+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       |    DCD**\* 01 (1.6%) |    DCD**\* 01 (1.6%)  |
+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       |    None 30 (57.1%)   |    None 46 (73%)      |
+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+

..

   ADHD*: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder OCD+: Obsessive
   compulsive disorder PDD**: Pervasive developmental disorder

   DCD***: Developmental co-ordination disorder

Non pharmacological management included dif- ferent types of
psychological interventions. These in- clude counseling (16 %), behavior
advises (17.5 %), Reassurance (6.3 %) and speech therapy (20 %). Spe-
cial education, occupational therapy and social skills training were
recommended in small minority. In 35 % cases patients were referred to
other specialist services including clinical psychologists, speech
therapist or oc- cupational therapist after non-specific behavioral
inter- ventions and advise.

DISCUSSION
==========

This paper aimed to study the syndrome of ADHD in a clinic sample and
report its clinical, demographic characteristics and co morbidities.
ADHD is the most frequent diagnosis in child psychiatric clinics with
preva- lence estimates ranging from quarter to half of the clini- cal
sample13. Our sample showed the similar trends. ADHD was present in 63
(34 %) children out of 166 patients seen over the course of two years.
We can presume that in our clinical population syndrome of ADHD exists
in similar manner as reported in the western literature, when DSMIV
diagnostic criteria are used.

The clinical, demographic characteristics and co morbidities are also
consistent with those reported in the western. There is a clear gender
difference in the preva- lence of ADHD. Epidemiological studies report
the gen- der ratio of 4 to 1, while clinical studies report the gender
ratio of nine to one6. The main reason behind this selec- tive referral
bias could be the nature of the symptomatol- ogy. Girls have primarily
in-attentive type of disorder with predominant cognitive problems. Boys
have more ag- gressive/impulsive conduct symptomatology which leads to
earlier referral14. Similar trends were seen in our data when it was
cross tabulated with gender and presenting symptomatology.

Co morbidity is a major problem in ADHD and has been reported to be
around two-third of the clinical sample 4. In our sample a wide range of
co morbid disor- ders were diagnosed. The most common was Mental
retardation and learning disability; this is comparable to range of 10
%- 25% reported by McGee R and et al15. The proportion of children
diagnosed with co morbid Major depression is somewhat lower than other
studies August et al 16. Quarter of our sample could be diag- nosed to
have deficit in attention, motor control, and perception (DAMP) along
with ADHD. It is a syndrome described by Gillberg et al (2003)17. It
contains hetero- geneous group of development coordination dis- order
(DCD) and ADHD patients. Literature usually points to more physical
co-morbid conditions in pediat- ric sample then psychiatric population18
.This could account for some of the observation from our sample as most
of the patients in our sample were either self referred or were referred
from the medical /pediatric source.

As reported in the western literature ADHD breeds true in the
families19. Our data also reported three fourth of first degree and a
quarter of second-degree relatives having the illness. Over all half the
patients having any family member with ADHD or related psychiatric
illness is pretty much consistent with the western literature14.
Psychosocial factors are not thought to play a primary etiological
role20.

Consistent with Western literature ,pharmaco- therapy was the first
choice of treatment of child with sever ADHD. Behavior modification
techniques were rec- ommended for children with mild to moderate ADHD.
In our sample medications were prescribed in half the cases considering
the robustness of evidence for their safety and efficacy. Equivalent
numbers were managed on psycho-social grounds.

CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS
=====================

ADHD is a chronic disorder with significant behav- ioral and emotional
sequels. It is best managed by a multidisciplinary team effort and a
combination of phar- macotherapy usually with stimulant medications,
behav- ioral interventions and environmental changes. In a de- veloping
country like Pakistan there are few allied spe- cialist services.
Problem is compounded by poor aware- ness on part of parents, teachers
and health profession- als. This is evident from low referral rate from
schools and lack of follow-up seen at our clinic. Pharmacologi- cal
management of ADHD calls for prescription of stimulant medication like
methylphenidate. There is significant resistance and controversy
regarding the use of stimulant medication both on part of physi- cians
and parents21. They argue against the use of chemical methods for
management of behavior disorder i.e. ADHD. The findings of this study
call upon a need to develop awareness regarding the preva- lence of ADHD
and co morbid conditions and make ef- forts to developed links with the
services and resource persons that are available both within the country
and abroad.

LIMITATIONS 
============

This study has several limitations. Aga Khan Uni- versity hospital is
tertiary care, private, fee for service hospital. The sample therefore
represents referred population. Who could afford to pay. The details of
the variables were derived from case notes. There- fore conclusion
should be drawn with caution about the whole population from our study.
Given the cons- traint of time and resources this study will serve as a
base line work for further studies. There are further re- search
questions that are generated by our work and should be addressed by
community based epidemio- logical work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
==============

The authors wish to thank Dr. Murad Moosa Khan for his feed back and
valuable suggestions on earlier drafts. We also like to acknowledge the
contribution of Ms Shumalia Furnaz for her invaluable effort in data
entry and processing.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statis- tical
    manual of mental disorders. 3rd ed. Washington: American Psychiatric
    Association, 1980.

2.  American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Sta- tistical
       manual of mental disorders. 3rd ed. R. Washing- ton : American
       Psychiatric Association, 1987.

3.  American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Sta- tistical
       manual of mental disorders. 4th ed. Washington: American
       Psychiatric Association, 1994.

4.  Biederman J, Newcorn J, Spirch S. Comorbidity of at- tention defecit
       hyperactivity disorder with conduct, de- pression, anxiety and
       other disorders. Am J Psychiatry 1991; 148:564-77.

5.  Jensen PS, Martin D, Cantwell DP. Comorbidity in ADHD: implication
    for research, practice and DSM-IV. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
    Psychiatry 1997; 36:1065-79.

6.  Cantwell DP. Attention deficit disorder: A review of Past 10 Years.
    J Am Acad Child Adlolesc Psychiatry 1996; 35:978-87.

7.  Malhi P, Singhi P. Spectrum of attention deficit hyperac- tivity
    disorder in childrens among referrals to psycho- logical services.
    Indian Pediatr 2000; 37:1256-60.

8.  Barkley RA, Fischer M, Edelbrock CS, Smallish L. The adolescent
    outcome of hyperactive children diagnosed by research criteria 1: an
    8-year prospective follow-up study. J Am Acad Child Adlolesc
    Psychiatry 1990; 29:546-57.

9.  Weiss G, Hechtman L. Hyperactive children grow up. New York;
    Guilford Press;1993.

10. Eapen V, Jakka ME, Saleh M. Childre with Psychiatric disorder: The
    Al Ain Community Psychiatric Survey. Can J Psychiatry 2003;48:402-7.

11. Kareem S, Saeed K, Rana MH, Malik MH, Jenkin R. Pakistan Mental
    health country profile. Int Rev Psychia- try 2004; 16:83-92.

12. Stephen VF, Joseph S, Gillbert C, Biederman J. The worldwide
    prevalence of ADHD:is it an American condi- tion? World Psychiatry
    2003;2:104-12.

13. Baumgaertel A, Wolraich ML, Dietrich M. Comparison of diagnostic
    criteria for attention defecit disorders in Ger- man elementary
    school sample. J Am Acad Child Adlolesc Psychiatry 1995;34:629-38.

14. Schachar R,Tannock R. Syndromes of Hyperactivity and Attention
    Deficit. In: Rutter M, Taylor E. Child and Ado- lescent Psychiatry
    4th edition Blackwell Publishing; 2004: 404-5.

15. Mc Gee R, Share DL. Attention deficit disorder-Hyper- activity and
    academic failure which comes first and what should be treated? J Am
    Acad Child Adlolesc Psychia- try 1988; 27:318-25.

16. August GJ, Garfenkel BD. Comorbidity of ADHD and reading disability
    among clinic referred children. J Abnorm Child Psychol
    Psychiatry1990; 18:29-45.

17. Gillberg C. Deficit in attention, motor control, and per- ception: a
    brief review. Arch Dis Child 2003;88:904-10.

18. Bhatia MS, Chaudhary S, Sidana A. Attention deficit hyperactivity
    disorder among psychiatric outpatients. Indian Pediatr 1999;
    36:583-7.

19. Biederman J, Stephen V, Faraone B, Keenan K, Tsuang

..

   T. Evidence of Familial Association Between Attention Deficit
   Disorder and Major Affective Disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry
   1991;48:633-42.

20. Cantwell DP. Attention deficit disorder: A review of Past 10 Years.
    J Am Acad Child Adlolesc Psychiatry 1996; 35:978-87.

21. Biederman J. Pharmacotherapy for Attention-deficit/ Hyperactivity
    disorder (ADHD) decreases the risk for substance abuse: Findings
    from Longitudinal Follow- up of Youths With and Without ADHD. J Clin
    Psychia- try 2003;64:3-8.
