   JPPS 2006; 3(1): 54–56 BOOK REVIEWS

BOOK REVIEWS

The Gateway Paper; Health systems in Pakistan – a way forward
=============================================================

By Sania Nishtar. Heartfile Central Office, 1 Park Road, Chak Shahzad,
Islamabad, Pakistan. 2006. 199 pp.

.. image:: media/image1.png
   :width: 3.12978in
   :height: 4.43594in

The first book review in JPPS is about a publica- tion on the health
system in Pakistan. Just a chance as- sociation? Considering the
editorial in this issue is about public health intervention in
psychiatry, the association is more than a chance. It is highly
significant relationship which we want to foster between the two
disciplines and you will see more on this. Watch this space!

The author introduces the paper in the précis as “ the Geteway paper is
a product of the consensus driven Action Plan embodied within the
statement of Pakistan’s Health Policy Forum, a recently established
health- sec- tor think tank designed to stimulate, assist in the devel-
opment of and monitor health policies; foster their imple- mentation and
catalyze change through technical and policy support”.

The paper elaborates the present health system in Pakistan and makes a
strong case for reforms in the health system. It reviews the basic
functions of a health systems i.e. stewardship, financing, service
provisions and inputs. The first major section of the paper highlights
the role of state as steward and regulator. It points out rightly that
the major reason for policy failure and imple- mentation has been the
paucity of locally applicable evi- dence and perhaps even worse no use
of existing avail- able evidence. It is of course a refreshing change in
the present climate of debate on health systems that a document starts
with a need for the evidence based so- lutions and the emphasis on this
is evident throughout the book.

The next section elaborates on the present system of health financing in
Pakistan. The author makes a good case for not relying on taxation as
sole source of financ- ing health in Pakistan. A highly valuable feature
of this section is the statistics provided on various aspects of health
financing in Pakistan. This, perhaps is one of the few resources where
you can find basic and highly rel- evant data about the health system
financing in Pakistan. We are told, for example, the startling fact that
the aver- age out of pocket expenses on health are equal to 5.2% of
total monthly house hold expenditure of an average Pakistani family and
poor bear a heavier burden of medi- cal costs than the rich. “Donors
contribute to only 14.7% of total public health sector allocation, this
plays havoc with the health system by determining all the major pri-
orities in health sector, made even worse by the lack of local
capacity.”

Another section, comprising of three substantial chapters reviews the
delivery of health services, both in public and private sector. This is
followed by a highly informative debate on federal-provincial-district
partner- ships in governance. In a critical review of the present
decentralization policy, the author points out that “Politi- cal and
administrative decentralization has also paradoxi- cally created
centralization of some functions within the district itself”. It is also
rightly pointed out that “the real challenge in relation to political
and administra- tive decentralization is for it to go side by side with
em- powerment and devolution of power at the grassroots level”.

The paper also highlights the need for proper hu- man resource
management, a robust drug policy and legislation, health promotion and
research. The ques- tion “why has there been a failure to foster a
research promoting culture in health sector”, is also discussed. (The
simplest answer would be we are not fond of ‘cul-

ture’!) I expected a detailed discussion, because this is the root cause
of many problems we are facing but had to contend with only one page.

My only disappointment is a rather brief discus- sion of mental health
in the context of the health system delivery. This should not be taken
as the view of a spe- cialist demanding a lion’s share for his
territory. This con- cern stems from robust evidence which shows that
the low priority assigned to mental health is a major cause of ill
health systems in developing countries including Pakistan1.

   The title is highly relevant; this is the ‘gateway’ paper and it is
   hoped that it will pioneer the future policy directions in the
   country. This paper is a must read for anyone who has some interest
   in the health care and health system in Pakistan. I will recommend
   this for all the policy makers, managers in health systems and cli-
   nicians with interest in public health. It is very valuable addition
   to an otherwise scanty literature on health sys- tems in Pakistan
   which has been plagued by an ugly divide between clinical and public
   health profession. Coming from an author who is a cardiologist, this
   book should also help to bridge this gap. This paper aims to initiate
   dialogue on health system in Pakistan. Consider- ing, the present
   state of health system in Pakistan this is need of the hour. I
   certainly found the paper very stimu- lating and highly informative.

   The presentation and style is user friendly. The author sets herself
   few questions in each topic and then provides answers to these. The
   book is available from the Heartfile central office ( E-mail:
   sania@heartfile.org).

   REFERENCE

   World Health Organization. Investing in mental health. World Health
   Organization, 2003. Geneva.

   **Dr. Saeed Farooq,** MCPS, FCPS.

   Associate Professor and Head of Psychiatry Department, Postgraduate
   Medical institute, Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar.

The book Mental Health. An Indian Perspective.1946-2003
=======================================================

   By S.P. Agarwal. Director General of Health Services, Ministry of
   Health and Family Welfare India. New Delhi. 2005. 532 pp. ISBN
   81-8147-195-4.

   The book Mental Health, An Indian Perspective is a remarkable effort
   by S.P. Agarwal that analyses the current situation of mental health
   care delivery in India in the light of a carefully reviewed
   historical perspective. It is particularly interesting for a
   Pakistani reader for our socio-cultural, economical and geo-political
   set up is pretty much the same. We share the history and many
   problems in health care delivery in which we can learn from each
   others experience.

   .. image:: media/image2.png
      :width: 3.11172in
      :height: 3.92in

What we found to be the most remarkable feature of the book was its
non-judgmental and unbiased evalu- ation of the material and facts. The
data presented has been extensively collected from various resources and
has been carefully and concisely summarized. The as- sumptions and
postulations are carefully formulated and evaluated critically.

The book attempts to focus on the modern con- cept of Mental Health
rather than dwell too much on the older concepts of folk remedies of
mental maladies and starts with a retrospection of the British conquest
of the sub-continent that started in the East and South and moved
towards West and North. After occupying a size- able portion of India,
The British started introducing many services and systems, most of the
models were natu- rally taken from their own country. This section
empha- sizes and describes the adequacies and inadequacies of the
facilities provided. Without being judgmental, it explains how
significant was the contribution of the Brit- ish in this regard and yet
how limited it was since they only improvised them far enough to suit
their specific needs particularly in to realm of aiding governance.

A few asylums were housed in dilapidated army barracks or prisons in the
major urban centers. The asylums were mainly for British soldiers or
Indian Sipahis serving the British. These facilities did not cater for
the general population. The asylums were inadequately staffed and poorly
provided.

The book then moves on to discuss the steady, albeit slow leaning away
from the “custodial” style of care towards a less stigmatizing and more
patient oriented

hospital system of care. This started happening in the colonial times.
The focus moved away from labeling the afflicted as “lunatic” needing an
“asylum” to calling him the patient and needing mental health care.

In the early days after independence, the focus in mental health was to
improve trained manpower and in- tegrate mental health with general
health. The birth of Indian Psychiatric Society and its role in shaping
future policy is highlighted. A remarkable milestone was reached with
the appearance of Indian Journal of Psy- chiatry.

The practical difficulties of conducting epidemio- logical surveys are
also dealt with in detail. The prob- lems of methodology and nosology
are also discussed. A significant detail of major illnesses and surveys
con- ducted is given in a very organized fashion.

In addition to streamlining the mental health ser- vices there was a
crucial question of updating Lunacy Act of 1912 and replace it with a
new law which should reflect the changes that have taken place in the
world of psychiatry. After decades of struggle Indian psychia- trists
pushed through Mental Health Act of 1987 but many years after its
approval by the parliament there was little change on the ground. The
book describes very well how it still retained its British flavor. The
concept of lunacy and the focus on saving the common man from the luna-
tic remained dominant for a long time and even now.

The author takes the reader step by step as to how the Indian mental
health program kept lurching forward amid the chaotic disorganization in
the political and pro- fessional circles. It describes the efforts of
National Mental Health Programme to develop a broader base of
multidisciplinary mental health care, the birth of commu- nity
psychiatric health care at the NIMHANS (National Institute of Mental
Health and Neurosciences) program and the development of rural mental
program in Chandigarh.

It pays special attention to the tragedy of Erwady in the Ramanathapuram
district of Tamil Nadu which led to the first ever solid involvement of
the judicial and liti- gation system in the care of mentally ill. This
paved the way for very vigorous and reasonably coordinated effort

to evaluate the true state of mental health care in India in October
2001.

Next the book addresses the various aspects of mental health care one by
one and the efforts done by various sections of the government, WHO and
the pro- fessional and civil society. The last part of the book ab-
sorbs the readers with some very nice chapter in “down the memory lane”.

The appendices are a voluminous section of infor- mation that provide
almost every single detail of official documents and laws, and provide
an exhaustive account of manpower and services available in India. The
Mental health act of 1987 as well as Mental Health rules 1990 are
documented with definitions and descriptions.

The editors, associate editors (D.S. Goel, R.L.Ichpujani, R.N.Salhan and
S.Shrivastava) and all the authors of the different chapters must be
applauded for this splendid work. The script was eloquent and the lan-
guage simple. Apart from the fact that it takes time to go through this
voluminous book (530 pages), it was a very pleasant reading as well as a
learning experience to re- view this book.

We hope that professionals from our part of the world would keep taking
such initiatives and provide such helpful material. We recommend this
book to any reader in general and anybody involved in policy making and
organizing mental health care in the developing world in particular.

Dr. M. Shafique
---------------

FRCPsych

Former Head of Psychiatry Department Khyber Medical College,

University of Peshawar, Pakistan.

Dr. Fuad Khan
-------------

Diplomate American Board of Psychiatry

Fellow Psychoanalytical Psychotherapy, Harvard, USA Consultant
Psychiatrist

Shafique Psychiatric Clinic, Peshawar, Pakistan.
