JPPS 2006; 3(2): 66–69 SPECIAL ARTICLE

THE CONCEPT OF PTSD: A CRITICAL APPRAISAL

   D S Goel

Both Pakistan and India have faced enormous di- sasters in recent years
in the form of earthquake on 8 October 2005 and Tsunami. The mental
health profes- sionals in these situations are invariably faced with the
mental health consequences of such colossal disas- ters. It is crucial
that our response is based on critical appraisal of the concepts and
treatments which could be employed in these situations.

Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is frequently thought to be the
natural consequences of these disas- ters in almost every setting. The
assumed *universality* of PTSD has been strongly contested in recent
times by sociologists, medical anthropologists and mental health
professionals. It is interesting to note that the concept of PTSD had
its origins in the aftermath of military cam- paigns as is discussed in
more details in following para- graphs. However, recent critique of the
concept is based more on discourse in disasters in non military settings
. I would like to explore the dialectics of the concept in view of its
history, literature from military Psychiatry as well as my three decades
of experience as a military psychia- trist.

*Politics of PTSD*
==================

Conceived in the aftermath of the US defeat in Vietnam and initially
christened *Post Vietnam Syndrome,* PTSD was included in DSM III by an
effete American Psychiatric Association (APA) during 1980, following in-
tense lobbying by the politically powerful Veterans As- sociations1-3.
Even then, the motion was carried by a wafer thin majority. Following
subsequent dilution of the diagnostic criteria, ambiguous to begin with,
PTSD “be- came the *disorder du jour,* its meaning stretched to en-
compass practically all the population. In effect, PTSD is not
conceptualized as an abnormal pathological re- sponse arising in
particular circumstances\ *, but the patho- logical response is assumed
to be the norm. …*\ psychia- trists now say that it is *normal* to be
traumatized by the horrors of war”4-6. The assumed *universality* of
PTSD has been, however, strongly contested in recent times by
sociologists, medical anthropologists and mental

Correspondence:

   **Dr. D S Goel,** Senior Adviser (Psychiatry), Armed Forces Medi- cal
   Services, India; Formerly: National Consultant (Mental Health), World
   Health Organisation, New Delhi & Mental Health Adviser to Ministry of
   Health, Government of India. Currently: Consultant Psychiatrist,
   Southland Hospital Mental Health Services, Invercargill, New Zealand.
   E-mail: `coldsgoel@hotmail.com. <mailto:coldsgoel@hotmail.com>`__

health professionals, who have flagged its cultural roots1,7-11.

*Origins of the PTSD Dialectic*
===============================

The controversy surrounding PTSD raises critical scientific and
historical issues which impact the cred- ibility of psychiatry itself.
The National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study (NVVRS), which is the
most exten- sive ever evaluation of the ground realities arising from
the genesis of PTSD as a DSM II diagnosis, reported the incidence as12:

(a) PTSD= 30.9% (i.e., *twice* the number of those in combat roles!)

(b) *Partial* PTSD= 22.5%

(c) Combined= 53.4%

..

   Surprisingly, however, there were very few *com- bat stress
   reactions* diagnosed in Vietnam itself and only 3.5% of all
   psychiatric casualties were diagnosed as *combat exhaustion,* which
   was not surprising as *only 15% of the men were assigned to combat
   duty.* Then how did twice that number develop PTSD? How to ex- plain
   these puzzling data?

“It’s different from shell shock (WW I) and battle fatigue (WW II)”,
protested the protagonists. “Delayed onset”, explained others, echoing
Penfield’s landmark formulation, ‘\ *a silent period of strange
ripening’*, con- structed half a century earlier in the context of
post-trau- matic epilepsy. But real life is different. Psychiatric
trauma induced illness usually begins in the war zone itself, as
documented in the annals of military medicine, through the two world
wars and the Korean conflict. Burkett13 advances a more rational thesis
in a recent publication, appropriately entitled, *Stolen Valor*:

(a) Dubious accuracy of data relating to both trauma and symptoms, as
    not all those sup- posed to have been exposed to trauma were from
    combat units.

(b) *Oversampling* from combat units, treating de- ployment in the war
    zone itself as qualifying stressor.

(c) Interviewers’ *bias* towards false positives.

(d) Artifact of retrospective appraisal (only 100 of the 1632 Vietnam
    veterans surveyed in the NVVRS had actual service connected
    disabilities), resulting from the reinterpreta- tion of diverse
    problems/symptoms through the prism of war and wrongly attributing
    them to military service, whereas

(e) Archival data, obtained from the files of 2000 Vietnam veterans
    using the Freedom of In- formation Act, indicated that 75% were, *a
    priori*, pretenders!

This damaging conclusion is reinforced by Frueh’s study14 of the
personal records of 100 randomly selected Vietnam veteran’s reporting
*war trauma,* 94% of whom had been diagnosed as PTSD (!), which
indicated that 59% had no credible record of exposure to any trauma at
all and of the 41% who had such record:

(a) 20% had served in Vietnam but had earned no combat medals,

(b) 32% had no documented combat exposure, and

(c) 7% had *never been in Vietnam*!

What, then, had happened? Fabrication, or highly improbable gaps in the
data/ missed traumatic events? Doubts are strengthened by the fact that
28% of *non- combatants* had reported witnessing or participating in
battlefield atrocities, compared to 12% of the combat- ants!
Anthropologist David Marlowe sums up succinctly: “We are dealing with
the *sequelae of post combat belief, expectation, explanation and
attribution, rather than the sequelae of combat itself”*\ 15. Simon
Wessley16 is more circumspect:”We should see war stories for what they
are: complex narratives that serve many functions, func- tions that
those of us who have never been to war are not best placed to
interpret.” Experience in the Indian context lends support to this
view17.

*PTSD and the Compensation Culture*
===================================

It is apparent from the foregoing that PTSD has become a *compensation
driven* nosological entity in western cultures, like the US where the
Veterans Ad- ministration is facing a grave fiscal crisis owing to a
huge hike in PTSD compensation payments to Vietnam veter- ans over the
past six years, at an annual cost of $4.3 billion, with the number of
beneficiaries having doubled over this period18. More surprisingly, this
increase is not due to soldiers just returning from Afganistan and Iraq
but due to Vietnam veterans in their 50s and 60s laying new claims to
being *crippled* by PTSD arising decades after the end of the war. A
2005 study by the Department of Veteran Affairs (DVA) Inspector General
on 2100 ran- domly selected PTSD cases from seven VA hospitals (mean
age= 56 years, mean period from discharge to 100% PTSD rating= 24 years)
revealed startling find- ings:

(a) No evidence of trauma\* = 25.1% (Or- egon=40.7%; Maine=11.0%)

..

   \* It must be stressed that this is Criterion ‘A in the diagnostic
   criteria of PTSD i.e’- extreme traumatic stressor involving threat to
   life/safety/physical integrity, experienced or witnessed di- rectly,
   or affecting someone close to the subject.

(b) Subjects continued to make mental health visits until they received
    100% disability com- pensation, and

(c) Then they either dropped out of therapy, or reduced their visits by
    an average of 82%, while, on the other hand

(d) No such decline was seen in other medical disability claim patients!

The report concludes that “Part of the problem is that the compensation
programme has a built in disin- centive to get well when veterans are
reapplying to get their disability rating increased.” Burkett13
considers three possible constructs to explain the inexplicable:

(a) Patients exaggerate, or even fabricate, the history of trauma to get
    compensation.

(b) Treatment *toxicity* hypothesis, which postulates that putative
    treatments (e.g., “PD”, psychological debriefing) *actually make
    patients worse*\ 15,16.

(c) ‘Natural’ history of the disorder, with puta- tive treatments being
    *inert* and unable to re- verse an inexorable downhill course.

In the aforesaid context, it will be justified to infer the need to
triangulate trauma with multiple, indepen- dent (albeit, fallible)
sources of data, self-report, archi- val, psychophysiologic, to evolve
an integrated and cred- ible paradigm.

*PTSD and DSM: Internal inconsistencies and* the subtle creep in
================================================================

The pernicious repercussions of PTSD, contextualized above to the
post-Vietnam scene in the US, are directly traceable to internal
inconsistencies in the DSM III diagnostic criteria for the disorder, as
adopted by the APA in 1980, and since aggravated by subtle but
significant dilutions in DSM IV. Originally, in the DSM III definition,
*traumatic* stressors were distinguished from ordinary stressors as
being:

(a) Outside the bounds of everyday experience, though, in the context of
    war, many of the putative stressors fell within the range of the
    soldier’s real life repertoire of almost routine combat phenomena17.

(b) Able to provoke distress in almost everyone, thereby assuming a
    universal, aculturalised threshold of vulnerability which is under
    in- creasing attack in the context of post-disas- ter PTSD6.

The definition did, however, attempt to limit the boundaries of PTSD by
identifying canonical stressors: combat (even though this rendered PTSD
as an inevi- table accompaniment of war), rape and confinement to

concentration camps. But DSM IV soon removed this token fig leaf by
radically enlarging the diagnostic pa- rameters as following:

   *“Criterion A –* (i) The person experienced, *witnessed, or was
   confronted with* an event that involved actual *or threatened* death
   or serious in- jury, *or threat to the physical integrity of self or
   others.*

   (ii) The person’s response involved fear, helplessness, or horror,
   which, in children, may be expressed, instead, by disorga- nized or
   agitated behaviour.”

The concept of the traumatic stressor has been, thus, vastly broadened
and its boundaries blurred. Non- canonical stressors from within the
bounds of everyday life now qualify, e.g., hearing about a traumatic
event/ death of a loved one and even non-traumatic life events19.
Increasingly, more and more of contemporary life now counts as trauma,
including being exposed to crude sexual jokes in the workplace (a
Michigan lawsuit on these grounds resulted in a 21 million dollar
settle- ment) and even *uncomplicated childbirth:* “ Birth caused PTSD
constitutes a serious mental health problem and accounts for 3000 new
cases each year in the Nether- lands”20. Does this make birth control a
primary preven- tion strategy for reducing the incidence of PTSD? This
would be considered laughable, but for the serious as- sertion in the
same paper that nearly 90% of Americans now qualify as trauma survivors!

In effect, now, psychic trauma denotes an event that is traumatic by
virtue of its meaning to the subject, rather than on the basis of any
objectively definable ca- nonical criteria. This trivializes trauma,
with a traffic acci- dent victim being assigned the same experiential
value as survivors of the Holocaust. This trend undermines at- tempts at
elucidating the psychological mechanisms un- derlying PTSD and as the
causal relevance of the stres- sor is eroded, the emphasis shifts to a
search for preex- isting vulnerability factors21, 22, Moving the causal
bur- den away from the stressor (trauma) leads to a back-
ground-foreground inversion and thus destroys the very *raison d’etre*
for inventing PTSD as a diagnostic entity in the first place. If
anything and everything qualifies as a traumatic event, then trauma
becomes the universal lexi- con of distress or misfortune in modern life
and PTSD will medicalise more and more of real-life human expe- rience,
shaping our culture in ways which will under- mine our capacity for
resilience in the face of adversity23.

*Macro-level consequences*
==========================

The ideological malaise underlying the PTSD epiphenomena, which has the
potential to inflict serious damage on organizations, governments and
societies, has been subjected to critical analysis by Vanessa Pupavac in
a seminal paper6 and her comments in this regard merit being quoted
verbatim:

   “The cornerstone of the international psychoso- cial model is its
   assumption of the vulnerability of the individual. *Whereas earlier
   psychiatry assumed the gen- eral resilience of the population and
   sought to diagnose individual susceptibility to psychological
   breakdown, the PTSD assumes universal vulnerability*. Assuming
   univer- sal vulnerability, metropolitan actuarial risk analysis then
   focuses on environmental risk factors. Hence *people in the South are
   deemed to be at greater risk of psychologi- cal dysfunctionalism
   because of the economic, political and social insecurities they
   face.* However, *a history of insecurity should not be equated with a
   history of greater susceptibility to psychological breakdown,* a
   distinction that is lost in the international psychosocial model. If
   there is any correlation it may be reverse of that as- sumed by
   international policy makers, that is, *the back- ground of
   communities used to hardship means that they are likely to be
   remarkably resilient in the face of adversity.* This factor explains
   why international aid work- ers, including trauma counselors, appear
   to be more susceptible to secondary or vicarious trauma, than the
   recipient populations who have experienced primary trauma.”

Pupavac’s landmark contribution has had pro- found impact across the
globe and the World Health Organisation has decisively moved away from
the PTSD- oriented approach in disaster management24, 25. In the US,
experts in the ailing Department of Veteran Affairs have called in
question the very utility/objectivity of the PTSD diagnosis and “whether
the structure of govern- ment benefits discourages healing”26. Going one
step further, the Bush administration has contracted the Na- tional
Academies Institute of Medicine to “review the util- ity and
objectiveness of the criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), and comment on the validity of current
screening instruments and their predictive capacity for accurate
diagnosis.

…also review the literature on various treatment modali- ties (including
pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy) and treatment goals for individuals
with PTSD”27.

*The Implications*
==================

   It appears to me that our vision has been distorted by the pernicious
   prism of what Vanessa Pupavac terms *assumed universal
   vulnerability*. Like international aid workers and trauma counselors,
   we seem to have be- come *more susceptible to secondary or vicarious
   trauma, than the recipient populations who have experienced primary
   trauma*. The ethical dialectic was summed up by Simon Wessely,
   Honorary Adviser in Psychiatry to the British Army Medical Services
   in the course of the 15th Liddel Hart Lecture, given at the Kings
   College, London on 15 Mar 2004:

“Reducing risk is increasingly the purpose of pub- lic health, and
indeed politics. Whenever anything is identified as ‘risk’, it is
inevitable that this is closely fol- lowed by calls t remove it.
However, there remains one

section of society whose *raison d’etre* is to take risks: the armed
forces. That is the nature of the military con- tract. So when men (and
increasingly women) go to war, it remains the case, now and then, that
some do not come back, some come back physically injured, and some come
back with invisible but often equally damag- ing psychiatric injuries.
The notion that a military opera- tion could ever be free of physical
casualties is some- thing devoutly to be wished for but unlikely to be
achieved, and so it is with psychiatric casualties.”

I have dwelt in some detail on the dialectics of PTSD not only because
it focuses attention on one of psychiatry’s many self-inflicted injuries
but also because it provides a useful prototype for illustrating the
ideo- logical pitfalls which have the potential to erode the cred-
ibility of psychiatry. We must resist the temptations of the bandwagon
effect and learn to manage pseudo- idealistic counter-transference,
which often tends to colour our vision.

   REFERENCES

1.  Lembcke J. The Splitting Image: Myth, Memory and Legacy of Vietnam.
    New York: New York University Press;1998.

2.  Scott WJ. The Politics of Readjustment: Vietnam Veter- ans Since the
    War. New York: Aide de Gruyter; 1993.

3.  Young A . The Harmony of Illusions: Inventing Post Trau- matic
    Stress Disorder. Princeton: Princeton Univ Press; 1995.

4.  Dean ET . Shook Over Hell: Post Traumatic Stress, Viet- nam and the
    Civil War. Cambridge: Harvard Univ Press; 1997.

5.  Scott WJ. PTSD in DSM III: a case in the politics of diagnosis and
    disease. Social Problems 1990: 37: 294-310.

6.  Pupavac V. Therapeutic Governance: The politics of psychosocial
    intervention and trauma risk management. Disasters 2001; 25: 358-72.

7.  Dawes RM . House of Cards: Psychology and Psycho- therapy Built on
    Myths. New York: The Free Press; 1997.

8.  Deahl M. Traumatic Stress: Is prevention better than cure? J R Soc
    Med, 1997; 91: 531-3.

9.  Dineen T. Manufacturing Victims: What the Psychology Industry is
    Doing to People. London: Constable; 1999.

10. Lee E. Post-abortion syndrome: reinventing abortion as a social
    problem. In: Nest J. Spreading Social Prob- lems: Studies in the
    Cross National Diffusion of Social Problems Claims. New York: Aldine
    Gruyter, Hawthorne; 1999.

11. Summerfield D . The invention of post-traumatic stress disorder and
    the social usefulness of a psychiatric cat- egory. B M J 2001; 322:
    95-8.

12. Kulka R, Schlenger W, Fairbank J. Trauma and the Viet- nam
    Generation: Report of Findings from the National Vietnam Veterans
    Readjustment Study. New York: Brunner/Mazel; 1990.

13. Burkett BG, Whitley G. Stolen Valor: How the Vietnam Generation was
    Robbed of its Heroes and Its History. Dallas Texas: Verity Press;
    1998.

14. Frueh BC, Elahi JD, Grubaugh AL. Documented com- bat exposure of US
    veterans seeking treatment for com- bat-related post traumatic
    stress disorder. B J Psychiatry 2005; 186: 467-72.

15. Marlowe D. Psychological and Psychosocial Conse- quences of Combat
    and Deployment. Santa Monica: Rand Corporation; 2000.

16. Wessely S, Jones E. Risk, psychiatry and the military. B J
    Psychiatry 2005; 186: 459-66.

17. Saldanha D, Goel DS, Kapoor S. Post traumatic stress disorder in
    polytrauma cases. Med J Armed Forces India 1996; 56: 140-2.

18. Satel S. For Some, The War Won’t End. Washington Post 2006 Mar 01.

19. Saskia SLM, Arntz A, Metsemakers FM. Symptoms of post-traumatic
    stress disorder after non-traumatic events: evidence from an open
    population study. B J Psychiatry 2005; 186: 494-9.

20. Breslau N, Chilcoat HD, Kessler RC. Trauma and post- traumatic
    stress disorder in the community: The Detroit Area Survey of Trauma.
    Arch Gen Psychiatry 1998; 55 : 626-32.

21. McNally R. PTSD: Issues and Controversies. Testimony before the
    Institute of Medicine PTSD Subcommittee, Washington: 2006.

22. Gurvits TV, Pletzger LJ, Lasko NB, Cannistraro PA, Tarhan AS,
    Gilbertson MW, et al. Subtle Neurologic Compro- mise as a
    Vulnerability Factor for Combat-Related Post- traumatic Stress
    Disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006; 63: 571-576.

23. Satel S. PTSD: Issues and Controversies. Testimony before the
    Institute of Medicine PTSD Subcommittee, Washington, 2006.

24. Saxena S. Personal communication. Disaster trauma from an
    international perspective: An overview of World Health Organization.
    [Online] 2006 [Cited on October 21, 2006] Available from URL:
    //http://www.disastermetal healthnj.com/newsletter.

25. Chandra V, Pandav R, Bhugra D. . Mental health and psycho social
    support after the tsunami observations across affected nations. Int
    Rev Psychiatry 2006; 18: 205-11.

26. A Political Debate On Stress Disorder. Washington Post, 2006: Mar
    01.

27. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Post traumatic
    stress disorder (PTSD). [Online] 2006 [Cited on May 8, 2006].
    Available from: URL://http:// `www.iom.edu. <http://www.iom.edu/>`__
