   JPPS 2006; 3(2): 90-92 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

CLINICAL MONITORING OF PATEINTS ON CLOZAPINE

   M.Gul, A Nihgam, N Broughton

ABSTRACT
========

   **Objective:** To find out if the Maudsley Guidelines for clinical
   monitoring of the patients on Clozapine has been followed or not and
   association of Clozapine with Diabetes Mellitus and Hyperlipidemia.

   **Design:** Descriptive observational study.

   **Place & Duration of Study:** Study was carried out at Three Bridges
   Unit Ealing Hospital West London Mental Health NHS Trust London .The
   data was collected between Dec 2005 & Jan 2006.

   **Subjects & Methods:** Study includes all the in-patient at the time
   of Data Collection started on Clozapine since Sept 1999.Pateints
   details were obtained from Clozapine Clinic at Three Bridges Unit
   Ealing Hospital .Data was collected by looking at patient’s blood
   results retrospectively via an access to Central Path Lab Data system
   at Ealing Hospital.

   **Results:** The total number of patients was 60 out of which 52 were
   males and 8 were females. 3.33% of the sample was less than 25 years
   old, 45% were between 25-40, 48.3% were between 40-60 and 3.33% were
   above 60 years of age. There were 41.67% white British, 13.33% Black
   British, 10% British Asians while the rest 35% were of miscellaneous
   ethnic origin. The results signify the importance of following the
   Maudsley guide lines in clinical monitoring of patients on Clozapine.
   It also supports the previous established studies of association of
   Clozapine with Hyperglycemia1.

   **Conclusion:** All patients receiving Clozapine should be regular
   monitored for changes in weight, lipid, and glucose levels so that
   appropriate preventive and therapeutic measures can be initiated.

   **Key words:** Clinical monitoring, Clozapine, Diabetes mellitus,
   Hyperlipidemia.

INTRODUCTION
============

Clozapine has been known to be associated with high blood sugar and
raised lipid level, as like any other second generation Anti-psychotic
drugs1. Study consis- tent with previous established data suggests that
Olanzapine, Clozapine and some conventional antipsychotics appear to
increase the risk of acquiring or exacerbating type 2 diabetes and the
effect may vary with drugs². Hyperglycemia and type 2 diabetes melli-
tus are more common in schizophrenia than in general population.
Glucoregulatory abnormalities have also been associated with the use of
antipsychotic medica- tions themselves. Clozapine –treated patients have
sig- nificant glucose elevation at fasting and 75 minutes af- ter load
in comparison with patients receiving typical

   **M. Gul,** Substance Misuse Service St Marys Hospital Central &
   North West London NHS Trust. E-mail: m.gul@nhs.net

   **A Nigam,** Forensic Services Broad Moor Hospital West Lon- don
   Mental Health NHS Trust

   **N Broughton,** R.S.U Forensic Service Ealing Hospital West London
   Mental Health NHS Trust.

   **Correspondence: Dr. M. Gul**

   antipsychotics and untreated control subjects³. Reports from a 10
   year naturalistic study support the hypothesis that Clozapine-treated
   patients appears to be at risk fro death from cardiovascular disease
   secondary to Clozapine associated medical disorders such as obe- sity
   , diabetes , hypertension and Hyperlipidemia4.

Increasing numbers of reports concerning diabetes,ketoacidosis,
hyperglycemia, and lipid dysregulation in patients treated with second
generation(or atypical ) antipsychotics have raised con- cerns about the
possible association between these metabolic effects and treatment with
these medication. Atypical antipsychotics offer significant improvements
over older, conventional antipsychotic agents. However, recently the
newer agents have been linked to medical morbidity including
hyperglycaemia, diabetes mellitus, bodyweight gain and abnormal lipid
levels. Even more concerning, because of a significant risk of death,
there have been numerous case reports of patients treated with Clozapine
or Olanzapine developing diabetic Ke- toacidosis shortly after
initiation of the drug. Much of the information concerning the medical
morbidity of diabe- tes mellitus is based on case reports, retrospective
chart reviews, naturalistic studies and cross-sectional stud-

   ies. While definitive studies have yet to be reported, mounting
   evidence suggests that the atypical antipsy- chotic agents,
   particularly Clozapine and Olanzapine, may significantly impair
   glucose metabolism and in- crease the risk of diabetes in patients
   with schizophre- nia. Diabetic Ketoacidosis, although it appears to
   be uncommon, is of great concern secondary to the risk of death5\ *.*

Lindenmayer et al found that Clozapine, Olanzapine, and Haloperidol were
associated with an increase in plasma glucose level, and Clozapine and
Olanzapine were associated with an increase in cho- lesterol level1.

In view of these concerns the regular monitoring of these parameters is
suggested by various guidelines for the patients on atypical
antipsychotics. Maudsley Guidelines also require monitoring the lipid
and sugar levels for those on Clozapine. A clinical audit was initi-
ated at R.S.U (Regional Secure Unit) Ealing Hospital to find out the
adherence to Maudsley Guide Lines in clini- cal monitoring of
in-patients started on Clozapine since Sept 1996 and also the point
prevalence of Hyperlipi- demia as well blood glucose abnormalities among
these patients.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS
====================

The total number of in-patients who were started on Clozapine at
Regional Secure Unit Ealing Hospital West London Mental Health NHS Trust
since Sept 1996 was 60. Details of the patient were obtained from On-
Site Clozapine Clinic which facilitate the regular blood monitoring of
patients on Clozapine .Access to the pa- tient blood results was
arranged through Path Lab Ealing Hospital .The Path Lab at Ealing
Hospital has the blood results of all the patient on their Data system
since Sept 1996. Blood results were searched on the system with help of
patient’s demographic details which included age, gender, date of birth,
hospital number and date they were started on Clozapine.

Maudsley Guidelines was laid down as base for Clinical Monitoring of
patients on Clozapine. Table 1 shows Maudsley Guidelines for clinical
monitoring of patients on Clozapine.As data was collected from the Path
Data System, So Ethic Committee approval was not sought .Data was
collected in an anonymous way and analysed.

RESULTS
=======

   The data showed that all of the patients F.B.C was analysed before
   they were started on Clozapine. Ac- cording to the national guide
   lines all the pharmacists and physicians were registered .As part of
   the baseline monitoring, none of the patient fasting blood sugar was
   requested while in 10% of the cases random blood sugar was requested
   which was with in the reference range. HBA1C and lipid level was
   requested in 2% and 5% of

   Table 1

   Maudsley Guide lines for Clinical Monitoring of Patients on
   Clozapine.

   the cases respectively which were with in the reference range. In 24%
   of the patients started on Clozapine LFTs & U&E was requested, as
   part of the baseline due to lack to motivation and insight
   monitoring.

   At the first month only 5% of the patient blood sample was sent for
   random blood sugar and were reported to be in the normal range.

At three months since started on Clozapine only 1.6% of the patient’s
blood was analysed for the lipid level. The results were norma5% of the
patients lipid level was requested at 6th month and all of them had
raised lipid level which supports the previous establish studies of
association of Clozapine with increase cho- lesterol level(Lindenmayer
et all JP 2003) .Two patients HBA1C was requested, and one of them was
diagnosed with diabetes mellitus.

At ninth month only 13.33 % of the patient’s lipids level were requested
and out of those 77.5% were re- ported to be suffering from
Hyperlipidemia.

After a year since started on Clozapine two pa- tients blood were
requested for lipid level. Both of them were reported back with
Hyperlipidemia .Three patients’ blood was requested for glycated
Haemoglobin, and one of them was reported to be diagnosed with diabetes
mellitus. Liver function Test was requested in only 25% of the patients.

DISCUSSION
==========

Although Maudsley guidelines require regular monitoring of patients
blood glucose and other a pa- rameters at regular intervals, in this
study a surprisingly low level of adherence to these guidelines was
found.

   None of the patients had fasting blood levels. Similarly in the first
   month only 5% of the patient blood sample was sent for random blood
   sugar. At three months since being started on Clozapine only 1.6% of
   the patient’s blood was analysed for the lipid level. Considering the
   extent of lipid and glucose abnormalities found in the patients on
   Clozapine adherence to the Guideline is vitally important. This lack
   of adherence may be due to lack of awareness or the practical
   difficulties associated with adherence to guidelines in clinical
   practice. This needs to be considered in future formulation of such
   guidelines

This study also highlights the importance of ad- hering clinical
guidelines. We found significant number of lipid and blood glucose
abnormalities in those tested for these. Although the numbers are very
small, more than two third of the patients had hyperlipidemia and one in
three patients tested for glycated Haemoglobin had diabetes Mellitus.
Our data seem to support the already established studies on association
of Clozapine with diabetes mellitus and Hyperlipidemia. Although not
scientifically proven, available evidence seems to indi- cate Clozapine
and Olanzapine may have a high pro- pensity to induce diabetes compared
with other atypical antipsychotic drugs6. As we didn’t try to find out
about other possible risk factors for diabetes mellitus and Hy-
perlipidemia in our patient sample, but the data does signify the
importance of clinical monitoring of patients on Clozapine for diabetes
mellitus and Hyperlipidemia. In a comparative study, both nonobese
Clozapine & Olanzapine treated groups displayed significant insulin
resistance and impairment of glucose effectiveness com- pared with
risperidone treated subjects7. In a retrospec- tive study done at
department of Veterans Affairs Out patient mental health clinic in the
Mid-Atlantic region, Of the Clozapine cases without a history of
diabetes/ hyperglycaemia, 27.7% developed diabetes after initia- tion of
Clozapine8. As Clozapine is usually initiated to treat the patients with
Schizophrenia after they have been tried on other antipsychotics , it
becomes more important to closely monitor these patients for any
metabolic dysregulation . Exposure to multiple second generation
antipsychotics or Clozapine or Quetiapine significantly increased the
risk of treatment emergent diabetes mellitus9.

CONCLUSION
==========

The data signify the importance of following the Maudsley Guidelines for
clinical monitoring of patients

on Clozapine .All patients receiving Clozapine should be regular
monitored for changes in weight , lipid, and glucose levels so that
appropriate preventive and thera- peutic measures can be initiated .This
is specially im- portant in psychiatric services as the patient with
mental illness often fail to communicate their symptoms with the health
professionals due to lack to motivation and in- sight. It is vital for
the treating physician to monitor their patients for any potential
health problems.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Lindenmayer JP, Czobor P, Volavka J, Citrome L, Sheitman B, McEvoy
   JP, et al. Changes in glucose and Cholesterol levels in patients with
   Schizophrenia treated with typical or atypical antipsychotic. Am J
   Psychiatry 2003; 160:290-6.

2. Gianfrancesco FD , Grogg Al , Mahmoud RA , Wang RH, Nasrallha HA.
   Differential effects of risperidone , Olanzapine , Clozapine , and
   Conventional antipsychotics on type 2 diabetes :Finding from a large
   health plan database. J Clin Psychiatrt 2002; 63: 920-30.

3. Newcomer JW , Haupt DW , Fucetola R , Melson AK , Schweiger JA ,
   Cooper BP , et al. Abnormalities in glucose regulation during
   antipsychotic treat- ment of Schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiat 2002;
   59: 337-45.

4. Henderson DC ,Nguyen DD, Copeland PM, Hayden DL , Borba CP, Louie PM,
   et al. Clozapine , diabetes mellitus ,Hyperlipidemia and
   Cardiovascular risks and mortality :results of a 10 years
   naturalistic study. J Clin Psychiatry 2005; 66:1116-21.

5. Henderson DC. Atypical Antipsychotic-Induced Diabe- tes Mellitus: How
   Strong is the Evidence? CNS Drugs 2002; 16: 77-89.

6. Amanth J, Kolli S. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2005;1: 55-68.

7. Henderson DC, Cagliero E , Copeland PM, Borba CP, Evins E, Hayden D,
   et al. Glucose metabolism in patients with Schizophrenia treated with
   atypical antipsychotic agents: a frequently sampled intravenous
   glucose toler- ance test and minimal model analysis .Arch Gen Psy-
   chiatry 2005; 62:19-28.

8. Miller MJ , Molla PM. Prevalence of Diabetes Mellitus in Patients
   receiving Depot Neuroleptics or Clozapine. Arch Psychiat Nurs
   2005;19: 30-4.

9. Citrome L, Jaffe A , Levine J , Allingham B, Robinson J. Relationship
   between antipsychotic medication treat- ment and new cases of
   diabetes among psychiatric patients. Psychiat Serv 2004; 55:1006-13.
