JPPS 2007; 4(2): 76-77 DEBATE

CURRICULUM OF BEHAVIOURAL SCIENCES AND

   PSYCHIATRY FOR MEDICAL STUDENTS OF PAKISTAN: AN OUTLINE

Zahid Nazar, Muhmmad Irfan, Muhammad Shafique

ABSTRACT
========

Mental, behavioral and social health problems are an increasing part of
the health burden on all part of the globe. Countries like Pakistan are
most affected because they are plagued by infectious diseases and
chronic medical conditions. At the same time they are being afflicted by
growing burden of mental health diseases and new social pathologies.
Equally disastrous scenario is that we have great shortage of
psychiatrists, which is not going to change in near future. In the light
of above findings a curriculum of behavioral sciences including
psychiatry for undergraduate medical students of Pakistan is outlined
here.

**Key words:** Mental Health, Behavioral Sciences, Curriculum, Primary
Physicians

INTRODUCTION
============

Mental health problems impose a heavy burden of sufferings at many
levels the individual their families their communities and the health
services 1. A report by the world bank in 1993 concluded that mental
health problems world- wide accounted for 8.1% of the global burden of
disease( as measured by disability adjusted life years)2. The loss of
productivity and the economic costs of psychiatric disorders are
enormous. Despite this immense burden of psychiatric ill health, mental
health education and services are often neglected and poorly resourced
in Pakistan. Like most of the non-western countries there is a great
shortage of psychiatrists. Few that we have are largely based in the
cities and it is not expected that this scenario will change
significantly in the near future.

Primary care physicians are the one who can ef- fectively prevent,
identify, treat, and intervene the dis- ease at community level 3,4. As
a short term policy it will be a cost effective approach for peculiar
needs of Paki- stan. But it is ironic that the prospectus of majority of
Medical colleges of Pakistan is conspicuous by the ab- sence of
behavioral sciences curriculum.

Table 1 shows is an outline of curriculum and top- ics to be divided in
various professionals of M.B.B.S course according to Pakistan Medical
and Dental Coun- cil of Pakistan. The emphasis in this curriculum is on
collaboration and integration with various Departments. This will make
the communication easier which will be helpful in generating consensus
about mental health and its implications.

At the end of 2nd year, students will appreciate the biopsychosocial
model of health and disease. The bio-

   **Zahid Nazar**, Assistant Professor, Department of Psychiatry, PGMI,
   Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan

   **Muhammad Irfan**, Department of Psychiatry, PGMI, Lady Reading
   Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan

   **Muhammad Shafique**, Professor, Shafique Psychiatric Hos- pital,
   Peshawar, Pakistan

   **Correspondence: Dr. Zahid Nazar**

Table 1

   1st and 2nd Year Course of Behavioural Science and Psychiatry

   Respectively

+--------+---------------------------------+--------------------------+
|        | **Behavioural Sciences**        | **Psychiatry**           |
+========+=================================+==========================+
| 1st    | 1. Human Development            | 1. Introduction to       |
| Year   |                                 |    mental health         |
|        | 2. Perception and awareness     |                          |
|        |                                 | 2. Conflict, ad-         |
|        | 3. Learning, thinking           |    justment and mental   |
|        |                                 |    health                |
|        | 4. Motivation and emotions      |                          |
|        |                                 | 3. Psychopatho- logy     |
|        | 5. Individual behavior and      |    (mechan- ism,         |
|        |    personality                  |    frustration           |
|        |                                 |                          |
|        | 6. Biological correlates and    |                          |
|        |    behavioral medicine          |                          |
+--------+---------------------------------+--------------------------+
|        | A minimum of 25 hours should be | (Medicine, der-          |
|        | allotted to these topic.        | matology, psy- chiatry;  |
|        |                                 | 33 hrs)                  |
+--------+---------------------------------+--------------------------+
| 2nd    | 1. Communication and            | 1. Personality           |
| Year   |    interaction                  |    assessment            |
|        |                                 |                          |
|        | 2. Group process                | 2. Intelligence          |
|        |                                 |    assessment            |
|        | 3. Family and community         |                          |
|        |                                 | 3. Counseling            |
|        | 4. Socio-cultural patterns      |                          |
|        |                                 |                          |
|        | 5. Human eco-system             |                          |
|        |                                 |                          |
|        | 6. Health care system           |                          |
+--------+---------------------------------+--------------------------+
|        | During second year following    | (Medicine, der-          |
|        | areas should be taught to be    | matology, psy- chiatry   |
|        | covered in 25 hours             | (70 hrs)                 |
+--------+---------------------------------+--------------------------+

logical system emphasis the anatomical, structural and molecular
substrate of disease and its effect on the pa- tients biological
functioning. The psychological system emphasis the effects of
psychodynamic factors, motiva- tion and personality on the experience of
illness and the reaction to it, and the social system emphasizes cul-

tural, environment and familial influences on the expres- sion and the
expenses of illness5.

Following is an outline of topics to be covered in clinical years (3rd
Final Year) MBBS.

A. .. rubric:: CURRICULUM OF PSYCHIATRY THIRD YEAR
      :name: curriculum-of-psychiatry-third-year

   1. Introduction to psychopharmacology of central nervous system drugs
         (C.N.S).

   2. Forensic psychiatry.

   3. Mental health portion of community medicine. (Medicine,
         dermatology, psychiatry; 143 Hrs)

These topics will be prepared in collaboration with concerned basic
sciences departments. With the help of Dept; of pharmacology, it will
generate sound prescribL.â€™1g behavior of psychotropic medicine among
students. With the help of forensic department topics of forensic
psychiatry will be prepared after which students will appreciate the
practice of psychiatry in relation to law. With collaboration of
Community Medicine Depart- ment, students will understand the importance
of mental health in community and its preventive aspects.

B. .. rubric:: CURRICULUM OF PSYCHIATRY FOURTH YEAR
      :name: curriculum-of-psychiatry-fourth-year

   1. Prevalence, etiology, classification of psychiatric illness.

   2. Clinical interview.

   3. Delirium, dementia.

   4. Schizophrenia.

   5. Affective disorder

   6. Neurotic disorder.

   7. Personally disorder

   8. Drug dependence and rehabilitation Medicine, dermatology,
         psychiatry; 255 Hrs)

At fourth year apart from theoretical aspects of psychiatry, training in
ward should be compulsory for all students.

CURRICULUM OF PSYCHIATRY FINAL YEAR
===================================

i)   PSYCHIATRIC PROBLEMS IN GENERAL HOSPITAL

     1.  Psychological reaction to physical illness.

     2.  Organic causes of psychiatric disorder.

     3.  Organic causes of affective disorder.

     4.  Puerperal psychiatric disorder.

     5.  Attempted suicide (as psychiatric emer- gency)

     6.  Genetic/HIV counseling.

     7.  Delirium

     8.  Hypochondriasis

     9.  Dysmorphophobia.

     10. Factitious disorder, malingering, sick role and ill1iess
            behavior.

ii)  SUBSTANCE ABUSE

     1. Pre-operative mental state and early out- come.

     2. Mutilating surgery

iii) EATING DISORDERS

     1. Mental retardation

     2. Nocturnal enuresis, school refusal, child abuse

In final year these topic should be covered with the help of department
of surgery, medicine, pediatrics and gynecology and obstetrics. The
students will appre- ciate the importance of consultation and liaison
psychi- atric services in general hospital and later in general
practice. The involvement of these departments will not only help the
students to appreciate psychiatry and men- tal health problem in overall
medical context, but will also help other departments to be involved
closely in mental health care.

At the end of their MBBS training these adequately trained primary care
physicians will identify and man- age primary psychiatric disorder. They
will be able to intervene skillfully in situations of domestic violence,
sui- cidal behavior or substance abuse, all of which are more common in
primary care settings1. With more compre- hensive treatment approach to
family network and com- munity they can avoid harmful medicalization of
social problems. For example, diagnosis a women with major depression
and treating it with a medication is inad- equate if a drug depended
husband is contributing to her distress as drugs are expensive component
of out patient treatment, it will also improve the psychotropic drug
prescribing behavior of physicians. Many neuro- psychiatric are chronic
conditions associated with sig- nificant disability such as impaired
occupational and social functioning with the help of family physicians
af- fordable, humane and effective community based psy- chosocial
rehabilitation programs can sustain patients in family and work
setting1. They will prove to form a significant bridge between general
health status and mental health system.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Desjarlais R, Eisenberg L, Good B, Kleinman A. World Mental Health
   Problems and Priorities in Low- Income Countries. New York Oxford
   University Press, 1996.

2. World Bank. Global economic prospects and the devel- oping countries.
   Washington, D.C.: World Bank; 1995.

3. Simon G, Gater R, Kisely S, Piccinelli M. Somatic symp- toms of
   distress: an international primary care study. Psychosom Med 1996;
   58: 481-8.

4. Leon AC , Olfson M, Weissman MM, Portera L, Fireman BH, Blacklow RS,
   et al. Brief screens for mental disor- ders in primary care. J Gen
   Intern Med 1996; 11: 426-30.

5. Engel GL. The clinical application of the biopsychosocial model. Am J
   Psychiatry 1980; 137:535-44.
