   JPPS 2008; 5(2): 72-75 REVIEW ARTICLE

ADDICTION WITH INTERNET AND MOBILE: AN OVERVIEW

   Unaiza Niaz

ABSTRACT
========

   The mental health services discovered Internet Addiction (IA) and
   Pathological Internet Use (PIU) during the mid 1990s. Recent research
   shows that some users of the Internet spend so much time logged on,
   that their personal and/or professional life suffers. This finding is
   substantiated by numerous anec- dotal accounts of people becoming
   captivated on on-line interactivity, accounts that have disseminated
   in on-line discussions as well as in real life settings.

   **Key words:** Addiction, Internet, Mobile, Pakistan.

INTRODUCTION
============

The term Internet Addiction Disorder, was first pro- posed by Ivan
Goldberg for pathological, compulsive Internet usage1. The criteria for
this disorder are based on similar criteria for substance abuse
disorders in the DSM-IV. It is ironic that Goldberg was not serious
about proposing this as an official diagnostic category, yet this term
has been used extensively. Goldberg had publicly reiterated that he
posted the information on Internet Ad- diction Disorder as a hoax, using
a list of symptoms de- duced from the DSM diagnoses of Substance Abuse
and Compulsive Gambling. Nevertheless, IAD has taken on a life of its
own. Goldberg recently revised his sug- gestion to change the term for
this condition to Patho- logical Computer Use, and changed several of
the crite- ria1.

   Pathological Computer Use Disorder is a disorder in which people
   overuse computers to the extent that (1 and/or 2):

1. Such a use causes them distress;

2. Such a use has a detrimental effect on their physi- cal,
      psychological, interpersonal, marital, eco- nomic, or social
      functioning.

..

   Jerald Block proposed in a recent editorial in the March 2008
   American Journal of Psychiatry calling for inclusion of IAD in the
   upcoming DSM-V, due out in 2012, the American Medical Association
   decided not to rec- ommend that the diagnosis be added. Block states
   about 86% of those diagnosed with IAD have some other men- tal
   disease2.

   **Correspondence:**

   **Dr. Unaiza Niaz,** MD, DPM, FRCPsych. Director, Institute of
   Psycho-trauma Pakistan. Chair, Section on Women Mental Health, World
   Psychiatric Association & Adjunct Prof of Be- havioral Sciences,
   University of Health Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan.

   E-mail: drunaiza@gmail.com

INTERNET ADDICTION IN THE DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
=============================================

In the developed countries technological devel- opments have been shown
to add to mental health prob- lems2. Most of the empirical work has
indicated that tele- vision watching reduces social involvement,
physical activity, mental health, and promotes boredom, and un-
happiness. Time displacement (time not spent socially engaged) is
identified as the major contributory factor of negative effects. Lonely
people they report, watch tele- vision more than others,

Young KS (1998) point out the trend associated with the Citizen’s Band
(CB) Radio as a similar techno- logical fascination (and potentially
addictive agent) as the Internet (in terms of such qualities as inter-
active- ness and anonymity)3,4. Capacity of the Internet Express
Maladaptive Behaviors Life Project, has tracked the in- crease of
Internet usage in the United States, from just under half of American
adults in 2000 to about 59% of adults at the end of 2002. Developing
trends on patho- logical Internet use suggest that nearly six percent of
those online users suffer from Internet addiction5.

Initial impressions of the excessive computer user, was of a young,
computer savvy, introverted, object-ori- ented male. This belief was
challenged by Young KS (1998) who found that 61 percent of her survey
respon- dents were women3, 4, 6. Older persons and women are usually
drawn to the socially interactive aspects of the Internet (conversation
groups), while younger patients and men are more likely to access the
interactive role playing games and pornography. Bai et al (2000) found
67 percent of Internet addicts to be women, 84 percent of those single,
and 63 percent college educated7. Ap- proximately, 10% of Americans have
internet addiction3.

   **Obsessive internet use** needs to be recognized as a clinical
   disorder. Sufferers spend unhealthy amounts of time playing online
   games, viewing pornography or e- mailing8. Four common symptoms are:
   They forget to

   eat and sleep; they need more advanced technology or more hours
   online as they develop ‘resistance’ to the pleasure given by their
   current system; if they are de- prived of their computer, they
   experience genuine with- drawal symptoms; And in common with other
   addictions, the victims also begin to have more arguments, to suffer
   fatigue, to get lower marks in tests and to feel isolated from
   society.

**Cyber-relationships or Cyber-affairs,** involve individu- als married
or unmarried who form on-line love relation- ships which may or may not
develop into real-life affairs. The user may carry on as many of these
affairs as de- sired in virtual safety and at the same time without
leav- ing the house or office9. Often these innocent chat room
affiliations can turn into passionate cyber-affairs, grow- ing into
intense mutual erotic dialogue (cyber-sex) with text-based fantasies

Earlier research data on pathological Internet use shows that it is
associated with significant psychosocial impairment such as increased
depression, relationship friction, academic failure, financial debt, and
often job loss3, 4, 10-14.

MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES RELATED TO THE USE OF INTERNET AND MOBILE
==============================================================

   PHONES IN THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Mental Health of men and women in the develop- ing countries are also
falling prey to these addictions2. Some of the most interesting research
on Internet addic- tion has been published in South Korea. After a
series of 10 cardiopulmonary-related deaths in Internet cafés15, and a
game-related murder16, South Korea considers Internet addiction one of
its most serious public health issues17. In 2006, the South Korean
government esti- mated that approximately 210,000 South Korean chil-
dren (2.1%; ages 6–19) were afflicted and required treat- ment. About
80% of those needing treatment often need psychotropic medications, and
about 20% to 24% possi- bly required hospitalization

China too is getting in the grip of globalization, Tao Ran, Director of
Addiction Medicine at Beijing Mili- tary Region Central Hospital,
reported 13.7% of Chi- nese adolescent Internet users meet Internet
addiction diagnostic criteria, (about ten million teenagers). As a
result, in 2007 China began restricting computer game use; current laws
now discourage more than 3 hours of daily game use18.

SCENARIO IN PAKISTAN
====================

In Pakistan, in the last few years, addiction to com- munication
technology is increasingly becoming a prob- lem. Psychiatrists can
report dozens of histories of pa- tients that were shattered by an
overwhelming compul- sion to use the mobile phones, surf the Net play
cyber games, or chat with distant and invisible neighbors in the
virtual, timeless, world of Cyberspace.

Clinical Presentations
======================

A substantial number of young married, working women have reported to
private psychiatric clinic of au- thor, in the last 5 years in Karachi,
Pakistan. These women came in emergency, in a state of acute distress,
(anxiety, panic and depression, with suicidal preoccupations,) following
love affairs on internet or mobile phones. They were all feeling lonely
bored or depressed at the time, and chatting on internet or mobiles to
unknown persons or acquaintances, (as a relief from loneliness, boredom
or as a” game”) developed into sharing their lives, mis- eries and
dissatisfaction in their intimate relationships. Most of the men, who
chatted with these women, were single, or engaged, and a few married,
who “professed undying love, but were not prepared for marriage.” Men on
internet usually chose women, who gave the impres- sion of being
depressed and desperately lonely, inde- pendent working married women.

The taboo of relations out of family, traditional and religious
restrictions, seem to dwindle in the virtual world of internet. Boredom,
loneliness and at times lack of emotional support in the family were the
common causes of Internet/mobile, phone affairs in women. But strong
moral values, expectations of family and their responsi- bility towards
marriage and children soon led to guilt and remorse, severe anxiety and
depression. Interest- ingly none of the married women wanted to break up
their marriages; they thought it was a harmless game/ pastime, or a
means to get emotional support without obligations. Intriguingly some of
them even met their internet men friends and got into physical
relationships. (Such extramarital behaviors until recently were ex-
tremely rare in Pakistan.)

Recently, a dozen young school and college girls were brought to
author’s clinic by parents, for mobile addiction. All these girls had
failing grades, reported to be mostly absent from their classes,
spending most of the time chatting on mobile phones or sending text mes-
sages to their friends(mostly boys) .They were irritable, rude and
belligerent ,in their behavior; and often spent all night talking on
phones. Antisocial behaviors like stealing money, roaming around with
boyfriends during school or college hours & precocious sexual
activities, were fairly common in these girls.

A fair number of male patients were also referred by their wives, in
private practice of the author for addic- tion to internet sex-sites.
Briefly, their wives had brought them for treatment for their addiction
as these men sought sexual satisfaction on internet. All these men over
a pe- riod of time had completely lost interest in their wives as sexual
partners, and spent long hours on internet /cyber sex. They had lost
interest in work and their family. Most of these men lost their jobs, as
they were unable to work during the day; consequently added financial
stress, lead to further family conflict and in a few cases led to
divorce/family breakup.

Diagnostic Features
===================

Internet addiction appears to be a common disor- der that merits
inclusion in DSM-V. Conceptually, the di- agnosis is a
compulsive-impulsive spectrum disorder that involves online and/or
offline computer usage15, 16 and consists of at least three subtypes:
excessive gam- ing, sexual preoccupations, and e-mail/text messaging17.
All of the variants share the following four components:

1) **Excessive use,** often associated with a loss of sense of time or a
      neglect of basic drives

2) **Withdrawal,** including feelings of anger, tension, and/or
   depression when the computer is inacces- sible

3) **Tolerance,** including the need for better computer equipment, more
   software, or more hours of use, and

4) **Negative repercussions,** including arguments, ly- ing, poor
   achievement, social isolation, and fa- tigue16, 17.

..

   Kimberly Young used the following criteria for as- sessing IAD in a
   large initial study of this problem:

1.  Do you feel preoccupied with the Internet or on- line services and
       think about it while off line?

2.  Do you feel a need to spend more and more time on line to achieve
       satisfaction?

3.  Are you unable to control your on-line use?

4.  Do you feel restless or irritable when attempting to cut down or
       stop your on-line use?

5.  Do you go on line to escape problems or relieve feelings such as
       helplessness, guilt, anxiety or depression?

6.  Do you lie to family members or friends to conceal how often and how
       long you stay on-line?

7.  Do you risk the loss of a significant relationship, job, or
       educational or career opportunity because of your on-line use?

8.  Do you keep returning even after spending too much money on on-line
       fees?

9.  Do you go through withdrawal when off line, such as increased
       depression, moodiness, or irritabil- ity?

10. Do you stay on line longer than originally inten ded? 18

TREATMENT
=========

Treatment of any behavioral addiction is con- ducted by a thorough
assessment of the unique behav- ioral reinforcement patterns contained
in any individual case. There is a severe lack of psychologists that are
familiar enough with the specific types of Internet social

interactions to be qualified to formulate a treatment plan to address
IAD.

Total abstinence is a reasonable “cure”(following the general caveat
that what causes a problem is a prob- lem). Most patients will not be
agreeable to that solu- tion, as so many of them are from student
community or working in jobs, where the use of the Internet to accom-
plish research or professional goals is a requisite, and not an option.
It is wiser then to offer the patient with IAD a treatment plan of
recovery like going on a diet (like a twelve step group that addresses
eating disorders) 19.

Treatment in principle includes, various inventions with a primary focus
on techniques from cognitive be- havioral and interpersonal
psychotherapy to regulate and moderate internet use and to attend to
underlying psychosocial issues often coexistent with this addiction (for
example, mood disorders, marital dissatisfaction, social phobia, job
burnout, childhood sexual abuse). Psychopharmacological treatment is
recommended in some cases.

And finally, it should be emphasized that methodi- cal evaluations that
assess computer usage among pa- tients are essential to further
understanding of the role of compulsive use of the internet in other
established addictions (such as drug addiction, alcoholism or sexual
compulsivity) and psychiatric disorders (for instant, major depression,
bipolar disorder, attention deficit disorder).

Internet addiction is reported by some research- ers, to be resistant to
treatment, entails significant risks, and has high relapse rates8.

CONCLUSION
==========

The obsessive internet or mobile use must be con- sidered a public
health problem. Mental health profes- sionals in Pakistan need to raise
the awareness about the dangers associated with excessive Internet use.
Two groups are at apparently at the greatest risk from Internet
addiction disorder. The first are adolescents/young adults. And
astonishingly, the second group is of women and men in the age range of
30-40. Mental health pro- fessionals in schools/colleges and workplaces
should be made aware of the risks of Internet addiction.

It is critical that mental health professionals help people realize
their level of dependency or addiction, and offer expert evaluation,
diagnosis & management of this disabling disorder, which is, socially
restrictive, and clearly affects the quality of life of these
individuals. Therapists must be taught to screen for this disorder,
create awareness in the media, besides their medical colleagues,
paramedical staff and the primary care phy- sicians to control this
growing epidemic in our part of the world.

Technological advancements in communication tools have opened a new
domain in social interactivity. Addiction to, on-line pornography and
interpersonal

   cyber-sex, is still not addressed appropriately, even in the West.
   Clinicians must be aware that anything that can safely, quickly, and
   completely satisfy such a basic human desire is bound to be addictive
   to some.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Goldberg I. Internet Addiction. [Online] 1996 [Cited on 2008, Oct 09]
   Available from: URL://http:

..

   //www-usr.rider.edu/~suler/psycyber/supportgp. html.

2.  Kraut R, Lundmark V, Patterson M, Kiesler S, Mukopadhyay T, Scherlis
    W. Internet paradox: A social technology that reduces social
    involvement and psy- chological well-being? American Psychologist
    1998; 53: 1017-31.

3.  Young KS. Internet addiction: The emergence of a new clinical
    disorder. Cyber Psychology and Behavior 1998; 1: 237-44.

4.  Young KS. Caught in the Net: How to recognize the signs of Internet
    addiction and a winning strategy for recovery. New York: John Wiley
    & Sons, 1998.

5.  Greenfield DN. Virtual Addiction: Sometimes New Tech- nology Can
    Create New Problems. Paper presented at the 1999 meeting of the
    American Psychological Asso- ciation, Boston, MA. August 21, 1999.

6.  Griffiths M. Does Internet and computer addiction exist? Some case
    study evidence. Paper presented at the 105th annual meeting of the
    American Psychological Association, Chicago, IL. August 15, 1997.

7.  Bai YM, Lin CC, Chen JY. Internet addiction disorder among clients
    of a virtual clinic. Psychiatric Services 2001; 52: 1397.

8.  Block JJ. Issues for DSM-V: Internet Addiction. Am J Psychiatry
    2008; 165:306-7.

9.  Brent DA, Baugher M, Bridge J, Chen T, Chiappetta L. Age- and
    sex-related risk factors for adolescent suicide. J Am Acad Child
    Adolesc Psychiatry 1999; 38: 1497-505.

10. Young KS. What makes the internet addictive: Potential explanations
    for Pathological internet use. [Online] 2002 [Cited on 2008, Oct 01]
    Available from: URL://http://
    `www.netaddiction.com/articles/habitforming.htm. <http://www.netaddiction.com/articles/habitforming.htm>`__

11. Griffiths M. Sex on the internet: Observations and impli- cations
    for internet sex addiction. J Sex Res 2001; 38: 333-42.

12. Krant R, Patterson M, Lundmark V, Kiesler S, Mukopadhyay T, Scherlis
    W. Internet Paradox: A social technology that reduces social
    involvement and psychological well-being? Am Psychologist 1998; 53:
    1017-31.

13. Morahn-Martin J. Incidence and correlates of pathologi- cal Internet
    use. Paper presented at the 105th annual meeting of the American
    Psychological Association, Chicago, IL. August 18, 1997.

14. Scherer K. College life online: Healthy and unhealthy Internet use.
    J Coll Dev 1997; 38: 655-65.

15. Choi YH. Advancement of IT and seriousness of youth Internet
    addiction. In: International Symposium on the Counseling and
    Treatment of Youth Internet Addiction. Seoul, Korea, National Youth
    Commission, 2007: 20.

16. Koh YS. Development and application of K-Scale as diagnostic scale
    for Korean Internet addiction. In: Inter- national Symposium on the
    Counseling and Treatment of Youth Internet Addiction. Seoul, Korea,
    National Youth Commission, 2007: 294.

17. Ahn DH. Korean policy on treatment and rehabilitation for
    adolescents’ Internet addiction. In: International Sym- posium on
    the Counseling and Treatment of Youth Internet Addiction. Seoul,
    Korea, National Youth Com- mission, 2007: 49.

18. Young KS. Cyber-disorders: the mental illness concern for the
    millennium. Paper presented at the 108th annual meeting of the
    American Psychological Association, Boston, MA. August 21, 1999.
    Available from: URL://
    `http://www.netaddiction.com/articles/articles.htm. <http://www.netaddiction.com/articles/articles.htm>`__

19. Orzack MH. Information Internet addiction. [Online] 1996 [Cited on
    2008, Aug 01] Available from: URL://http://
    `www.cmhc.com/mlists/research. <http://www.cmhc.com/mlists/research>`__
