ABSTRACT
========

   **The Concept And Epidemiology Of Dhat Syndrome**

   Ajit Avasthi,Om Prakash Jhirwal

Culture bound syndromes refer to prevalence of some syndromes in
specific cultures. Dhat syndrome (semen loss related psychological
distress) is a culture- bound entity seen in natives of Indian
sub-continent. Due to its clinical significance, it has been included in
ICD-10. It is suggested that such a perception is reflective of the
unusual emphasis placed on the qualities of semen in ancient holy
treatises. The clinical picture includes symptoms of hypochondriacal
quality, with or without psychosexual dysfunction. The symptoms usually
disappear if the misconceptions about semen loss are effectively dealt
with proper sex education and relaxation exercises. It is expected that
with increasing literacy and progress in sexual knowledge among the
general population of this region, the syndrome will become less common.

KEYWORDS: Culture bound syndrome; Semen; Dhat syndrome; Management.

INTRODUCTION
============

The last three decades have witnessed an increased interest in the field
of trans-cultural psychiatry. Trans- cultural psychiatry mainly
delineates the cultural factors in the occurrence, symptom patterns,
recognition, course and outcome of psychiatric disorders. :sup:`1` The
concept of ‘culture-bound syndromes, initially introduced by Yap
:sup:`2` in the 1950’s and 1960’s, refer to psychopathological entities
having a geographically defined prevalence, and are largely determined
by the beliefs and assumptions prevalent in the native culture.

In most cultures including Indian culture, sexual adequacy in man is the
hallmark of masculinity, virility, personal adequacy and fulfillment.
:sup:`3` Semen loss related psychological distress has been reported
consistently in Asian and western cultures.

Dhat syndrome- a term coined by Wig (1960)\ :sup:`4`, is deemed a common
culture-bound preoccupation regarding semen-loss among patients in the
Indian sub continent. This condition strictly speaking is not a
psychosexual dysfunction but a sex-related disorder and often considered
a culture-specific sexual neurosis\ :sup:`5`. **CONCEPTUAL EVOLUTION**

Ayurveda teaches the physiology of the production of semen. According to
that, there are seven essential constituents of the body (the seven
Dhatus: chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone marrow and semen), which are
produced through a cycle of successive internal cooking and
transformations. After ultimate distilling, the most concentrated elixir
among the constituents of the body is semen (Dhatu). Its preservation
guarantees health, longevity, and supernatural powers. :sup:`6`

In Charak Samhita, disorders of Dhatus have been elaborated and a
syndrome resembling modern day Dhat syndrome by the name of Sukrameha
(Shukra=sperm+ meha= passage in urine) finds prominent place. In Susruta
Samhita, loss of semen in any form leads to a draining of physical and
mental energy and vitality\ :sup:`3,` :sup:`7`. This is further
reinforced by the belief enshrined in religious scriptures according to
which, 40 meals produce one drop of blood, 40 drops of blood make one
drop of bone marrow and 40 drops of bone marrow form one drop of semen.
:sup:`8` Therefore, a large segment of the general public from all
socio-economic classes believes that semen loss is harmful and it should
be preserved which further constitutes an organized belief system.
Considered in this religio-cultural perspective that is deeply ingrained
in the minds of common folk of Indian sub-continent, psychogenesis of
the Dhat syndrome is easy to comprehend. :sup:`3` **EPIDEMIOLOGICAL
ASPECTS**

Dhat syndrome is widely prevalent in the natives of Indian subcontinent
:sup:`9-14` including Nepal, Bangladesh and Pakistan. :sup:`9,15` It has
been also reported among Buddhists in Srilanka :sup:`16` and Pakistani
Muslim ex-partite workers in the Gulf-states. :sup:`17` Immigrants from
these countries seen in European and North American clinics

:sup:`5` do present with this sex-related disorder. The studies except
one :sup:`18` reported so far pertain almost exclusively to male
patients. The patient presenting with Dhat syndrome is typically more
likely to be recently married; of average or low socio-economic status
(perhaps a student, labourer or farmer by occupation), comes from a
rural area and belongs to a family with conservative attitudes towards
sex. :sup:`5,7,19` ‘Dhat Syndrome’ has acquired further International
recognition by being included in Annexure 2 (culture- specific
disorders) of the ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Research. :sup:`20`

CLINICAL FEATURES
=================

Dhat syndrome is usually said to consist of the loss of semen in young
men while passing urine or straining to pass stools. :sup:`21`

The presenting symptoms in this syndrome have a hypochondriac quality.
Associated symptoms include vague and multiple somatic and psychological
complaints such as fatigue, listlessness, loss of appetite, lack of
physical strength, poor concentration, forgetfulness, and other vague
somatic troubles. These symptoms are usually associated with an anxious
and dysphoric mood state. These patients may also present with or
without psychosexual dysfunction. :sup:`7,13,22`

The patient ascribes his symptoms, including sexual dysfunction, to the
passage of ‘Dhat’ (semen or some whitish substance presumed to be semen
by individual) in urine as a direct result of excessive indulgence in
sexual activity or masturbation or to nocturnal emissions. :sup:`3,`
:sup:`23` Sometimes the sufferer may complain that semen has become foul
smelling and less viscous. :sup:`23`\ Apart from a whitish discharge
with urine, there are no other urinary symptoms. Despite the patient’s
assertion and concern about the passage of semen in urine, there is no
objective evidence of presence of semen in the urine. :sup:`21` Urine
examinations fail to reveal any discoloration, sperms or any other
abnormal constituents except for the occasional oxaluria or
phosphaturia\ :sup:`7` Neurotic depression followed by generalized
anxiety disorder are the commonest psychiatric disorders seen in
patients with Dhat syndrome. :sup:`13,24` Absence of concomitant
systemic illnesses (resulting in turbidity in urine e.g. diabetes
mellitus, in-born metabolic disorders, urinary tract infections etc),
sexually transmitted diseases, local genital abnormalities must be ruled
out before labeling Dhat syndrome. :sup:`5`

Some research workers :sup:`21` distinguished Dhat syndrome into three
subgroups: - a) Dhat syndrome alone; b)

Dhat syndrome with anxiety and depressive symptoms; and c) Dhat syndrome
with sexual dysfunction.

It is important to mention that an interview schedule for assessment of
Dhat syndrome (DSIS) has already been introduced by research workers
:sup:`25` at Chandigarh in order to assess this syndrome in the Indian
male population.

PATIENT’S KNOWLEDGE, ATTITUDE AND EXPECTATIONS TOWARDS DHAT SYNDROME
====================================================================

Regarding the composition of Dhat, a majority of patients belonging to
Indian sub-continent believe that it is semen, followed by those who
believe it to be pus, sugar, concentrated urine, infection or not sure
of its composition. :sup:`5` Masturbation and/or excessive indulgence in
sexual activities, venereal diseases, urinary tract infections,
overeating, constipation or worm infestation, disturbed sleep or genetic
factors are believed to be the main etiological factors\ :sup:`5,19`.

Majority of these patients get the information about Dhat syndrome from
friends, colleagues or relatives whereas some get information from
posters, advertisements in mass media, magazines or quacks. Therefore,
these patients prefer to visit STD clinics, urologists and physicians
rather than approaching psychiatrists.

MANAGEMENT
==========

The management of Dhat syndrome needs serious attention. This syndrome
has become the domain of traditional therapeutic resources i.e. quacks,
ayurvedic or Unani practitioners. The understanding of this condition by
the modern medicine fails to impress most patients and the explanation
and reassurances offered prove to be not of much use\ :sup:`26`. Some
research workers :sup:`26` recommended emphatic listening, a non-
confrontational approach, reassurance and correction of disbeliefs,
along with the use of placebo, anti- anxiety and anti-depressant drugs,
wherever required.

Avasthi and Gupta (1997) :sup:`27` have developed a standardized
treatment package for single males presenting with Dhat syndrome that
mainly includes sex education and relaxation exercises. Sex education
mainly focuses on anatomy, physiology of sexual organs, their
functioning with reference to masturbation, semen, nocturnal emissions,
and the functioning of genito-urinary system etc. Relaxation therapy
includes Jacobson’s Progressive Muscular Relaxation Technique combined
with Bio-feed back (so as to facilitate objective evidence and mastering
of anxiety by the patient), which should be practiced 2-3 times/day
regularly, especially after therapy sessions are over. If there is the
presence of associated anxiety or depressive symptoms that may impede
the process of therapy, anxiolytics or/and antidepressants can be added
for the least possible time and in the least possible doses. Not
surprisingly, Lorazepam was found to be most useful at the end of 4
weeks of treatment. :sup:`5`

CONCLUSION
==========

There is sufficient clinical evidence to support Dhat syndrome as a
culture specific problem. Due to the contribution of Professor Wig and
other researchers, this syndrome was included in the Tenth edition of
the International Classification of Diseases (WHO, 1992) :sup:`28` under
other specified neurotic disorders (F48.8) with the provision of further
research.

Apparently, this syndrome has a varied clinical picture. Some have the
pure form of the disorder; others have concomitant diagnosable
depression and anxiety disorder. Dhat syndrome may also have co-morbid

psychosexual dysfunction ranging from concern about potency to frank
impotence and premature ejaculation either alone or in combination.
However, its phenomenology, long term course and prognosis need to be
studied further before this entity is accorded international acceptance.

REFERENCES
==========

1.  Lipsedge M, Littlewood R. Transcultural psychiatry. In Recent
    Advances in Clinical Psychiatry, no. 3(ed. Granville-Grossman).
    Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1979.

2.  Yap PM. Classification of the culture-bound reactive syndromes. Aust
    N Z J Psychiatry 1967; 1: 172-9.

3.  Kulhara P, Avasthi A. Sexual dysfunction on the Indian subcontinent.
    International Rev Psychiatry 1995; 7:231-9.

4.  Wig NN. Problem of mental health in India. J Clin Social Psychiatry
    (India) 1960; 17:48-53.

5.  Bhatia MS, Malik SC. Dhat syndrome- a useful diagnostic entity in
    Indian culture. Br J Psychiatry 1991; 154:691-5.

6.  Malhotra HK, Wig NN. Dhat Syndrome: A culture bound sex neurosis of
    the orient. Arch Sexual Behav 1975; 4: 519-28.

7.  Chadda RK, Ahuja N. Dhat syndrome: A sex neurosis of the Indian
    subcontinent. Br J Psychiatry 1990; 156:577-92.

8.  Akhtar S. Four culture bound psychiatric syndromes in India.
    International J Social Psychiatry 1988; 34:70-4.

9.  Wig NN. Psychiatric research in India. In Psychiatry in India, Eds.
    De Souza A, De Souza DA. Bhilani, Bombay, 1984, pp. 703-32.

10. Neki JS. Psychiatry in South East Asia. Br J Psychiatry 1973;
    123:257-69.

11. Sethi BB. Culture bound symptoms in India. Indian J Psychiatry 1978;
    20:295-6.

12. Tiwari SC, Katiyar M, Sethi BB. Culture and mental disorders. An
    overview. J Social Psychiatry 1986; 2:403-25.

13. Singh G. Dhat syndrome revisited. Indian J Psychiatry 1985;
    27:119-22.

14. Gandhi N, Mahatme S. A psychiatrist’s approach to Dhat syndrome.
    Indian Practitioner 1989; 42:533-6.

15. Mumford DB. The ‘Dhat syndrome’: a culturally determined symptom of
    depression? Acta Psychiatr Scand 1996; 94: 163-7.

16. De Silva P, Dissanayake SAW. The use of semen syndrome in Sri Lanka:
    A clinical study. Sex Marital Ther 1989; 4:195-204.

17. Hay J. Are Non-western beliefs false? (Letter). Br J Psychiatry
    1992; 160:870-1.

18. Singh GD, Avasthi A, Pravin D. Dhat Syndrome in a female: A case
    report. Indian J Psychiatry 2001; (4): 345-8.

19. Behere PB, Natraj GS. Dhat syndrome: the phenomenology of a
    culture-bound sex neurosis of the orient. Indian J Psychiatry 1984;
    26:76-8.

20. World health organization. The ICD-10 classification of mental and
    behavioural disorders: Diagnostic criteria for research Geneva:
    World Health Organization, 1993.

21. Avasthi A, Nehra R. Sexual disorders: A review of Indian Research.
    Mental Health in India (1995- 2000), ed. Murthy RS. People’s action
    for mental health, Bangalore, 2001, pp. 42-53.

22. Nakra BRS, Wig NN, Varma VK. A study of male potency disorders.
    Indian J. Psychiatry 1977;19:13-8.

23. Jilek WG. Culturally related syndromes. In New Oxford Textbook of
    Psychiatry vol. 1, Eds. Gelder MG, Lopez-Iber JJ, Andreason N.
    Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000, pp. 1061-6.

24. Patil B, Nadkarni R, Dhavale HS. Sexual misconceptions in male
    patients attending sex group. Abstract. Indian J Psychiatry 1996;
    38(2) (Suppl): 199.

25. Sharan PS, Avasthi A, Gupta N, Mohanty M, Gill S, Jain A.
    Development of Dhat Syndrome Interview Schedule (DSIS) for Indian
    male population. Presented at Annual National Conference of Indian
    Psychiatric Society at Hyderabad, January 2003.

26. Wig NN. Dhat Syndrome. In Therapy of common sexual problems- A hand
    book, ed. Brahmbhatt R. Family Planning Association of India,
    Mumbai, 1998.

27. Avasthi A, Gupta N. Manual for standardized management of single
    males with sexual disorders. Marital and Psychosexual Clinic, Dept.
    of Psychiatry, PGIMER, Chandigarh, 1997.

28. World Heath Organization. The ICD-10 classification of mental and
    behavioural disorders; Clinical description and diagnostic
    guidelines 1992, WHO; Geneva.
