JPPS 2007; 4(1): 55–56 SHORT COMMUNICATION
------------------------------------------

PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE, SPIRITUALITY AND ISLAM

   **Khalid A. Mufti**

INTRODUCTION
============

In the past century there has been a tendency to exclude spirituality
and religion from psychiatry, other than as a form of pathology or
pathological response. Spirituality is a common human experience. The
New ways of human understanding point positively towards the new
paradigm of non-material or spiritual dimension to life. Following
observations are pertinent to my argu- ments:

    For some patients within mental health settings, religion and
   spirituality are already emerging as rel- evant factors in research
   and clinical care (Koeing et al,2001) In his study, Koeing et al 60%
   of seri- ously mentally ill patients reported that religion/
   spirituality had a great deal of impact on their ill- ness through
   the feelings of being cared for and of not being left alone.

    Swinton (2001) defines Cure as eradication of dis- ease. It is the
   anticipated outcome of attempts to take control of disordered
   biological and /or psy- chological process. He describes[Healing] as
   re- lated to care which attends the deep inner mean- ing, value and
   purpose that forms the infrastruc- ture to all human experiences.

    The notion of having a difference between spiri- tual care needs
   and religious care needs is ques- tioned by many researchers
   including (koeing et al 2001) to include that medical patients have
   reli- gious and spiritual needs that are intimately related to their
   physical health conditions. So that religious and spiritual beliefs
   and practices can often be important for emotional healing

    Any of components of spiritual care e.g. tolerance, wisdom,
   compassion, patience, generosity and honesty are already aspects of
   good psych- iatric practice. These can be learned as profes- sional
   development in terms of spiritual deve- lopment in terms of spiritual
   attitudes values and skills.

Challenging the pure materialistic view Kretschmer cited the case of a
child who is born blind and dumb.

   **Corespondence:**

   **Prof. Khalid A. Mufti,** Medical Director Ibadat Hospital Peshawar,
   Former Principal Khyber Medical College, Chairman Horizon, Chairman
   South East Asian Psychiatry Forum UK (Pak Chapter)

Psychologists and physicians began to wonder how such a child could
possibly have a full psychological and men- tal life without access to
tactile sensations. How could this happen if matter was really the
origin of psychologi- cal life and the source of mental processes.
Realizing this difficulty Carl Jaspers pointed “The image of man is
beyond our reach and eludes scientific research”.

ISLAMIC VIEW
============

Islamic medicine is based on the image of man in Islam and the Islamic
comprehensive view of man and the universe, including cohesion and
comprehensive- ness. Thus man is naturally equipped to utilize strength
of will, self confidence and faith in God in getting cured from a host
of diseases. When we conceive of man as a harmonious composite of body
and soul, little wonder will remain in accepting the idea of spiritual
treatment and its great physical and psychological efficacy.

In Islam the term spirituality is inseparable from the awareness of one
Allah and a life lived according to His will. The principle of oneness
‘Al Towheed’ must be taken into account in any study of Islamic
spirituality.

Quran contains three main terms that relate to hu- man conduct and safe
integral and sound treatment. The first is IMAN,which means faith and at
its root means, to be at peace and not exposed to danger. The second
term is ISLAM, that means to be safe, to be whole and inte- gral and not
to disintegrate. Thus Islam bestows safety and peace. The third
fundamental concept is TAQWA, which is usually translated as piety or
conscious of Al- lah, but whose root means to protect from getting lost
or wasted and to guard against peril.

According to Islam a man is in trouble when he / she is sick. One is
close to God and God is close to one at the moments of trouble. One is
not afraid or desper- ate in the security of God’s presence. This also
implies a sort of adjustment, but in a far wider sense than the he
narrowly used in modern psychology. The environment to which man should
adjust must be expanded to in- clude;

1. The External Environment: location, climate, geo- graphic situation,
   fresh air ,pure water, sunlight and biological life etc,

2. The Internal Environment: The circulating blood with its well
   balanced chemical components of ptotiens, fats, salts, vitamins,
   hormones, minerals, neurotrasmitters .

3. The psychological Environment: Instinct, emotions, intelligence
   growth and development.

4. Socioeconomic and political environment: the fam- ily, school street
   administration, work .all these are important factors in shaping
   man’s personality and upbringing and personality.

5. Moral Environment: the surrounding atmosphere with positive virtues
   or negative vices and their in- fluence on man’s attitudes.

6. Intellectual environment; The ideas, views, trends,
   philosophies,traditional and scientific or semi sci- entific
   belifes,ideologies,educational and cultural attitudes.

7. The Spiritual environment; This is based on supramundane[above world]
   conceptions in con- trast with mundane conceptions. The former world
   form the core of the mystic sciences of heart ‘based on belief on
   unseen world, historical events and evidnce,introspection.

The most striking uniqueness about Islam is the direct relationship
between a Muslim and God .In Islam nothing or no body plays agent or
mediator between God and man. And God has promised to respond to whoever
calls on him, provided the call is from a pure heart
Quran,[S2:v.186]says” When my servants ask thee [Muhammad]concerning me,
I am indeed close[to them]:I listen to the prayer of every suppliant
when he calleth on me,”

Faith and trust is man’s best shield protecting him against despair and
depression. Many physicians have

become aware of the great therapeutic effects of remem- brance and
prayers. Alexis Carrel,a Noble Prize laure- ate in medicine[1912], the
author of “Man that unknown being” published a short paper about the
medical effect of invocation and prayers. He claims that weakness and
the atrophy of the sense of veneration and moral obliga- tion is as
serious as atrophy of the brain. Moral atrophy has made a man totally
blind from the spiritual point of view.

In is safe to assume that while understanding the nature of influence
prayers and remembrance have, sci- entists and thinkers are nearing
consensus that there must be a spiritual environment without which the
living matter would loose its meaning, value and purpose. It is the
point of contact between man, who is a composite of body and soul, and
the creator, who is unlike anything we know, according to Holy Quran.
Realizing this need, the mental health professional working in our
country need to understand the spiritual values of the patients and
incorporate these in assessment and treat- ment.

REFERENCES
==========

1. Koeing HG. Hand book of Religion and Health: Ox- ford. Oxford
   University Press; 2001.

2. Swinton J. Spirituality and Mental Health Care. Re- discovering a
   forgotten Dimension. London: Jessica Kingsley; 2001.

3. WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. WHOQOL and

..

   spirituality, religiousness and personal beliefs. Report on WHO
   consultation.Geneva: WHO; 1998.
