   **ALI MADEEH HASHMI, BILAL AHMED, AIMAN NAWAL, AFTAB ASIF**

   Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences, King Edward
   Medical University/Mayo Hospital, Lahore.

   **CORRESPONDENCE: DR. ALI MADEEH HASHMI** E-mail: ahashmi39@gmail.com

   *Two roads diverged in a wood, and I â€” I took the one less traveled
   by,*

   *And that has made all the difference.*

   *Robert Frost - American Poet*

CASE VIGNETTE 1:
================

A senior surgeon (a medical teacher) is referred for psychiatric
evaluation by his sibling, also a senior medical teacher. He is
reluctant to see a psychiatrist and on initial assessment, claims that
nothing is wrong. According to him, after a long, tiring day at work
where he lost a patient on the operating table, this experienced, much
respected surgeon had a trivial argument with his spouse and, after
locking himself in his room, took an overdose of analgesics,
antihypertensive medications and sedatives. His family broke down his
bedroom door and took him to the hospital where he was kept in the ICU
for three days. There is no prior history of psychiatric treatment and
he has never sought any help for mental health issues. He confides to
his psychiatrist that he is constantly tired, cannot sleep because he
worries about his patients, has been irritable with his family and
hospital staff and has been thinking about leaving the medical
profession altogether.

INTRODUCTION
============

Burnout is everywhere, or so it seems. From doctors and lawyers to
teachers and housewives, it appears that there is an epidemic of burnout
all over the world. As a distinct phenomenon, 'Burnout' was first
reported in the1970s by American Psychologist Herbert Freudenberger who
initially used the term to describe a constellation of symptoms found
within the 'helping professions'; in his case, doctors and nurses.1
Christina Maslach and others developed one of the earliest tools for
measuring burnout, the Maslach Burnout Inventory.2 Their seminal work
has led to the concept of burnout being broadened beyond just healthcare
practitioners and it is now widely known that burnout, with its
associated effects on work efficiency, productivity, life satisfaction
and mental health in general affects just about everyone.3

THE SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM
========================

There is now a vast amount of published literature on this

topic globally and in Pakistan4-6 and it has been added as an occupation
related phenomena in ICD-11.7 Burnout has reached the level of a global
epidemic with major medical organizations calling it a public health
crisis and 'death by a 1000 cuts'.8 While the phenomenon of Burnout was
widespread in years past, COVID-19 has been the icing on the cake with
health care professionals being forced to work long hours under immense
psychological pressure. Burnout has caused or contributed to a multitude
of problems including dissatisfied physicians changing careers,9
suboptimal care of patients, expensive healthcare, increased propensity
of being named in medical malpractice suit and doctors reporting more
preventable errors in their clinical decision making.10 Not only that,
it has led to an increased incidence of clinical depression leading to
suicides, substance abuse, poor self care, road traffic accidents
following long duties and stress related sudden deaths in healthcare
workers.11 While burnout is a global phenomenon, the common problems of
low and middle income countries like Pakistan such as undeveloped or
poorly developed healthcare facilities and systems, inadequate staff
training and procedures, lack of security at hospitals and healthcare
facilities leading to a real risk of injury or death of healthcare
workers because of enraged family members or patient attendants, meager
doctor salaries, media and social media scrutiny etc. add to the burden
of burnout for healthcare workers. Social and political instability,
terrorism, crime and law and order problems make things even worse. It
is no wonder that studies in Pakistan have reported very high levels of
burnout in doctors and healthcare workers in Pakistan, especially in the
era of COVID19.12,13

CASE VIGNETTE 2:
================

A senior medical teacher, spearheading the COVID-19 fight at her large
public hospital confides to her therapist that she feels anxious,
stressed, cannot sleep and has recurring nightmares. She has lost weight
and feels nauseated when she eats. She has been unwell since her mother
died a year before. When COVID started and her medical department became
the epicenter of the COVID outbreak with dozens of doctors and nurses
becoming infected, her symptoms worsened. She herself has contracted
COVID twice during

her duties and even though she is now recovered, her burnout symptoms
are not resolving. All medical investigations have been normal.

PHYSICIAN BURNOUT: WHY WE NEED TO PAY ATTENTION
===============================================

Much has been written about the dangers of burnout. Lower physician
productivity, a higher propensity for clinical errors leading to patient
harm, mental health issues including frank mental illness and other
health consequences for physicians including life threatening cardiac
and other events are just some of the sequelae of untreated burnout. In
addition, burnout by definition, leads to dissatisfaction and emotional
detachment and has been shown to be a factor in inducing physicians to
leave the medical profession altogether.9

A study by our group recently showed high levels of burnout in medical
teachers in a large public medical university in Lahore.4 We pointed out
that medical teachers are already in very short supply in Pakistan. With
the rapid expansion of health services and medical education, this is
set to get worse in the near future. Medical teachers are an especially
valuable resource since they train the medical workforce of the future.
Similarly, physicians and healthcare workers in the community are
overwhelmed with patients and their problems. It is not uncommon for a
General Practitioner or even a specialist working in private practice to
see upwards of 100 patients a day.14 Patient volumes of this magnitude
lend themselves easily to burnout in healthcare staff including
physicians. If this escalates to mental health problems, it can lead to
tragic consequences like physician suicide or even homicide.15 Even
without the problem escalating to psychiatric emergencies like suicide,
physicians and healthcare workers who are suffering high levels of
burnout suffer both impaired work efficiency as well as problems in
their personal lives which can have a vicious 'add-on' effect leading to
increased burnout. There are also the 'ripple' effects of healthcare
worker burnout which can affect other healthcare workers as well as
society at large by depriving patients of their most conscientious and
hard working healthcare providers.

In short, unaddressed burnout and associated mental health problems pose
an acute risk to healthcare workers including doctors. But there is also
a hidden 'social cost' to ignoring this problem. If well educated,
affluent members of society such as doctors are suffering such high
rates of burnout, one can well imagine what the situation is like for
those who are struggling to make ends meet financially, let alone the
poor, those affected by terrorism or natural calamities or vulnerable
populations such as women and children.

WHY IS IT HAPPENING?
====================

The profession of medicine has always been viewed less as

a profession and more as a 'calling'. It attracts intelligent, highly
motivated people with high levels of altruism.16 'Serving ailing
humanity' is an answer we often get when we ask our medical students why
they want to become doctors. This is a prime example of 'intrinsic
motivation', the main driver of high achievement and resilience while
performing tasks, especially those that require persistence, hard work
and delaying of gratification such as acquiring a medical education or
delivering medical care. In a misguided attempt at allaying burnout in
doctors and healthcare workers, especially during COVID-19, healthcare
administrators and policy makers have attempted to create financial
incentives.17 This is doomed to failure. "Extrinsic motivators' (both
positive, in the form of financial incentives and negative in the form
of punitive action against healthcare workers who cannot perform
effectively due to burnout) cannot replace intrinsic motivation and,
over time, can actually erode and destroy intrinsic motivation leading
eventually to 'a motivation' i.e. further burnout.

In the West, where healthcare decisions and policies are generated on
the basis of hard data rather than the whims of government officials, it
has been demonstrated again and again that financial rewards, workplace
'wellness programs' including yoga, exercise classes at work and other
interventions rarely, if ever, provide long term, meaningful resolution
of burnout and its associated consequences.

In Pakistan where doctors and healthcare workers are faced with the
herculean tasks of seeing hundreds of patients a day with little or no
job security, the omnipresent threat of risk to life and limb18 as well
as the ever present challenges of all low and middle income countries
(LMIC), it is a wonder that healthcare workers are able to deliver any
care at all.

CASE VIGNETTE 3:
================

Two senior professors, a surgeon and a psychiatrist, meet regularly to
discuss the challenges of working in their large public medical
university. Hundreds of patients a day, thousands of students and
trainees to teach and supervise, multiple stakeholders to answer to, all
while balancing a precarious personal life leave little time for leisure
or reflection. Both are burned out and often talk about leaving their
chosen fields to pursue other activities. Both have always scored high
on student evaluations and are often sought out as advisors and mentors
by other faculty members as well as senior administrative staff. Both
have seen firsthand how the lives and health of their fellow doctors
including senior faculty and administrators are being consumed by their
work and it's never ending challenges. There have been discussions about
setting up a 'physician wellness service' at their university but it
seems like yet another in a long 'to-do' list that keeps getting longer
and longer.

WHAT IS TO BE DONE?
===================

The phenomenon of burnout has been with us long enough to where, even in
Pakistan, there is now increasing recognition that it can no longer be
ignored.19 Financial incentives alone do little, if anything in the long
term and, in a LMIC like Pakistan, cannot be guaranteed to be delivered
on time or at all.

Fortunately, tackling burnout does not require huge financial resources.
In a seminal paper,20 Gagne\` and Deci identified three key factors that
enhance intrinsic motivation and psychological well being: autonomy,
competence and relatedness. GagnÃ© and Deci define autonomy as healthcare
workers having a sense of choice about their work as well as 'agency',
the feeling that they are doing what they are doing of their own free
will. In Pakistan, for doctors and healthcare workers at all levels,
from medical students to practitioners to faculty and senior health
administrators, autonomy is severely limited by a number of factors.
Medical students are forced to study in educational systems that
prioritize 'top- down' learning with students having no say in what is
taught or how the instruction is delivered.21 Doctors working in the
community are overwhelmed by the sheer number of patients needing
services as well as the need to generate incomes which can keep pace
with high inflation. Medical teachers face labyrinthine bureaucratic
procedures, meager salaries and overwhelming work loads.4

Gagne' and Deci's second factor supporting intrinsic motivation is
'Competence' meaning a deep fund of knowledge about one's chosen
vocation coupled with the ability to apply it appropriately in given
situations. Here too, we are failing our doctors and healthcare workers.
Medical students in Pakistan, some of the most intelligent, idealistic
and hard working youth in the country face an antiquated education
system once they gain a much coveted spot in a medical college.21 The
emphasis is on rote learning with little or no knowledge imparted about
correct application of the knowledge. Once they graduate, they are faced
with a post graduate training system that is little better than medical
college relying heavily on the skill and/or willingness of trainers to
train. While structured post- graduate training systems exist on
paper,22 their quality varies widely depending on the availability of
trainers and faculty. Doctors practicing in the community are so
overwhelmed with patient loads that they rarely have any time or
inclination to keep their knowledge updated resulting in delivery of
medical care that is adequate at best and abysmal at worst. Medical
faculty, the teachers of the next generation of doctors are similarly
overwhelmed.

The third factor identified by Gagne' and Deci, 'Relatedness', is in
fact qualitatively different in Pakistan (and presumably other LMICs).
Due to a variety of social and economic factors which are outside the
scope of this article, the sense of

belonging, interpersonal attachment and being connected socially is
strong. But this comes with a price. Interacting with friends, family
and co-workers socially requires time which, in the case of doctors and
healthcare workers, is already in short supply due to multiple and often
conflicting work commitments. Thus, this too can become a source of
stress and further burnout if social and family obligations come in
conflict with professional obligations.4 With the move towards more
accountability in the medical profession in Pakistan (a welcome
development), the introduction of management controls at major hospital
systems (including electronic records) and other changes, the burden on
doctors and healthcare workers is about to increase.

SOME SUGGESTED REMEDIES:
========================

COVID-19 has exposed the fundamental structural flaws in our medical
systems which have existed for decades but can no longer be ignored. As
a LMIC, Pakistan will continue to face healthcare crises of one sort or
another and if we are to face them successfully some urgent changes need
to be implemented in our healthcare systems:

-  Medical education, both undergraduate and post- graduate, needs to be
   aligned with modern scientific standards and methods. There is now a
   huge amount of published literature about this internationally as
   well as in Pakistan and medical teachers who are formally trained in
   scientific educational methods now exist in increasing numbers in all
   institutions in Pakistan. They should be given the responsibility of
   modifying and updating the curricula of medical colleges/universities
   as well and post-graduate medical training programs to bring them up
   to international standards.

-  Our healthcare system nationally needs a major overhaul. The existing
   system is broken and does not serve the needs of the majority of our
   population, especially those in the lower socio-economic strata. More
   investment is needed by the government, especially in strengthening
   grass roots systems starting with Rural Health Centers, Basic Health
   Units, and Tehsil/District Headquarter hospitals. Staff training,
   especially of allied health professionals at these facilities can
   enable quality medical care to be provided in local communities
   rather than patients and families having to travel long distances to
   tertiary care hospitals which are overwhelmed and broken down. Once
   the load on these hospitals declines, they can also be upgraded to
   handle only the most severe cases.

-  Major national initiatives are needed to address burnout and mental
   health issues in our healthcare workforce. This cannot happen without
   the commitment (including financial commitment) of provincial and
   national governments. Any money invested in the well being of our
   healthcare workforce will be paid back many times over by improved
   work efficiency, increased morale and

..

   savings in sick days and absenteeism.

Pakistan along with this region of the world is at a major inflection
point in our history. While COVID-19 has battered us with many
challenges, it has also opened up a world of opportunity. We need to
seize this opportunity to make significant changes in our healthcare
delivery and management system so that a healthier, happier healthcare
workforce can support the well being of the people of Pakistan and take
us forward confidently into the 21st century.

CLINICAL PEARLS/TAKE HOME MESSAGES
==================================

-  Burnout is ubiquitous, both globally and in Pakistan. It should not
   be ignored.

-  Burnout poses multiple personal, professional and occupational risks,
   including the risk of major mental health issues

-  Innovative solutions can be both helpful as well as cost effective

-  Addressing burnout in the healthcare workforce can be a major driver
   for positive social change

REFERENCES
==========

1. Freudenberger HJ. Staff Burn-Out. Journal of Social Issues
   [Internet]. Wiley; 1974 Jan; 30(1): 159-65. http://dx.doi.org/
   10.1111/j.1540-4560.1974.tb00706.x

2. Maslach C, Jackson SE. The measurement of experienced burnout. J
   Occup Behav. 1981; 2 (2): 99-113.
   https://doi.org/10.1002/job.4030020205

3. Employee Burnout Report: COVID-19's Impact and 3 Strategies to Curb
   It [Internet]. Indeed.com. 2021 [cited 24 December 2021]. Available
   from:
   `https://www.indeed.com/lead/preventing- <http://www.indeed.com/lead/preventing->`__
   employee-burnout-report

4. Hashmi AM. The challenge of Burnout in Public Medical Teachers in
   Pakistan: A mixed methods study. Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences
   [Internet]. Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences. 2021 Jun 30;37(5).
   https://doi.org/10.12669/pjms.37.5.4429

5. Naz S, Hashmi AM, Asif A. Burnout and quality of life in nurses of a
   tertiary care hospital in Pakistan. J Pak Med Assoc. 2016 May
   1;66(5):532-6.

6. 6.Zaman BS, Ghouri RG, Ali MM, Ahmed RM. Impact of burnout among
   surgeons and residents at a Tertiary Care Hospital of Pakistan. The
   Professional Medical Journal. 2020 Nov
   10;27(11):2523-https://doi.org/10.29309/TPMJ/2020.27.11.4555

7. 7.Burn-out an "occupational phenomenon": International Classification
   of Diseases [Internet]. Who.int. 2021 [cited 24 December 2021].
   Available from:
   `https://www.who.int/news/ <http://www.who.int/news/>`__
   item/28-05-2019-burn-out-an-occupational-phenomenon-
   international-classification-of-diseases

8. Medscape.com. 2021 [cited 24 December 2021]. Available from:
   `https://www.medscape.com/slideshow/2021-lifestyle- <http://www.medscape.com/slideshow/2021-lifestyle->`__

..

   burnout-6013456#1

9.  Shanafelt TD, Boone S, Tan L, Dyrbye LN, Sotile W, Satele D, et al.
    Burnout and satisfaction work-life balance among US physicians
    relative to the general US population. Arch Int Med. 2012;
    172(18):1377-1385. doi: 10.1001/ archinternmed.2012.3199

10. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Shanafelt TD. Physician burnout: contributors,
    consequences and solutions. Journal of Internal Medicine [Internet].
    Wiley; 2018 Mar 24; 283(6):516-29.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/joim.12752

11. Lancet T. Physician burnout: a global crisis. Lancet (London,
    England). 2019 Jul 13;394(10193):93.doi: 10.1016/S0140-
    6736(19)31573-9

12. Imran N, Hashmi AM, Haider II, Naqi SA, Asif A, Gondal KM. The toll
    it takes: mental health burden and associated factors during
    COVID-19 outbreak among healthcare workers in Lahore, Pakistan.
    Annals of King Edward Medical University. 2020 Sep 29;26(2):317-23.

13. Imran N, Masood HMU, Ayub M, Gondal KM. Psychological impact of
    COVID-19 pandemic on postgraduate trainees: a cross-sectional
    survey. Postgraduate Medical Journal [Internet]. BMJ; 2020 Aug 25;
    postgradmedj-2020-138364.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/postgradmedj-2020-138364

14. Fitz-Gerald M, Takeshita J. Models of Emergency Psychiatric Services
    That Work. 1st ed. Springer; 2020. Pages 266-
    275.DOI:10.1007/978-3-030-50808-1

15. Correspondent T. Psychiatrist commits suicide after killing medic
    daughter [Internet]. DAWN.COM. 2021 [cited 24 December 2021].
    Available from:
    `https://www.dawn.com/news/1603020 <http://www.dawn.com/news/1603020>`__

16. Tammaro D, Arrighi J, Hilliard R, Toll E. Altruism: A Story in Three
    Acts. The American Journal of Medicine [Internet]. Elsevier BV; 2018
    Dec; 131(12): 1526-7. http://dx.doi.org/
    10.1016/j.amjmed.2018.05.035

17. Reporter T. Punjab CM announces additional pay for health workers
    [Internet]. DAWN.COM. 2021 [cited 24 December 2021]. Available from:
    `https://www.dawn.com/news/1552528 <http://www.dawn.com/news/1552528>`__

18. In pictures: Day of terror, violence as lawyers storm Lahore cardiac
    hospital [Internet]. DAWN.COM. 2021 [cited 24 December 2021].
    Available from:
    `https://www.dawn.com/news/1521687 <http://www.dawn.com/news/1521687>`__

19. Ghazanfar H, Chaudhry MT, Asar ZU, Zahid U. Compassion Satisfaction,
    Burnout, and Compassion Fatigue in Cardiac Physicians Working in
    Tertiary Care Cardiac Hospitals in Pakistan. Cureus [Internet].
    Cureus, Inc.; 2018 Oct 5; http://dx.doi.org/10.7759/cureus.3416

20. GagnÃ© M, Deci EL. Self-determination theory and work motivation.
    Journal of Organizational Behavior [Internet]. Wiley; 2005 Apr
    14;26(4):331-62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/job.322

21. Time To Stand Up Against The Coercive Model Of Education [Internet].
    Naya Daur. 2021 [cited 25 December 2021]. Available from:
    https://nayadaur.tv/2019/12/time-to-stand-
    up-against-the-coercive-model-of-education/

22. Biggs JS. Postgraduate medical training in Pakistan: observations
    and recommendations. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2008 Jan 1;
    18(1):58-63.
