Crime: Its Cause and Treatment
================================

:Type: Book Reviews.
:Author: Clarence Darrow. 
George Harrap &
Co. London, pp. 292 10s. 6d. 1923.

"The old order changeth" and many social
questions are being viewed to-day in a new
light. Amongst these problems none is more
prominent at the present time than that which
is associated with those anti-social actions
which are designated "crime." The fact is
not without significance, as evidence of a new
official attitude, that several books upon the
subject have been written recently by those
who have been, or are, directly connected with
the Prison service, notably by Sir Ruggles Brise
on the English Prison System, by Dr Mary
Gordon on Female Offenders, and more
recently by Dr Hamblin Smith on the Psychology of the Criminal. The latest book on
Crime its cause and treatment, is by an
American lawyer, but "Coelum non animum
mutant qui trans mare currunt," and the
problem is the same whether on this side or
that side of the Atlantic. Dr Darrow opens
with a discussion of the question "What is
crime?" and answers it by shewing what it
is not. Crime as such has no true reference
to conscience or ethics, but its significance lies
in the fact that it elicits a certain type of
group-reaction from the rest of the community. But he goes on to point out that exactly
the same type of reaction, i.e. a deprivation
of liberty, is exhibited in the case of imbecility, insanity, and infectious disease. Personal liberty must end where public injury
begins. Our laws have descended to us out
of tribal customs which date from a time to
which "the memory of man runneth not,"
and are based on primitive ideas of man's
capacity and responsibility which themselves
have long been superceded. Hence it has
become increasingly necessary for us to change
our attitude in regard to crime.

The author looks at the question from a
biological standpoint, and considers the essential feature of crime to be a failure of adjustment to the ever increasing complexity ^
environment, and the relentless growth o
social restrictions. Man is, as Aristo
described him long ago, a social animal, an
the gregarious or social instinct is one of t
mainsprings of life, without which he cou
scarcely have maintained his existence in
past. Human actions are governed by 111
stinct and emotions and only to a small exte
by Reason. Hence there arises an inevita
conflict. In each one of us there abides
potential criminal, and the saying of
xviii century divine, "there, but for
Grace of God, go I," is profoundly true of
all. These considerations compel us to assum
a determinist position in relation to thosC
actions which we label criminal. This does
not imply, however, that there must not be
social reaction to these actions, for such a
reaction is a biological necessity. But u
may apply the physiological theory of the la
Dr Rivers, our reaction, which has in
past partaken of the protopathic or "all^f
none" type, must now assume an epicrftlC
regulated character.

The book is so clearly written and so eVj
dently the result of much experience in dea
ing with crime, that it will be found one 0
the most valuable, as it is one of the m?s
interesting studies of the subject which h&s
been written.

G. A. AudeNIntelligence Tests and School Organise*
tion. By Lewis M. Terman, Virgil
Dickson, A. H. Sutherland, Raymon
H. Franzen, C. R. Tupper and Grace
Fernald. Harrap 4s. 6d. net.

This book is a Sub-Committee Report of
National Eeucation Association on revision
of Elementary Education. The writers
describe experiments in organisation whic
have been made to eliminate differences m
mental ability either by the individualisation
of instruction or by making more homogeneous classes. The "Multiple track," or Oakland System described by Dr Dickson pr?"
vides for the individual by establishing more
0r less homogeneous classes in at least five
parallel grades known as the accelerated,
formal, opportunity, limited, and atypical
classes. The last two cater for subnormal
children, the opportunity class tor children
^ho have good mental ability?but are backward, through ill-health and long absence, and
^e first two for children such as the names
suggest. To put such a plan into practice
*Ueans that we must have schools with 1000 to
1200 on the Roll. But is it not a matter of
1egret that we should have schools with such
kig rolls ?

?Dr Sutherland describes the Los Angeles
Plan an individual system of teaching by projects, arranged primarily for special class
children. Expense will not allow us in
^Ugland to carry out such a plan with normal
children. At the same time the social advantages to be gained from the homogeneous class
?ut\veigh the advantage of a purely individual
system of instruction so that perhaps it is as
well if expense does curb us.

These all too brief reports make us rejoice
that the psychologist is coming to the aid of
the organiser of schools, and that the latter
ls concerned not only with catering for the
sub-normal child but also for the supernormal
aud allowing him to develop at his own pace.
G. A. Auden .

^thoduction to the use of Standard
Tests. By Sidney L. Pressey and Luella
Cole Pressey. (Harrap 6s. net).
this book the reader is introduced to tests
? achievement in History, Geography, Englsh and Arithmetic.

Sufficient is said to show that their work is
not that of the examination, and that they
cannot take the place of the examination. The
atter gives opportunity for spontaneous and
?riginal work but the former have the threepurpose of testing the child's general
HilHty' ^etecting weaknesses with a view to
e adoption of remedial measures and giving
practice in the subject in order to eliminate
weaknesses.

The English Tests appear satisfactory for
testing spelling, punctuation and grammar, but
the methods of assessing actual merit seem so
elaborate that the result gained does not seem
worth the trouble expended.

The History and Geography tests make
too great use of the power of suggestion to be
of real value. The Courtis Tests in Arithmetic
give a very clear idea of the threefold function
of the test?a general test of ability in the
four rules discovers weakness in one of them,
then follows a diagnostic test which splits
up the total ability into its elements. The
weakness is discovered and the necessary
practice tests follow.

The writers are to be commended for their
clear exposition of the meaning and value of
both tests of ability and achievement.
G. A. Auden.

"The Psychology and Teaching of Number." By Margaret Drummond, M.A.
George Harrap & Co., 3s. 6d. net.
Though intended primarily for teachers in
Infants' Schools, this book will be found of
great service to those whose work lies among
mentally defective children. In the past,
teachers have profited but little from the
' 'psychology of number'' as expounded by the
theorists, but here we have both theory and
practice dealt with in a simple straight-forward manner by a psychologist who is thoroughly conversant with school conditions and
methods.

We all know the tremendous efforts that used
to be made by class-teachers to get Jimmy and
Mary and Tommy and Jessie, etc., to realise all
on the same morning just what was meant
by 7 sparrows and 7 oranges and 7 pennies and
7 sticks, etc., ad nauseam.

This book will have fulfilled a great mission
if it helps us to realise very clearly that there
is a time to teach and a time not to teach; that
lots of play with well-chosen but easily obtamable material, combined with short lessons
and intensive practice at the right time will
bring us more happily and often more speedily
to the goal. A number of really enjoyable
games are suggested and guidance given as to
economical methods of practice. Where Miss
Drummond compares the achievements of
the "Uninstructed" and the "Instructed"
child, we are forcibly reminded of the words
of the poet:

"Mankind are not pieces?there's your
fault!
You cannot push them, and, the first move
made,
Lean back and study what the next will be,
In confidence that, when 'tis fixed upon,
You find just where you left them, blacks and
whites:

Men go on moving when your hand's away.''
The Special School teacher will be warned
against hurrying her pupils to 'sums' and
paper-work?tho elementary school tradition
dies hard in this. With many defectives it
simply means that in practical life their
school work in number will avail them nothing
at all if the foundations are not well and
truly laid. Methods must be psychological
whether or not they appear logical to the
adult mind, and to ensure this there is given
a careful analysis of the early stages of development along with the educational principles
deduced. E.L.S.R.

Handbook for Mental Nurses. Published
under the Authority of the MedicoPsychological Association. London:
Bailliere, Tindall and Cox. 1923. Pp.
xiii,+615. Illustrated. Price6s.net.
Seventh Edition.

First published in 1885 as a modest volume
of 64 pages, this Handbook has now grown
into a comprehensive textbook of nearly ten
times its original size. The present edition
has been entirely rewritten and the scope of
the book considerably enlarged. The subject
Blatter is divided into sections dealing respectively with the duties of nurses in mental hospitals ; general anatomy and physiology;
aid; hygiene; principles of sick nursing; bodi ^
diseases and their nursing requirements; ana
omy and physiology of the nervous system >
the mind in health; causes of nervous and men'
tal disease; types of mental disorder and their
special nursing requirements; and menta
nursing in institutions and private housesThe concluding chapter is devoted to an
account of mental deficiency. This subject is
fully and clearly presented, and consideration
is given to diagnosis, causation, classificationt
intelligence tests, treatment, and management
and training. The treatment of certain subjects, notably that of the nervous system ana
psychology, is rather more than elementary>
and many excellent nurses could not reasonably be expected to assimilate thoroughly an
the contents of this volume. The editorial
committee realise this, but they feel that it Is
desirable to include more than may be necessary for mere examination purposes. The
contents of this book make it abundantly evident that the mental nurse is now expected to
know a great deal of the theory and practice of
her profession, but the clear and readable
manner in which this Handbook is written*
and the pains which have been taken to make
a difficult subject interesting, should do much
to make the preparation for examinations a
pleasure rather than a burden. The book will
not only be found of value by mental nurses
but also by social workers who wish to acquire
a knowledge of the various aspects of mental
disorder. An error has been overlooked on
page 53 where the spleen is described as lying
under cover of the ribs "on the right side of
the back." H. Devine.

Opening Doors. A little book for the
Mothers of Babies who are Long in
Learning to Behave like other Children
of their Age. By John Thomson, M.D.
Everyone who comes in contact with the
homes of young defective children has felt, at
some time or other, the need of a pamphlet?
cheap enough to be given away if necessary?
conveying in non - technical language that
information about training and treatment
which comes as a message of hope to the
mother who is quivering beneath the pain of
the growing realisation that her baby is not
like other babies.*

Dr John Thomson?one of Scotland's
leading Children's specialists?has for ^ears
been interested in the problem of the Mentally
Defective child and studied it in terms of
human needs as well as of science, and has
now stepped into the breach with this little
pamphlet embodying his long experience.
Its nature may be gauged from the headings
?f some of its principal sections, viz., "On
Babies who behave differently from Others";
'The Healthy New-born Baby and why he
can do so little"; What you Notice when a
Baby's Brain is Growing Properly"; "How
you may know when it is not Growing as Fast
as Usual''; What you can do for the Baby is
he is doing too little, forming bad habits, late
in speaking, to strengthen his character, if he
cries constantly or has fits or faint turns;
To keep him strong and well"; ' 'Suggestions
for the Special Treatment of those Children
whose Limbs are very Stiff." Under these
headings it incorporates practically all the
knowledge which it is necessary for the
Mother of the young defective to have, and it
conveys it in terms chosen with such a fine
regard for the susceptibilities of the readers
for whom it is primarily intended that there is
nothing in it which could hurt or shock the
most sensitive of parents.

To write a pamphlet of this kind may seem
to the casual reader an easy matter, but those
who have had some practical experience of
the subject with which it deals know that the
task which Dr Thomson has achieved with
such complete success is one of very great
difficulty and they will always be grateful to
him in the name of the mothers they are trying
to help, for his labour of love.

The pamphlet is to be sold for distribution
at the rate of 25s. per 100; single copies are
6d. each or, in cloth, Is. 6d., and we confidently state that in future no office of a
Voluntary Association can consider itself
adequately equipped without a supply of the
pamphlets on its shelves.

The C.A.M.W. has purchased a limited
number of copies for disposal which it will be
glad to supply on application, or they may be
obtained direct from the publishers, Messrs.
Oliver & Boyd, 83, Paternoster Row, London,
E.C., or Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh.
Causative Factors of Mental Inferiority
and the Prevention of Degeneracy.

By J% E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D.,
Director of State Bureau of Special
Education and Professor of Clinical
Psychology, Miami University.

This pamphlet is a reprint from the Proceedings of the 46th Annual Session of the
American Association for the Study of the
Feeble-minded, held at St. Louis, Missouri,
in May, 1922. It contains a summary of the
results of an analysis of the personal and
family histories of 872 consecutive cases
examined by Dr Wallin at the St. Louis
Clinic and sums up the conclusions he has
arrived at from this and other experience of
the kind during the last 12 years.

Dr Wallin discusses at length the place of
heredity as a factor in the production of
feeble-mindedness and gives a summary of the
views of other experts on the question showing
how widely divergent these views are. He
also points out the extreme difficulty
frequently found in detecting adequate causation in individual cases, this being possible
in the present enquiry in only 229 of the 872
examined. Of this number (229) he found
that the mental deficiency was due to heredity
alone in 46%, that in 16.6% it was partly due
* We do not forget Miss Macdowall's valuable little
book, "Simple Beginnings in the Training of Mentally Defective Children," but this does not roncer i
itself specifically with babies, and is not of course a
Pamphlet,
to heredity and partly acquired, and that in
37.8% it was wholly acquired, and he sums
up his general views on the subject as follows:
"In my own experience, therefore, the
evidence for the hereditary transmission of
feeble-mindedness, in the sense in which
that term has been employed, is not as
positive or unambiguous as is desirable for
the purpose of formulating a theory of
causation which shall adequately account
for all the facts and lead to measures of
prevention or treatment, which shall be
maximally effective. How then, shall we
formulate an adequate theory of causation ?''
The theory advanced to answer this question
is that the defect in cases with regard to which
causation is obscure and does not appear to be
heredity, is due to the influence of toxic
substances acting upon the soma or germplasm of the parents and of the embryo or
foetus either directly or indirectly?a theory
which Dr Wallin maintains (despite his
realisation that it will doubtless be attacked
as ' 'heterodox and unscientific'') can be shown
to be supported by evidence derived from
experiments which have been made with
regard to alcoholism and lead poisoning.
The practical outcome of the adoption of the
theory is, he maintains, important in seeking
to prevent mental deficiency in that it shows
we "cannot depend solely upon colonisation,
sterilisation or laws prohibiting the marriage
of the feeble-minded but must also aim at the
prevention of toxication of the germ-plasm in
the parents of each successive generation."
Report on the Work of the Children's
Branch or the Home Office. April,
1923. H.M. Stationery Office. Price
2s. net.

This Report contains not only a record of the
work and progrdss since 1916, of Industrial
and Reformatory Schools but a review of all
the other activities of the Home Office in
connection with children and young persons,
such as ' 'Probation," ' 'Cruelty to Children,''
"Employment of Children," "Cinematographs," etc.

The first chapter, devoted to a general discussion of Juvenile Delinquency, contains a
useful summary of the various methods which
can be used by Courts in dealing with young
offenders, under the Children Act, whilst the
chapters on Reformatory and Industrial
Schools and on Probation are packed full of
just that information which those who are
concerned with the subject in any way ought
to have at their command.

The question of Mental Defect is not dealt
with at any length, for the Commissioners do
not share the view of those irresponsible
alarmists who proclaim it as being the chief
cause of all delinquency and crime. On the
contrary we read {page 8):?

"Mental defect is too often stated as the
primary cause of delinquency in children'
It is often put forward as an excuse for an
offence, and is used as an argument for neglecting the education of a child who is really
only backward. Although it is no doubt true
that many serious offences may be directly
attributed to mental defect, the majority oi
offences are committed by normal children
who have not been trained to control their
impulses."

Much greater attention is now being given in
Home Office schools to the problem of the dull
and backward child, and it is inspiring to
read that he is "no longer being given the
minimum of teaching in the school-room on
the ground that his mind is not worth development but is becoming an object of interest and
study. Thus on the ''Cornwall'' and in other
schools the principal teacher has recognised
that the training of these boys is his greatest
responsibility and he takes the lowest class
himself."

But the whole Report should be read and
studied by all Mental Welfare workers. ^
may justly be taken as the official embodiment of the new spirit in which the problem of
delinquency is now being approached, and
its complete abandonment of the old vicious
ideas of repression and punishment is full of
hope for the future.

In "National Health,'' for May and June*
1923, there appear two articles by Dr Tredgold on ' 'Mental Deficiency in Children under
School Age,'' which should be useful to those
who have not the time or opportunity for
reading up the subject in his book.
The magazine can be obtained, at the price
of Dd. a copy, from the Manager, "National
Health," 5, Tavistock Square, W.C.I.
