The Psychology of the Criminal
===============================

:Type: Book Reviews By
:Author: M. Hamblin Smith, M.A., M.D. 
Medical Officer of H.M. Prison, Birmingham.
Methuen & Co., London, pp. 182.
Price 6s. net.

The Psychology of Misconduct, Vice
and Crime." By Bernard Hollander,
M.D. George Allen and Unwin, London
pp. 220. Price 7/6 net.

With the growth of the science of psychology, current ideas regarding the causes underlying conduct or misconduct have undergone
a very important development and in no direction is this more apparent than in our views
concerning the criminal. From being a person to punish he has become one to understand
and reform. To do this obviously necessitates a psychological study of the individual
criminal and Dr Hamblin Smith's book gives
the results of such a study which he has made
in a considerable number of cases.

Dr Hamblin Smith, for the past three years,
has had the opportunity of examining many
offenders in and around Birmingham to which
city, as is well known, belongs the credit of
having taken the lead in this country in the
psychological investigation of criminals. In
addition Dr Smith has had twenty years
experience as Medical Officer in local and convict prisons, so that we looked forward to
reading his account with much pleasure and
with great hope that we should find in it a
valuable exposition of the subject.

The book consists of six chapters; Chapter
I is a general statement of the problem, and in
it the author briefly discusses the various
theories which have from time to time been
advanced as to the cause of criminality, the
problems of punishment and of responsibility.

He emphasizes here, and throughout the
book, the absolute necessity for a study, not of
crime, but of the individual criminal, if we
are to make any advance in our knowledge and
methods of treatment. Chapter II deals with
the physical examination and investigation of
the offender's conscious mind. It contains a
useful account of the mental tests which he
has found of value, which, in the main, are the
same as those in ordinary use in the examination of defectives. Chapters III. & IV. whicfl
deal with the investigation of the offender s
unconscious mind, are taken up with an
account of the doctrine of Freud, of the abnormal states which may result from repressed
complexes and of the methods of psycho analy*
sis. Chapter V. gives a short description of
such offenders as Mental Defectives, Epilep"
tics, Psychopathies, Moral Imbeciles, etc.*
and the final chapter deals with the attitude of
society to the offender and makes some useful
and practical suggestions.

Whilst much in this book will be found of
decided value to those entering upon a study
of criminology, or who are called upon, in
either a medical or legal capacity, to deal with
offenders, we must confess that on the whole
we come to the end with a feeling of disappointment. For it seems to us to have one
grave defect which militates against its general usefulness, and that defect lies in the
general want of balance and undue prominence
which is given to Freudism and Psychoanalysis. With regard to this doctrine DrHamblin Smith is obviously a fervid enthusiast. Nearly two fifths of the book deal with
the criminal from this aspect alone and even
when describing him from other standpoints
the author seems to be in the predicament of
Mr. Dick with regard to the head of King
Charles. Thus, even in the case of the constitutional inferiors, whose real trouble surely
depends upon their innate imperfections,
we are told that " it is quite possible that some
sexual conflict is often at the root of the
trouble." We are informed that a repressed
sex conflict "is always to be found" in cases
of kleptomania and that even the dipsomaniac
probably owes his craving to a repressed sex
conflict. This is not the place to enter upon a
criticism of Freud's doctrines, but we may
remark that many of them are purely hypothetical and are very far from being accepted
by many psychologists of eminence and experience. Personally, we do not deny the possibility of repressed conflicts being a cause of
crime, but we feel that there is more in the
psychology of the criminal than this and we
could wish that a somewhat better balance had
been preserved in the author's presentation of
the subject.

There is one other matter to which we would
Venture to allude, namely, that of moral sense.
? Hamblin Smith denies that this exists;
"ut does he appreciate what is meant by this
term? If Dr Hamblin Smith, or any other
^ell brought up, self-respecting person, should
j)appen, whilst walking at night along an unfrequented road, to stumble upon a bag of
sovereigns, why does he give notice at the
P?lice station or take steps to discover the
owner? The circumstances are such that he
^ight appropriate them without the slightest
chance of detection and it may be that his first
Impulse is to do this. But this primitive
instinct is inhibited by certain emotions, (repugnance, shame, self-esteem, etc.), crystalled round the idea of theft. This system of
emotional dispositions centred round an idea
institutes a sentiment, a sense?in this case
moral sense? and we believe that there is not
?nly ample evidence that such exists, but that
plays a very important part in the inhibition
?f primitive instincts and consequently in the
regulation of conduct . We may add that we
regard the absence of this sense as one of the
Rental defects present in that class of persons
known as moral imbeciles, regarding whom Dr.
mith seems in such perplexity.

^ hilst we consider that Dr Smith's account
the criminal attaches undue importance to
?ne mental aspect, nevertheless the book is
?hviously the result of much thought and
observation and is conceived in a scientific
spirit. We cannot say the same of Dr.
Hollander's production. It is in the main a
c?nglomeration of trite sayings, obvious facts
and inaccurate statements put together in an
extremely loose manner and giving no evidence of either scientific knowledge or original
thought. The book might well have been
Written by a journalist who had read up the
subject, indeed it is doubtful if a modern
edueated journalist would have perpetrated
many absurdities as it contains. For
mstance, resentment is surely an emotion, the
author speaks of it as a propensity or impulse,
he calls suspicion an instinct. He says:
There are many geniuses in the world who
remain undeveloped and obscure for lack of
opportunity; there are many imbeciles whose
defects are hidden because they are never
called upon to do anything requiring intelligence, and there are many criminals in the
world who remain honest solely because they
have never been subject to temptation." If
he is using the terms genius, imbecile and
criminal in their proper meaning this is sheer
nonsense. We fancy that most people will
also think the same of the statement "most
people could not get drunk if they tried.'' We
are told that "in the struggle for existence
among men, it is not the fittest that survive,
but those who most readily adapt themselves.''
It does not seem to have occurred to Dr.
Hollander that these latter are the fittest. It
is interesting to learn that ' 'the morally sound
will grow up normally even amongst criminal
surroundings"; but it would be still more
interesting if Dr Hollander would produce
evidence in support of this statement.

Dr Hollander would appear to have such a
unique knowledge of ' 'phrenology'' that he has
surely missed his vocation. He can detect
thieving propensities merely by the shape of
the head. What an asset for a criminal investigator! He gives a whole catalogue of
alterations in conduct which may happen after
injury or disease of various brain areas, and he
claims to have discovered the actual localisation of various propensities. What a virtue
there is in that ' 'may'' instead of ' 'do." Of
course such changes may occur, but equally of
course the} may not. And upon such observations as these he bases the cerebral "localisation of conduct!''

One final small point. On Page 42 Dr.
Hollander says, as if it were his own idea,
"Even in the case of tests which are tests of
character and most nearly approach social situations, there is still a great difference between
passing them in a laboratory or under the stress
and strain of real life." The words seemed
strangely familiar so we looked up the
"Lancet" of November 16th, 1920 and there
we read, ' 'Even in the case of tests which most
nearly reproduce social situation there is still
a great difference between passing them in a
laboratory or under the stress and strain of
real life." But the author of the words was
not Dr Hollander! A. F. Tredgold.
24 STUDIES IN MENTAL INEFFICIENCY.
The New Psychology and the Parent . By
H. Crichton Miller, M.A., M.D. Jarrold,
6s. net.

Dr Crichton Miller has summarised the
recent advances in the knowledge of analytical
psj^chology and the unconscious with special
reference to the child and his management.
It is from the parent's point of view that the
following remarks are made.

The whole ground covered is still highly
controversial and we may still doubt after
reading the book whether the public will benefit from having in its hands the tools of the
expert mind-analyser. But Dr Crichton
Miller disarms much criticism. For, as he
says, it is not psycho-analysis for the young he
advocates, but rather a method by which we
are helped to think clearly and to know ourselves. His principles are often not much
more than intelligent commonsense, and are
practised by many who would repudiate all
knowledge of psychology. He enters a more
debateable realm in the chapter on dreamsymbolism, which we can only feei, will deter
many from further study and will afford
amusement to more.

But questions as to the application of this
new psychology must be answered, and we
must be thankful that we have here a reply
written in such a spirit of sanity and fairness.
He has placed within public reach much that
must tend towards a more commonsense view
of mental hygiene. The chapters on sexinstruction and his recommendations on the
treatment of the sensation-mongering child
are especially important in emphasising the
need for an unemotional treatment of the
topics which will arise, and the paramount importance of not relegating subjects unpleasant
to the parent to mental cupboards.

All this and much else in the book must
help towards mental health, even though there
lurks in it a very real danger that as parents
we shall introduce a new self-consciousness,
unnaturalness, and exaggerated anxiety into
our relationship with our children?especially
with our amateurish efforts?which they will
be the first to detect and to resent. Again and
again neurotic conditions revealed in the consulting-room are directly attributed to some
early, usually parental, mismanagement.
The lay reader cannot judge of the fairness ox
this estimate, but we question whether the
inherent weakness, even after perfect mental
surroundings, would not have found some peg
on which to hang the complex.

Lastly, will the psychologist never learn
that the lay public dislikes his particularly
irritating slang ? N. Barlow.
Remembering and Forgetting. By Pr?"
fessor T. H. Pear, M. A., B .Sc. Methuen,
7s. 6d.

This book is difficult to review; one reason
is that in his preface Professor Pear has disarmed criticism. The defect of the work lieS
in that the author has tried to deal with too
big a subject in a too limited space?the trees
in the wood are too closely crowded togetherSuch a defect has this merit for many of us,
that interest, stimulated, but not satisfied by
one or other aspect of the subject matter of the
book, must find satisfaction in a wider reading
of the whole subject. A sufficient justification
in itself for the publication.

There is one important point which could
do with greater elaboration, because of its
legal importance, that is the value of crossexamination in aiming at the truth of a recalled experience. It would be of great
interest to ascertain if the emotional state of
the person actually participating in an experience has any marked effect on the appreciation of that experience.

Would a person very highly emotionally
affected by the witnessing of an accident get a
different impression?even actual visual impression?from that of a less emotionally
affected spectator? It seems a point of practical importance.

In his chapter on the "Intellectual Ptespectability of Muscular Skill" there is much food
for thought and research. The idea of what
might be termed a Kinaesthetic memory
almost distinct in itself is new to me. But
even in its shadowy form it opens up the possibility of answering certain questions that have
hitherto been unanswerable or only answerable in a vague unsatisfactory way. It is to
be hoped that Professor Pear will some day
soon give a detailed account of any research
j*e has or is carrying out regarding this possibility of a defined kinaesthetic memory.
r The book is an excellent starting point for
m&ny lines of psychological reading and as
such can be sincerely recommended. It is not
too technical and yet sufficiently so to form a
s^ep to more detailed study.

E. A. Hamilton -Pearson .
The Local Government of the United
Kingdom" and "Social Administration
Including the Poor Laws," both by
John J. Clark, IvI.A., F.S.S. Sir Isaac
Pitman & Sons. 7s. 6d. net each.

^ should be considered as important for
Cental welfare workers as it is for social
Workers in any of the older branches of that
Profession to have, as a background, a knowledge of activities outside their own special
Province, with some idea of the "early history" in which the multifarious social movements of the present day have their roots.
These two volumes should do much to supPly for the much occupied worker without time
^?r prolonged study what he needs in this
direction, for whilst being brief and to the
Point, they give a comprehensive account of
the movements constituting "Social service"
and of the powers and duties of the public
anthovities concerned with Local Government
and of the various Acts of Parliament which
they severally administer.

One does not, of course, expect a work of this
kind, surveying such a wide field of social
activity, to enter into detail with regard to
each of its subdivisions. But in the treatment of the subject of the care of the mentally
defective to which we, whose chief interest it
ls> naturally pay special attention?we note
s?nie misstatements and omissions serious
enough to warrant the author's attention
being drawn to them.

Each of the volumes contains some account
of the Mental Deficiency Act. In Chapter
~pll. of "Social Administration including the
?^?or Laws," the act is described in so far as it
affects the position and duties of Boards of
Guardians. The description given is substantially correct, but it is perhaps a pity that
the account of procedure under Section 30 (ii)
Was not carried a step further in order to completo it by showing exactly how it achieves its
end?a point upon which the general reader is
now left in doubt.

There is also an account of the Act?this
time in its relation to Local Government?in
Chapter XX. of ' 'Local Government in the
United Kingdom." The criticism we would
make here is that no indication is given as to
there being any limitations in its application.
Indeed we read, in the paragraph headed
"Duties of Local Authorities," "The first
duty of a local authority is to ascertain which
persons within their area are defectives and
therefore subject to be dealt with under Section
2 (2) (b) of the Act" which implicitly rules out
the idea of limitation. Moreover included in
this category of defectives who must be
"ascertained" by the local authority are
"persons already in prison or undergoing
detention in a place of detention, or a reformatory or industrial school or a lunatic asylum,''
and ' 'pauper mothers of illegitimate children"
whereas all these are cases which Local
Authorities cannot touch unless they are
requested to do so in the manner provided by
Section 9, 16 and 30 (ii).

With regard to the Finance of the Act, the
writer is evidently unaware that an Amending
Act passed in 1919 repealed the provision by
which a limit of ?150,000 was put to the
money which could be expended by Parliament thereon.

Voluntary Associations for Mental Welfare
receive no mention in either of these volumes,
although in Chapter XXII. of "Social
Administration," which deals with the
' 'organisation of Social Service,'' the ' 'gradual drawing together of the work of voluntary
organisations and that of the organised staffs
of local authorities" is especially noted as a
healthy sign of the times. Nor is there anywhere any mention of the emergence of Mental
Hygiene as one of the newest factors in the
problem of social service?a point which it is
specially regrettable to find omitted in the
chapter dealing with "The Delinquent."

To the Mental Welfare worker, however,
whether administrator, Secretary, or visitor
who wants to gain a knowledge of the genera l
machinery of our social administration and of
the principles underlying it, we can confidently recommend both these volumes.

4'Mental Deficiency,'' 4th edition. Bv A.
F. Tredgold, M .D., M .R .C .P., F .R .S .Ed
Bailliere, Tindall & Cox. 21s.
A book with the reputation of Dr Tredgold's and whose third edition we reviewed in
these columns as recently as October, 1920,
needs from us no further recommendation. Its
appearance, however, in a fourth edition is
something of an event to those concerned with
Mental Welfare work and we cannot let the
occasion pass unnoticed.

A number of new illustrations, many of them
supplied from Dr Nicoll's and Dr Brushfield's unique collection of photographs at the
Fountain Mental Hospital, together with much
new material, have been added to this edition
and the size of the volume has increased by 39
pages. The chapters on Moral Deficiency,
Criminal Aments, Clinical Examination,
Mental Tests and Diagnosis have been entirely
re-written whilst considerable additions have
been made to the chapters on Psychology,
Mentally Defective Children, and the Clinical
Varieties of Primary and Secondary Amentia.

There has also been a re-arrangement of some
of the old material and the sequence of
Chapters 16 and 17 (Moral Deficiency and
"Vicious and Criminal Aments") has been
reversed.

An addition to which we should particularly
like to draw attention as we feel it to be of
great practical value, is the inclusion, in the
Chapter on "Moral Defectives," of the diagrams which Dr Tredgold first showed at the
University of London Post Graduate Course
for Medical Officers in the spring of 1921.
They are concerned with the normal evolution
of mind and with its evolution when abnormal
or incomplete and they give an indication of
the meaning and the precise significance of
mental abnormality so vivid that it can be
grasped almost at a glance.

In his review of the Third Edition in this
journal Dr Turner referred to the large number of laymen to whom?as well as to medical
men?this book is indispensable. May we,
on behalf of the laymen concerned, make one
humble suggestion, viz., that when the time
comes for a Fifth Edition to be issued it shall
contain a Glossary of the more technical
medical terms for their special benefit ?
