Mental Defectives Under the Poor Law: How the Problem is Dealt with at Ipswich by Co-operation with other Bodies
=================================================================================================================

:Auhtor: M. Jefferies. V

.. admonition:: About the author
  M. Jefferies V is the Chairman of the Ipswich Board of Guardians.

The proper care of the mentally deficient who become chargeable to the rates is
one of the most difficult problems with which Guardians are faced.

In the old davs very little was done for them. The imbeciles, if not too troublesome, were left in the ordinary Workhouse or Infirmary Wards where they were
often a great source of annoyance to the old people and where they sometimes met
with a good deal of unkindness from the rougher inmates. The higher grade
feeble minded girls, too weak to succeed in the battle of life, were allowed to drift
into the Workhouse and to mix with the very worst women there; and as a result
they often left the Workhouse to lead an immoral life, returning again and again
to give birth to illegitimate, weak minded children.

When the Act of 1913 was passed, it was hoped that the Guardians would, in a
great measure, be relieved of the care of the mentally deficient; but owing to the
need of economy due to post war conditions, and the consequent shortage of
Special Institutions, a great many defectives still remain under the direct care of
the Guardians; and it is obvious that for a considerable period Workhouses will
have to be used as places of detention under the Act. This state of affairs is
much to be regretted, as even under the most favourable circumstances Workhouses are not the right places for the majority of mental defectives. Conditions
which are suitable for the aged and infirm, whose physical and mental powers are
on the wane and who chiefly require peace and comfort, may be deadening to mental defectives who need the stimulus of constant change and interesting occupation. The Nurses in the ordinary Poor Law Infirmary have neither the time nor
training to teach the lower grade mentally deficient how to develop such powers
of mind as they Lave, and therefore the defectives tend to grow dull and apathetic.

The high grade feeble minded girls realise that the other inmates can take
their discharge at will and they bitterly resent the fact that they themselves are
detained. As a result they are much more troublesome than they would be in an
Institution where all the inmates were certified. The discipline and peace of the
Workhouse in consequence suffers, and the Officials are inclined to blame the
defectives and to forget the fact that the defectives are deprived of their freedom
through their mental infirmity and through no fault of their own, and therefore it
is the duty of the State to make their lives in the Institution as happy as possible.
In a few Workhouses the mental defectives have special classes and are taught
* For a lucid account of the legal position, see *"The Poor Lam Officers' Journal"* Feb. 2nd.
1938.?Ed,

various handicrafts, but, although such a course has proved to be very beneficial,
most Boards of Guardians are reluctant to incur the expense of having a wholetime trained teacher, and it is almost impossible to obtain a lady with the required qualifications who is able and willing to be a part time worker.

The Ipswich Board of Guardians have surmounted this difficulty by cooperation with the Voluntary Association of Mental Welfare. Each pays half the
salary of a trained teacher who works under the Voluntary Association in the
Occupation Centre for imbecile children in the mornings, and who takes the
mentally deficient in the Workhouse for two hours every afternoon. She gives
two afternoons a week to the cases in the Women's Infirmary, two afternoons to
the women in the body of the House and one afternoon to the mentally deficient
male patients.

The defectives in the Infirmary are of so low a mentality that it is difficult to
teach them much in the few hours at the teacher's disposal, and most of the time
of the class is occupied in recreation; music, dancing and singing. The defectives
in the body of the House spend part of their two hours in recreation, but they
devote the rest of the time to learning raffia work, mat making, basket work,
leather work, embroidery, knitting, crochet, etc., etc., During their spare time
in the week they finish the work which they began at the Class and they turn out
very pretty, saleable articles. These are sold at a special Stall at the Brabazon
Sales, and the proceeds of the sale more than cover the cost of the material.

The defectives go for a weekly walk outside the Workhouse grounds; at
Christmas each is given a present and in summer those, who are well enough, are
taken for an outing into the country or to the seaside.

The Classes have brought a great deal of interest and pleasure into the lives of
the defectives; the teacher usually gives them work to do which appeals to their
sense of beauty and the)' are very proud of the articles they make.

In the future it might be possible to extend a good deal further on these lines.
A whole time teacher could be beneficially employed, and it would be advantageous if the dffectives could have special wards and attendants. Undoubtedly,
however, the ideal is that all defectives needing institutional care, excepting only
the most infirm, should be removed from Workhouses and placed in special
Institutions for the Mentally Deficient.

Besides sharing with the Voluntary Association the services of the teacher for
the defectives, the Ipswich Board of Guardians co-operates in various other ways
with that Association and also with the Statutory Committee and with the
Education Committee; and this co-operation facilitates the work of all the bodies
concerned.

The Workhouse Officials report to the Secretary of the Voluntary Association
any inmate who appears to them to be certifiable. The Secretary interviews the
alleged defective, makes enquiries into his or her history from relatives, and past
employers and teachers, and submits the report to the Workhouse Committee,
who are then in a position to decide whether or not to refer the case to their
Medical Officer for examination. It is a distinct advantage to the rate-payers for
all mentally deficient persons to be transferred to the Statutory Committee
as then half the cost of their maintenance can be recovered from Treasury funds.

Moreover, in adopting such cases for certification, the Statutory Committee can
remove the defective from the Workhouse to some more suitable place: such a
course is desirable when dealing with young people who are likely to benefit by the
training which they would receive in a special Institution for the Mentally
Defective.

If the Secretary of the Voluntary Association knows that any person, whom
she believes to be mentally defective, has entered the Workhouse, she reports the
matter to the Guardians' Officials, who are usually able to persuade the alleged
defective to remain in the Workhouse until the necessary enquiries and arrangements have been made. If the inmate in question is found to be a settlement case,
who has to be removed to another Union, the Secretary of the Voluntary Association is informed as soon as the transfer has taken place in order that she may
notify the case to the Voluntary Association of the Distr.ct to which the alleged
defective has been taken. This procedure is advisable as it may prevent some
very defective persons from discharging themselves from the Workhouse almost
immediately upon their admission and subsequently getting into serious trouble.

Regulation 238 of the Act states that the Superintendent of a Certified
Institution with the consent of a Commissioner or two of the Members of the
Committee may grant leave of absence to any patient detained in the Institution.
When the Regulations were made, it was j,robabl v assumed that the Superintendent of a Certified Institution would be a Medical man or a person with special
knowledge of mental deficiency and that the Members of the Committee would be
persons selected because of their interest in the welfare of defectives. At the
present time many Workhouses have been certified for the reception of defectives
under the Act; the Master of a Workhouse and the Members of the Committee may
be persons whose knowledge of mental deficiency is limited; yet according to the
Regulations, the Master of a Workhouse and any two of the Workhouse Committee are empowered to give a leave of absence for an indefinite period to a patient
without consultation with the Statutory Committee, although that Committee,
having had the whole facts of the case placed before them and having obtained the
opinion of two qualified medical men, have deemed it necessary for the defective
to be detained in an Institution. The difficulties that may arise through this
Regulation must be apparent to everyone; and they are more likely to occur
because many defectives improve greatly both in conduct and appearance whilst
under Institution care, but go back mentally and physically if they leave.
People, who have not witnessed this deterioration and who are not conversant
with the appalling difficulties into which defectives are apt to get when they are
not under proper care, very naturally underestimate the dangers of allowing high
grade defectives to leave an Institution. It, therefore, appears desirable that the
Regulation should be so amended as to ensure that leave of absence exceeding 48
hours should only be granted to certified patients in Workhouses with the approval
of the Medical Officer and with the concurrence of the Statutory Committee.
Since persons of low mentality are more likely than persons of average
intellect to require indoor relief for themselves and their children, it is extremely
probable that a considerable proportion of the children under the Guardians' care
will prove to be dull and backward or feeble minded.

The Superintendent of the Ipswich Poor Law Children's Home calls the attention of the Secretary of the Voluntary Association to any child whose mentality
appears to be subnormal in order that she may arrange for the child to be interviewed by the School Medical Officer for the purpose of classification of his or
her mental condition. The records made by the Medical Officer not only serve as
a guide to the Guardians in their present dealings with the children, but will be
of great use if, in the future, the case of any of these subnormal children comes
before the Statutory Committee for consideration, as it will obviate the difficulty,
which is now often experienced, of proving that the defect existed from an early
age.

Most School Doctors in the course of their work come across difficult cases of
mentally unbalanced children in which it is hard to decide whether the abnormality is due to real mental defect or to unsatisfactory home surroundings. The
Ipswich Guardians have admitted several such children into their Poor Law Home
for observation at the request of the School Doctor although the parents of the
children were not destitute in the ordinary meaning of the word.

This same useful co-operation is also shown by the Ipswich Guardians and the
Statutory Committee concerning defectives who do not need Institution
care. If a defective, who is under Statutory Supervision, requires help owing to the
temporary unemployment of his or her parents, the Guardians give assistance
during the time of stress, and the defective comes again under Statutory supervision when the need for relief has passed; thus the necessity of placing the
defective under permanent guardianship under the Act is obviated. On the other
hand, if it appears that a defective, who is having out-relief, can be dealt with better
by the Local Authority than by the Guardians, the Statutory Committee accept the
case without making any difficulty.

The Guardians avail themselves of the help of the **Voluntary Association** in
dealing with defective persons who are receiving out-relief; a list of the names of
all such persons is given by the Relieving Officer to the Secretary of the Voluntary
Association who visits the cases regularly and sends quarterly reports to the OutRelief Committee, and any suggestion made by her for the welfare of any of the
defectives is usually carried out.

Since many defective persons need at various times in their lives assistance
from the Education Committee, the Board of Guardians, and the Statutory
Committee, it is imperative that all these bodies should work harmoniously
together in the carrying out of their duties. This is done with considerable
success in Ipswich and is in no small measure due to the tact and efficiency of the
successive Secretaries of the Ipswich Voluntary Association, who have in many
ways acted as a link between the three public bodies.
