A Case of Intellectual Superiority with Personality Handicaps and General Maladjustment
========================================================================================

:Author: Alice J. Rockwell, Ph.D.
Psychologist, Baltimore Mental Hygiene Clinic
Martin, aged nine years, was referred to the clinic by his family
physician, because of marked maladjustment in school. Just before
he was referred, the parents of his classmates had protested against
his presence in the class, saying he was such a disturbing influence
that the education of the other children was being jeopardized. The
probable outcome of the case seemed to be expulsion from school.
The history was obtained from the mother, the father, the
family physician and the school principal, interviewed separately.
In order to understand Martin's personality difficulty it is necessary
to see him in his family setting.

On the paternal side the grandparents were born in Russia,
of Jewish parents. The grandfather came to America in 18G3. He
made an initial success in the wholesale liquor business, later broken
up by a disagreement with his partner. He tried two other business ventures, neither very successful, and continued to work until
his death at the age of sixty-eight, of a heart attack, llis wife was
also born in llussia. She died at the age of thirty-eight, in childbirth, when Martin's father was fifteen years old. The father is
the oldest of their four children. His two sisters are married and
appear normally adjusted. His brother, forty-two, a civil engineer,
has a long history of mental disease. His condition is paranoid; he
has twice tried to kill his wife and has had many years of hospitalization, but is now paroled and maintaining himself in a distant city.
The maternal grandfather, a man of comfortable income, died
four years ago of heart failure. The parents of the patient lived in
his home, lie was pleasant and friendly; lie loved Martin who, in
turn, respected his authority. The grandmother, seventy-one years
oi age, has most of her life been in poor health. After her husband's
death, four years ago, she seemed to lose what little energy she possessed and is now a querulous, fault-finding, sickly old woman who
spends most of her time in bed. Before the grandfather's death
she was very indulgent toward the child; but of late, with increasing
ill health and approaching senility, she has become very antagonistic
toward him. She complains of his behavior constantly, and disagrees with her daughter as to proper methods of discipline for him.
Each evening she recounts to the father a list of the boy's crimes for
the day. The grandmother is in a somewhat matriarchal position,
as Martin and his parents live in her home, maintaining a standard
of living which the father's salary would never permit. She, of
course, controls the purse-strings.

A grand-aunt, sixty-eight years old, sister of grandmother, also
in poor health, has lived in Martin's home throughout his life-time.
She frequently champions the child, interferes in discipline, and
always makes it a point to show him off to visitors.

The boy's father, fifty-seven years old, is at present a civil
engineer, earning a very moderate salary. He did not marry until
he was forty-seven years old, and attributes his long bachelorhood
to improvidence and thoughtlessness, lie states that he is fond of his
wife and happy in his work, but admits freely that his home is an
unhappy one. He feels somewhat restricted in his social activities
because of the presence of several invalid women in the home, and
does not feel free to bring his professional friends there. He admits
that the discipline in the home is divided, and that this has bred in
the patient defiance for all authority. Martin's welfare is of primary importance to him, so much so that he cried while talking to
the worker about the problem.

Martin's mother is now fifty-one years old. She had a common
school education, and at an early age assumed a great many household duties because of her mother's poor health. She has never lived
away from her parents' home. During the interview she was nervous
and on edge, very protective about giving information concerning
the child. She denied Martin's misconduct and threw all the blame
for his present maladjustment 011 the school. It was observed in
the clinic that she "nags" the boy constantly. It is reported that
she protects him from the father's attempts at discipline. The
father believes that she wants the boy to be a miniature adult in
behavior and that if she had her way, he would never play with other
children. This year she has been taking him to and from school because of her fear that the other children may hurt him.
The mother is considered a nervous person by family and
friends, and for this reason worthy of special consideration. She
stays in bed many mornings until about ten-thirty. The father spoke
of her as a most "opinionated" person, whom 110 one can convince
by argument. It lias been his habit to let all suggestions come from
her and to agree with her in order to "keep the peace." Her attitude and personality as seen at the Clinic were neurotic in the extreme. Several observers reported spontaneously that her personality was one of the most irritating encountered there for many a
day.

Martin is an only child. The mother was forty-two at the time
of his birth; he was born three weeks prematurely and was a high
forceps case. There is nothing unusual in his physical developmental history. There was no persistent enuresis, and no auto-erotic
habits have developed. He is a sound sleeper, has good appetite, although he does show some food fads. He is afraid of only one thing,
electric storms, following the example of the women in his home. He
docs not have temper tantrums, and has never shown any sex
curiosity, nor to the parent's knowledge, had any sex experiences.
Before his entrance into school, which coincided roughly with
the grandfather's death, the father states that Martin was a docile
and obedient child, although he was pampered excessively by everyone except his father. He had, at. this period, excellent table manners and was exhibited with great pride to guests because of his attractive appearance and behavior. Since the death of the grandfather he has become a behavior problem both at home and in school.
His behavior is for the most part of the attention-getting type?an
aggregation of small annoyances which become cumulatively intolerable to each new teacher as the weeks go by. He talks to other
pupils, takes materials from their desks, pokes and shoves other children, spills ink, chews gum and snaps it, makes spit balls, rubs the
soles of his shoes on the floor, makes a peculiar noise in his throat,
distracts other children by bringing toys to his desk, lie responds
to no authority, and the teachers have been unable to improve his
behavior with either discipline or kindness. On several occasions
lie has stolen things belonging to other children. He has taken
money from home, and stolen food from neighboring stores. The
mother denies that he has ever stolen from her, but says that he
"appropriates" change that he finds around the house.

The school principal is sure that the teachers are not at fault.
Martin has had several teachers, and all report the same sort of
conduct. They have hoped for improvement as the boy grew older;
instead he appears worse than a year ago.

His school work has never been outstanding. His average
grades are "moderate" to "good"?never excellent. He skipped one
semester of second grade.

Martin was seen at the Clinic in October, 1929. At the time
of psychological examination he was friendly and co-operative, very
talkative, seizing frequent openings in test situations to bring in
relevant general information. He was physically restless, constantly
getting up and sitting down. Overhastiness sometimes resulted in
initial wrong responses, corrected at once. Work habits were not
completely controlled. The boy enjoyed working without direction,
but slumped considerably in effort at moments when the examiner
appeared not to be giving full attention to his activities. He
talked constantly in a loud, strained voice, and laughed a great deal.
He was obviously over-stimulated, and showed too much initiative
and zest to be a comfortable group member.

On Stanford Binet (full schedule) his chronological age was
nine years, his mental age twelve years, eleven months, his Intelligence Quotient 143. He gave superior adult scores on memory
span; vocabulary was fourteen years; he passed the fourteen year
arithmetical reasoning problems as well as the differences between
president and king. At year sixteen he had no difficulty with the
enclosed boxes problem. His Binet test was typical of the superior
child group surveyed by the author in 1924. On twelve performance
tests his median mental age score was eleven years. Median scores
on the performance tests ranged from seven to fourteen years, with
one test at twelve years, two at thirteen and two at fourteen. On
Ilealy Completion II his score was at the median for ten years, the
errors being in the field of observation rather than failure to comprehend the situations. On this test his over-hastiness of response militated against success.
To summarize the psychological results: Martin showed very
superior all-round ability. He was too rapid and uncritical in many
first responses?definitely over-stimulated and most immature in his
demand for attention. He is underplaced in school for his mental
age, but not from the viewpoint of personality and emotional maturity.
A physical examination was not made. The psychiatrist reports
a fairly developed and nourished boy, notably active physically and
mentally. He looked into everything, walked about the room and
talked constantly in a loud voice; both talk and general behavior
were rather immature and childish. His response to questions about
school was quite superficial; he denied any serious school difficulties,
was frank about his minor delinquencies, but thought them of little
importance.

He reported a fondness for reading, movies, and construction
work with his father's carpenter tools, with a preference especially
for the construction work. He plays little with other children but
has picked out for special attention, two "bad boys, one four and
a half years old, and a boy at school who insists on the patient's
bringing him money. The younger boy is evidently a flagrantly
"hardboiled" child from Martin's description of his behavior.
Martin said he believed it was wrong to take things. He admitted taking "a penny or two" from everyone at home except his
father. "That," he said, "isn't stealing."

He spoke of the adults in the home very frankly. His father,
lie said, works all the time and sometimes Sundays, too. Ilis mother
disciplines him mostly for infringement of health rules. His father
is more severe, but the boy has more respect for him. His mother
he can get around; his grandmother is so weak she "can't get at"
him. The parents promise him many things for good behavior. He
told of the grandfather's giving him $5.00 and dying the next day
ol heart failure (he did not see any humor in this juxtaposition of
facts). Nothing of a sexual significance was uncovered.

When the patient was leaving, the psychiatrist gave him a slap
on the back, which he immediately returned, with interest. This is
an excellent illustration of his attitude toward adults in general.
At the staff conference on this case, attended by tlie family
physician who had referred the boy, it was felt that this child, although superior intellectually, is very immature in personality. His
difficulties are not of his own making. He is the only child of middleaged parents, overprotected and spoiled in his early years, now the
victim of split discipline in the home and interference of aunt and
grandmother. In the home the boy is a veritable bone of contention.
The father, the only masculine ideal in the boy's life, although
he does have more respect from the boy than anyone else, has shown
himself inadequate to cope with his own home situation. Although
he wants nothing more than to be of help to the boy, he fails to be
a satisfactory masculine ideal because of his own inadequacy.
It was felt by everyone in staff conference that the boy has
little chance of improvement in the present home situation. The
father felt it impossible to withdraw from the home of these semiinvalid women and set up a separate household with his wife and
child. Indeed, in view of the mother's overprotective and nagging
attitude, it is doubtful whether such a move would have solved the
problem. The parents would not consent to placing this boy in a
foster home.

Children's Village was recommended by the Clinic. The family,
however, preferred to send the boy to a good military school. During the Christmas vacation he came home, and both parents, overjoyed at his improvement, brought him to the Clinic. He was dressed
in a natty uniform and beaming with pride. The parents report
that they have never seen such a complete change in any individual.
He has been thoughtful, kind, and there has been no difficulty at
home whatever. He is doing well in his school work. The headmaster has never considered him a problem child. He adapted at
once to the school routine. At the Clinic he showed none of the
old restlessness. The parents are more than grateful for the Clinic's
recommendation to remove him from the home.

With the family history of a psychosis in one paternal uncle, the
neurotic mother and the boy's own intellectual precocity, the best
sort of mental health in childhood seems doubly necessary for this
boy, if he is to become a well balanced adult.

The case appears especially interesting in that the boy's intellectual superiority has not led him to make a better social adjustment,
in spite of untoward home conditions. This boy and one or two other
very brilliant boys and girls seen at the Clinic recently, also in difficulties, would seem to suggest the relative unimportance of intellectual superiority per sc in social adjustment.
