The Significance of Test Results in Predicting Efficiency in Garment Machine Operating
=======================================================================================

:Author: Katherine Treat
Vocational Adjustment Bureau, New York City*
The chief purpose of the experiment1 described in this report
was to determine if the aptitude of girls entering a class in garment
machine operating could be measured.2

In outlining the experiment, it was felt that if significant relationships were found the test could be used in place of an actual
try-out on the machines to weed out probable successes from probable failures among further applicants for such trade training.
When significant relationships between test results and ability to
learn the trade were actually found in the course of this investigation, it was decided to experiment further with the tests to determine their validity with trade school groups slightly older chronologically and of a higher intellectual status than the original group.
The results for all of the groups included in this investigation are
pooled in this report.

MAKE-UP OF THE GROUPS STUDIED IN THIS INVESTIGATION

1. Experimental Group. This was the first group studied in the
course of the investigation. It consisted of 101 subnormal girls who
passed through the class in garment machine operation conducted
* The Vocational Adjustment Bureau is a social service organization,
specializing in the study of problem girls, especially in relation to vocational
guidance and employment. The maladjustments of these girls are often due
to subnormal mentality or psychopathic tendencies which may result in social
and industrial inadequacy. By taking into account the entire situation surrounding the girls, and helped by the studies of the Research Department, an
effort is made to place each girl where she may develop to the limit of her capacity. The Bureau maintains an experimental therapeutic workshop, (VAB
WORKSHOP), to which nervous and mentally disturbed girls are sent for
economic rehabilitation.

1 Devising the team of tests was part of a larger experiment. For a
complete report of the whole experiment see Unger, Edna W.: Vocational
Training for Subnormal Girls, An Experiment in the Garment Machine
Operating Trade, Journal of Personnel Research, Vol. V, No. 6, Oct., 1926,
pp. 243-255. A reprint of this article may be obtained from the Vocational
Adjustment Bureau.

2 "To learn" was defined as to learn to operate the power machine and
to produce work reaching or exceeding the average standard set up by the
machine operating industries.
TESTS IN GARMENT MACHINE OPERATING 219
by the Vocational Adjustment Bureau from July 1923 to March
1925 and for whom complete records were available.
The chronological ages of these girls ranged from 12 to 19
years, eighty percent of the group being between 14 and 16 years of
age.

In mental age the girls included in the Experimental Group
ranged from approximately 8 to 11 years. Two-thirds of the group
were included between the mental ages of 7 years, 9 months and
10 years. None of the girls in this group had an I.Q. above 70, inasmuch as girls with Standford-Binet I.Q.'s above this were not admitted into the class. As a matter of fact, 50 percent of them were
either in ungraded classes at the time of admission to the class in
garment machine operating or had previously attended such classes.
The tests used in this investigation were standardized on the
first 45 girls of this group3 and then given to the girls who entered
subsequently.4

In the instruction in garment machine operating given to this
Experimental Group the atmosphere of the shop rather than that
of the class room was maintained. Trade standards were adhered
to as closely as possible in every phase of the work. The class was,
however, designated purely as a testing class. Each girl received
approximately 90 hours of training, extending over a period of six
weeks.

2. Trade Extension Classes. The second group consisted of
girls from Trade Extension School Classes. The Trade Extension
Classes represent a branch of the Manhattan Industrial High School,
a public trade school of New York City. They are for (1) girls over
14 years of age who have not completed the course at elementary
school but wish to take trade training, and (2) those girls who are
unable to complete the trade course at Manhattan Industrial High
School because they find the trade training of that school too difficult.
One of the courses offered in the Trade Extension Classes is
training in power machine operating. For admission to the class
the girl must meet the requirements of a machine operating test
requiring one hour per dayfor five days. This test is an actual try-out
3 Treat, Katherine: A Team of Psychological Tests for Mentally
Deficient Power Machine Operators. Unpublished thesis, Columbia University, New York, 1924.
4 Treat, Ivatherine: Tests for Garment Machine Operators. The Personnel Journal, Vol. VIII, No. 1, June, 1929.
on the machines which, however, has not been standardized. There
exists, however, this, eliminating factor, not present in the case of
either of the other two groups.

The training corresponds rather closely to that used in the
Bureau's group, except that some handwork and stitching on foot
driven machines is given. Members of this group had received approximately 90 hours training in operating when the tests were given
November 11-18, 1926.

The girls in the Trade Extension Class ranged in chronological
age from 14| years to V7\ years, with two-thirds of the group between
15 and 17 years.

The girls ranged in mental age from 8 years to about 15 years,
with two-thirds of the group between 11 and 14 years mental age.
The Otis "B" Test for General Intelligence was used to find the
mental age, and the results therefore are not perhaps altogether comparable with those of either of the other groups, in which different
tests were used.

3. East Side Continuation School. In accordance with the laws
of the State of New York, "children between 14 and 17 years of
age who are regularly employed must attend continuation or part
time school for 4 hours per week, unless they have completed the
four year high school course. If out of employment such children
shall attend such schools not less than 20 hours per week."5
One of the courses offered for girls in the East Side Continuation
School is power machine operating. There is no preliminary requirement for admission to this class. The training received is individual
in character, because the personnel is so constantly shifting that
little regular class work can be given. The girls furnish the material
for whatever simple articles they wish to make on the machine, and
after learning control of power from the teacher, they try to make
the article.

From the point of view of length of training and experience,
the group was very mixed, this being the third year in continuation
school for some girls and the first week for others. Many of the girls
were working, and some had been working for over a year at machine
operating jobs in various industries. No estimate could be made of
the number of hours training for these girls, though no girl was in5 An Abstract of Laws Governing School Attendance and the Employment of Children in New York State, Bureau of Women in Industry, Department of Labor, Sept., 1926.
eluded in this study unless she had had training for one month or
more involving at least twelve hours of work on the power machine.
The girls in this third group ranged in chronological age from
15 to 17 years with over 90 per cent of the group between 16 and 17
years. This third group was older chronologically than the other
two groups, but there was much overlapping in all of the groups.
The mental age ranged from approximately 1\ years to almost
18 years with two-thirds of the group between 10| and 14| years.
The Otis Self-Administering Test, Intermediate Grade, Form A
was used to determine the mental age.

Total Group. The combined group consisted of 242 girls with
complete records, made up of the 101 girls in the experimental group,
40 in the trade school group, and 101 in the continuation school
group. They had had from 12 to 90 or more hours of training in power
machine operating.

The combined group ranged in chronological age from a little
over 12 years to 19 years, with the average at 15 years and 10 months
and over two-thirds between 15 and 17 years.

Since three separate tests were used for measuring general intelligence, no comparison of the mental ages or Intelligence Quotients
could be made. An inspection, however, shows the two trade school
groups to be within approximately the same general range and the
experimental group to be lower in range of general intelligence.
Standards of accomplishment in power machine

OPERATION
-----------

1. Experimental Group. The criterion with which each test
was compared for the first group of 45 girls, on which the original
battery of tests was standardized, consisted of a single mark made up
from an average of the actual marks given day by day. A five point
scale?poor, poor+, fair, fair-]-, and good,?was employed in marking. All work was rated on six points, viz:?accuracy, speed, neatness, handling, attitude, and grasp of directions. In the final mark
the two items of accuracy and speed were weighted by giving each
twice the value of the other items. The final weighting was obtained
by adding the weighted score and dividing by 8. This weighted score
is known as the "objective work rating."

For the whole group of 101 girls, however, this "objective work
rating" was modified by a subjective rating. This second rating was
called the "judgment rating." In this, the absence of the incentive
of remuneration, competition, pressure, strain, etc., was taken into
account by the instructor in judging the chance of success for each
individual as a future operator. Some who rated well in actual accomplishment had to be rated subjectively as possible failures in
industry for such reasons as nervousness, inability to concentrate,
quarrelsomeness, need of constant prodding, etc., while others who
rated slightly below average on the basis of actual accomplishment,
were considered possible successes for such reasons as personality,
failure to put forth full effort in training because of lack of financial
compensation, etc. Since the purpose of this experiment was not
only to measure the trainability of the subnormal girl as a machine
operator, but also to estimate her probable success as an operator in
industry, it was decided to use the second or subjective "judgment
rating" as the final criterion. On this "judgment rating" Criterion,
21 percent of the girls were rated as probable successes, 21 percent
as doubtful successes, and 58 percent as probable failures.

2. Trade Extension Classes. The Criterion with which each test
and the combined tests were compared in the case of this group was
as nearly the same as that for the Bureau group as could be expected
from different raters, different instructors, a slightly different training course, and a slightly different group of girls.
The weekly machine operating marks were copied from the girls'
report cards and averaged. The five point scale of poor, poor-]-, fair,
fair-\-, and good was used in rating the following: work, speed, attitude, and grasp of directions. In the final score the two items " work"
and "speed" were weighted by giving each twice the value of the
other items. The final weighting was obtained by adding the
weighted scores and dividing by 6. This weighted the two items
'work" and "speed" a little more than for the Bureau group, but
it was felt to give the nearest comparable Criterion. Each girl was
then given a "judgment rating" representing the combined opinion
of her four instructors with reference to probable success or failure
in the trade. This "judgment rating" represented the final Criterion.
3. East Side Continuation School. For this school the same plan
of marking was adhered to as for the Bureau group. The final "judgment rating" constituted the Criterion. Only one instructor judged
the marks in this school.

Table I shows the distribution of machine operating ratings
("judgment ratings") on probable successes, doubtful successes,
and probable failures, for each of the three groups and for the total
group.

Table I
Showing Percentage Distribution of "judgment ratings"?Successes, Doubtfuls, and Failures?for the Separate Groups and the Combined Group.
Group Successes Doubtfuls Failures
Experimental  22 21 57
Trade Classes  20 52.5 27.5
Continuation School. . 31 46 23
Total or Combined.. . 25 36 39

THE TESTS AND THEIR ADMINISTRATION

The conditions for testing were in every case quite good. The
individual tests for the Continuation School group were given at a
table in the same room where the operating class was being conducted. There was considerable confusion in this room, but the testing
was done in a far corner.

A preliminary battery of IS tests was tried out on the first 45
girls of the Experimental Group. The five tests which showed the
highest correlation with the "objective work rating" were chosen
for the final team of tests. They were then given to the remaining
56 girls in the Experimental Group, thus covering the entire group
of 101 operators. The final team included the following tests:
Triviming Test.6 This is test 11 of the series, Girls' Mechanical
Assembly Tests, Institute of Educational Research, Teachers' College, and was given as a group test to small groups. It involves cutting out a design between a path of double lines, the path becoming
narrower as it progresses. The excellence of the performance depends upon the girl's ability to cut between the lines without touching either of them.
Porteus Maze Test.7 This is a test in which the subject is instructed to trace her way through certain mazes from a fixed start
to a fixed end. There are eleven mazes in a scale of increasing difficulty designated by ages from 3 to 14 inclusive. The test age score
achieved by the subject is expressed in terms of mental age. This
test requires prudence, foresight, practical judgment, perhaps a
certain degree of emotional stability, and has been found to correlate
with industrial success.8

6 Toops, Herbert A.: Tests for Vocational Guidance of Children from
Thirteen to Sixteen, Teachers' College, Contributions to Education, No. 136,
Oct., 1924, pp. 123, 125.

7 Porteus, S. D.: Porteus Tests, Vineland Revision, Publications of
the Vineland Training School at Vineland, N.J., No. 6, Sept. 1919.
8 Glenn, Irene: A Report on the Correlation of Mental Tests with
Academic and Manual Subjects, Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. Ill,
p. 496.

Paper Folding Test.9 This is a simple test involving the process
of folding five 4X4 sheets of yellow paper into smaller pieces according to a designated pattern. The subject is told to fold, as quickly
and neatly as possible, her five sheets in just the way the Examiner
illustrates. The papers are scored for time and quality, but only
the quality score was considered in this investigation. The subjects
were hurried in order to determine the quality of work they could
do under pressure. It is a simple test to comprehend, and after the
first paper is folded becomes a test of manual dexterity requiring
precision, neatness, and speed rather than a test of comprehension.
Card Sorting Test. This test consists in arranging two packs of
playing cards into suits. Four cards are removed in order to make
an even 100 cards. The cards are always presented to the subject in
the same order, and she is told to arrange them into the four suits
which had been previously pointed out. To make a good score requires apperception, neatness, precision, speed and the ability to
learn quickly and remember which cards go into the individual piles.
Tapping Test.10 The apparatus for this test consists of a block
of wood about 5 inches by 8 inches in which there are holes arranged
to make an equilateral triangle. The holes are metal-lined. Behind
each hole is a small metal counter. The board is supported to stand
at an angle of 45 degrees. There is a metal stylus with a wooden
handle. The subject is told to take the stylus and insert it into the
holes in rotation as quickly as possible. A trial practice period of 15
seconds with each hand is given. Then the total number of taps
made by the right hand and registered by the counter on the back
of the board in 30 seconds is averaged with the total number made
by the left hand in 30 seconds. This average represents the score.
This test requires coordination of hand and forearm, and a sense of
rhythm.

When applied to the whole group of 101 girls the first three
tests were shown to be the most valuable, so when the team was
given to the Trade Extension Classes and to the East Side Continuation School the least valuable test, namely Tapping, was omitted,
and the fourth test, Card Sorting, was tried out on the Trade Classes
group and on 77 of the Continuation School girls, a number considered sufficient to estimate the value of this test.
For the Experimental Group of 101 girls correlations between
test scores and "judgment ratings" were computed by the Toops'
9 Porteus, S. D.: Ibid.

10 Scott, Walter Dill: Personnel Management. A. W. Shaw & Co., 1923.
revision of the Pearson correlation formula.11 Toops' multiple ratio
correlation formula12 was applied to these raw correlation coefficients, on both raw scores and team scores, to select the battery of
tests which would yield the maximum prediction of the Criterion.
The results for the two other groups, namely the Trade Extension Classes and the East Side Continuation School were subjected
to the same analysis by the same method.

Finally the results of these three groups were plotted together
in a correlation scattergram, using different symbols for each group.
An inspection of the scattergram (Figure I) showed the three groups
to be nearly homogeneous in content, and to make valid the computations of correlations, and the selection of a team of tests on the
basis of the entire group of 242 cases.

The resulting multiple ratio correlation on the combined groups
of 242 subjects was .61 ?.03, quite comparable with the correlation
of .06 ? .04 on the Experimental group13 alone, and is considerably
higher than that of .45 ? .09 on the Trade Extension Classes group
and that of .31 + .06 on the East Side Continuation School. These
correlations are much lower than that of .84+ .09 figured by the
Rank Difference Method obtained on the original 45 subjects from
the Experimental group with the work rating as Criterion.
As in the case of the separate groups, it was found that a combination of Porteus Maze, Paper Folding and Trimming yielded
practically as high a degree of prediction as would be obtained by
adding the other two tests of the team, namely Card Sorting and
Tapping. The above correlations are computed from the raw weighted scores of these three tests and the Criterion, i.e. the "judgment
rating" of the ability to operate an electric power machine. The
raw score weights for the combination of the scores of these three
tests into one combined weighted score were obtained by dividing
the three weights for each of the tests by their respective standard
deviations. The weights are as follows: Paper Folding X 5; Porteus
MazeX2; and TrimmingXl.

11 Toops, Herbert A.: Eliminating Pitfalls in Solving Correlations'
Journal of Experimental Psychology, Vol. IV, No. 6, Dec., 1921.
12 Toops, Herbert A.: As yet unpublished.

13 In a report of this experiment, "Vocational Training for Subnormal
Girls," by Edna W. Unger (quoted above) the correlation of the total team
scores with the criterion is reported as .59 ? .05, whereas it is reported in this
paper as .66 ? .04. The original multiple of the total scores was obtained by
combining tests according to the original weights used, and the latter multiple
by combining the single tests and building up the correlation the .07 points.

Figure 1
Criterion Scores and Team Tests (Weighted Raw Scores) Showing Critical Score for Combined Group of 242 Subjects.
Judgment Ratings
Test
Scotgs 12 3 4 5
56-60
52-56
48-53
44-48
40-44
36-40
32-36
28-32
24-28
80-2416-20
13-16
8-12
M-)'
\ ?
H{i IIM
HH II
HU?
WV \W
9 ?
O O
A A
WW AAA
A A4 A A
0 ? ???
9 &5> O
It ? ?
d &
o ? ?
(it ? ?
on a i?
I &
9*9
9 ? O
III ?
oo o
I A ?
0 9 9 9
1SJ2
9 6##
? 9 ? ?
111 ?4
OJ AA
w
HIM
0?9
o ?
m 0 9
A ? 9
t U
0> 9 0
mi a
o o o
1|9?
? 99
mi a
9 9
IHM
09
ll ?
9 O
??
99
9A.
? o A
9 A
dA
? oo
No-? 50 45 87 44 IS 242

Key: | Experimental Group 1&2, Probable failures
A Trade Extension Classes 3, Doubtful successes
? East Side Continuation 4&5, Probaole successes
School
Key: [ Experimental Group
A Trade Extension Classes
? East Side Continuation
School
1&2, Probable failures
3, Doubtful successes
4&5, Probable successes
TESTS IN GARMENT MACHINE OPERATING 227
Table II shows a comparison between the coefficients of correlations for the team tests and the Criterion for each of the separate groups and for the Total Group. In every case the correlations
for the Experimental group, or the group for which the tests were
originally intended and upon a portion of which they were standardized, were highest. The correlations were next highest for the
combined or Total Group.
Table II
Coefficients of Correlation between the Criterion and Team Tests for the
Various Groups.
Group Porteus Maze Paper Trimming Total 8 Tests No.
Folding
Experimental 5S + .05 .52 + .05 .53 ?.05 .66+.04 101
Trade Classes 22+ .11 .45+ .09 .23+ .01 .45 + .09 40
Continuation School. .27 + .07 .26+ .07 .27 ?.07 .31 ?.06 101
Total 3 Groups 52?.03 .52?.03 .47?.03 .61?.03 242
Development of Critical Score for the Elimination of
Failures
This method14 involves plotting test scores against "judgment
ratings" as for a correlation chart, and then drawing an arbitrary
line so that those making desirable test scores for the Criterion will
be included.

Experimental Group. For this group, when the raw scores were
plotted against the "judgment ratings" it was found that a score of
32 or above for the three tests as a critical score eliminates approximately 63 percent of the failures, 5 percent of the doubtful successes,
and 5 percent of the probable successes.

Trade Classes. A critical raw score of 32 for the three tests eliminates 45 percent of the failures, 24 percent of the doubtful successes,
and no probable successes in this group.

East Side Continuation School. In this case, a critical raw score
of 32 eliminates 24 percent of the probable failures, 7 percent of
the doubtful successes, and no probable successes.

Total Group. A critical raw score of 32 for the three tests used
eliminates 44 percent of the probable failures, 3 percent of the doubtful successes, and 3 percent of the probable successes for the total
group. This critical score, therefore, fails to eliminate 56 percent of
the failures. These failures occurred, it would seem, not so much because of absence of the specific motor abilities required by the tests,
as either by reason of the fact that a number of the elements de14 Bills, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. V, 1921.
manded in machine operating were not measured by the tests or
that perhaps certain other necessary qualities classifiable under the
head "personality" were not involved in the examination.

An inspection of the records of these failures revealed that some
were decidedly institutional cases (especially from the Bureau's
Experimental group), so hopeless was the prognosis for success at
even the lowest grade of unskilled work. A considerable number
were sufficiently unstable emotionally to interfere with the proper
concentration on their work. Some showed a decided lack of interest
in their work. It is also probable that for the more intelligent girls in
the two trade school groups the tests were not sufficiently discriminative of manual dexterity.
In the case of no single test used alone in predicting the Criterion, did the critical score method prove effective as a means of
eliminating prospective failures for any of the three groups or for the
Total Group.

An Analysis of Other Eliminating Factors
In considering other possibilities, besides the team of tests as a
means of eliminating failures, none were found to be so valuable
as the tests.

Chronological Age. In the narrow range of each of the separate
groups, there is little relationship between chronological age and the
ability to run an electric power machine, but for the combined
groups this relationship is somewhat more marked. For the Experimental group the correlation was .016 ? .07, for the Trade Classes
.088?.01, for the Continuation School .004+ .07, and for the total
or combined group it is raised to .26 ? .04. However, even this correlation of .26 is hardly of significance.
Intelligence Quotient. Since a different general intelligence test
was used for each of the three separate groups, no attempt was made
to pool these results. In each case, however, the relationship between general intelligence and the Criterion is positive, being .35
+ .05 for the Experimental group, .30+ .10 for the Trade Classes,
and .33 + .06 for the Continuation School. There is an average
correlation of .33 for the three groups, representing a slight but
consistent positive relationship between general intelligence as
measured by the tests and the ability to run an electric power
machine.

It is interesting to note in this connection that a critical score
of I.Q. 50 eliminates 24 percent of the failures in the Experimental
group when the individual Binet is used. An I.Q. of 80 as a critical
score eliminates only 9 percent of the failures for the Trade Classes
when the Otis "B" Test is used. An I.Q. of 65 as a critical score
eliminates 33 percent of the failures (and no probable successes) for
the Continuation School group when the Otis Self-Administering
Test, Intermediate Grade, Form A is used. This last represents a
better elimination of failures for the Continuation School than the
team of tests, the best critical score in this team eliminating only 24
percent of the probable failures.

Summary and Conclusions

1. The team of three tests referred to in this report is effective
in eliminating future failures among applicants for classes in power
machine operating. It is most effective when used for that type of
girl on which the tests were originally standardized, namely the
subnormal.

2. The team is most effective when the raw scores are used and
given the following weights: Paper FoldingX5, Porteus MazeX2,
and TrimmingXl.

When this procedure is followed with a mixed group the best
critical score eliminated 44 percent of the probable failures, 3 percent of the doubtful successes, and 3 percent of the probable
successes. When applied to the group whose Intelligence Quotients
are below 70 on a Binet scale the same critical score eliminates 63
percent of the probable failures, 5 percent of the doubtful successes,
and 5 percent of the probable successes.

3. Although there is no point of emotional instability at which
it can be said that a girl can or cannot learn operating, it is obvious
that no unstable girl should attempt to learn the trade.

4. From the evidence from the Experimental group, and other
evidence which the Bureau has gathered,15 no girl should be admitted
to a machine operating class who tests below a mental age of 8 years
on a Stanford-Binet scale.

5. The tests were not found to be sufficiently discriminating for
use with the two trade school groups, especially when the groups are
considered separately. The results show that when the tests are
subjected to use and analysis on the groups differing from that group
on which they were standardized, they are not as selective as for the
original group.

15 Unger, Edna W: op. cit.
It is possible that if other tests, requiring a higher degree of
intelligence and perhaps finer manipulative ability were added to
these three, the resulting combination might be valuable in eliminating future failures among the candidates for these classes.
At present if for any reason the try-out period in the Trade
Classes were to be eliminated, the tests would be a valuable substitute for it. Such a substitute would probably be more valuable
than the results in this paper show, for the group then would be more
heterogeneous. If the class in machine operating in the Continuation School were to be overcrowded and a preliminary selection
required, the group test of general intelligence alone would be a
helpful eliminating factor, the battery tests described in this report
serving probably as a good secondary eliminating factor.D