An Information Test of Interests
=================================

:Author: Kathryn McHale
rrofcssor of Education, Goucher College, and Acting Director and Educational

Secretary of the American Association of University Women
A determining factor which lias been scarcely utilized for vocational guidance is the interest of the individual. Vocational guidance directors have sought to tap interests, but few have determined
accurately the degree to which any fundamental interest is possessed. They have not, with any degree of satisfaction, been able
to tap accurately the interests of those who are not conscious, in
the sense of being fully aware, of a vocational interest. The major
proportion of college undergraduates are without vocational information and do not have marked vocational interests, but are
anxious to know how their general and special interests can be directed to vocational choice. If we possessed full knowledge of the
degree of existing interests in any individual, we could the nturn
to a more intelligent study of the individual's abilities and pertinent vocational pursuits as related to his interests. We have sufficient evidence to prove that if any individual pursues an activity in
which he is wholeheartedly interested, he will put forth his greatest
effort, insuring greater success within the limits of his ability.
The evidence can be found in a review of studies of interests.2

The most convincing is that of E. L. Thorndike, who" in the elaboration of the Bridges' data, found the following:3-4
"The order of a pupil's interests as lie estimates them gives almost as good
a prophecy of the order of his grades as does the order of his abilities as he
estimates them. Neither gives a very close prophecy because the distinctions
involved are so fine?and because the grade received in a single course is so
afflicted with chance error. Widen the distinction (as by comparing mathematics, language, physical sciences, history, drawing, and music) and reduce the
1 Read tit the annual meeting of the National Vocational Guidance Association, Atlantic City, February 20-22, 19:50.
*See Kathryn McIIale, An Experimental Study of the i ocalionai interests of a Liberal Arts College Group, The Journal or Applied Psychology,
Vol. VIII, No. 2, June, 1924.
3 Bridges, J. W. and Dollinger, V. M., Correlation Beticeen Interest and
Ability in College Courses, Psychological Review, 27, 1920.
* Tiiorndike, E. L., The Correlation Between Interests and Abilities in
College Courses, Psychological Review, 28, 1921.

chance error (as by taking the average in four or more courses in each) and the
correlation between interest and ability will surely rise considerably above 0.70.
On the whole Bridges' data seem to corroborate the doctrine of a very close relation between the order of an individual's interests and the order of his abilities."
Make-Up of the Information Test of Interests

These suggestions, along with others, influenced the writer to
formulate a working idea to guide an objective study^ of vocational
interests in Goucher College; the idea being, that if one made an
information test based on interests, perhaps one would arrive at
something more tangible by way of a guidance tool. The following
sources served, for the most part, to furnish the vocabulary and
test content: (a) books, (b) information, and (c) tabulated magazine and newspaper clippings read by Goucher students in incidental or casual reading for a period of three months. Several
hundred tests of the recognition type, made up principally from
these sources, were criticized by judges who left 247 as being the
most representative. On the cover page of the test appeared a
suggested list of vocations for college women with two directions
to the student, (a) to underline five of her choices in order of preference, (b) to read the test directions and proceed when the
signal was given.

Samples of the test, with directions follow:
Underline the word or words which will make the statement accurate.

Group I

The most widely used individual general intelligence test in the elementary
schools is the
Pintner-Patterson Performance Tests Seguin Form Board Stanford Binet-Simon Army Alpha.
The Education Bill would if passed
Abolish State's Rights Provide for government inspection of schools
Allow for school standardization Establish a National Department
of Education with a Secretary in the President's cabinet.

Group II

The "Findex System" is used in
Bookkeeping Stenography Filing Typewriting
A comptometrist is secured to use principally a
Typewriter Dictating machine Telephone Computing machine

Group III

Root vegetables are best kept by
Cutting tops Removing dirt Keeping dirt and tops attached Placing in water
The best depth of a pan which will keep milk sweet longest is one which is
3 5 7 9 (inches)
Tripe is a
Fish Animal membrane Fowl Vegetable
In reading an electric meter the dial on the right in a complete revolution
indicates in kilowatt hours
10 100 1,000 10,000
A butler or waitress should start to serve
Left of person at hostess's left Left of person at hostess's right
Farthest person from the hostess Nearest person to the pantry

Group IV

The "Hippocratic Oath" is taken by college graduates with an
M.D. Ph.D. A.B. LL.B.
The capacity of an empty stomach is
0 12 3 (ounces)

Group V

A codicil is
An attachment A bill A supplement to a will A wish
The greatest of our Chief Justices was
Wm. "White Wm. Taft John Marshall James Kent
This test was given to 133 Goueher Juniors in January, 1922.
It was finished in fifty minutes by the quickest and in eighty minutes
by the slowest.

In January, 1924, a questionnaire was sent to each individual
to whom the test had been given. At the same time a "followup letter" was sent to their employers. A summary of the most
significant findings follows.

Summary of Findings
---------------------

1. Of the eight selected groups of occupations for women
(Education and Social Service, Ilomemaking, Business, Writing and
Journalism, Science, Law, Art and Architecture, Music), Education and Social Service was the most popular choice, 41.3 per cent
selecting it as a first choice and GO.O per cent as a second choice.
(Chart I)

2. Ilomemaking was the next most popular choice. The maternal tendency may be in the case of women the most potent determiner of vocational choice, disregarding, of course, other possible factors such as, the reluctance to accept directly the pursuit of a
career with money earning responsibilities, desire for an optional
amount of leisure or independence, etc.

Chart I?Vocational Interests ok College Women
First Second
Choice in Choice in
Suggested List of Vocations Total Total
Per Cent Per Cent
Group I (Educational and Social Service)*   41.3 GO.O
1. Community Service
2. Library and Museum Work
3. Boys' and Girls' Work
4. Vocational Guidance
5. Educational Research
6. Teaching
7. Rural Work
8. Protective Work
9. Child Welfare
10. Family Case Work
11. Recreation
12. Dramatics
13. Interpreting and Translating
14. Physical Education and Hygiene Teaching
Group II (Homemaking, etc.)   27.0 15.0
1. Homemaking (Home Economics, Household Arts, etc.)
2. Dietetics and Food
3. Interior Decorating
4. Institutional Management
5. Costume Design
Group III (Business)   17.2 12.0
1. Civic and Government Service
2. Personnel Management
3. Professional Secretarial Work
4. General Secretarial Work
5. Salesmanship
G. Advertising and Publicity
7. Banking
8. Publishing
9. Business
Group IVt   G.OG 5.2G
1. Journalism
2. Short Story Writing
Group V (Science, etc.)   5.26 5.2G
1. Medical Social Work
2. Medicine
INFORMATION TEST 57
3. Biological Work
4. Technology
5. Chemistry
6. Bacteriology
Group VI (Law)   0.75 0.75
1. Law
Group VII f   0.75 0.75
1. Art
2. Architecture
Group VIIIt   0.75 0.75
1. Music

* The names in parenthesis designate the general fields covered in these
groups.

t Not included in the test.

3. The degree of stability or change of choice was studied. In
two years 24 per cent had changed their first choice and 40 per
cent their second choice. As to the number of the graduates who
were engaged in the vocation for which they had expressed a preference in their Junior year, only 24 per cent were following their
first choice and 27 per cent their second choice. Twenty per cent
were pursuing vocations not mentioned at all in their first choice.
These facts emphasize the unreliability of choice and the need for
the recognition of the principle that vocational guidance, vocational
adjustment, and vocational fitness are only names for a process
which should be continuous in its operation.

4. Correlations between choice and the results of the Vocational Interest Test for College Women were "low." This fact
seems to verify the undesirability of using choice as an index of
interest in guidance.

5. The correlations between scores of the Vocational Interest
Test for College Women and the Thorndike Intelligence Examination for College Freshmen showed no relationship. The test of vocational interests is designed to test the ability to recognize information based on interests rather than intelligence.
6. In the case of certain groups a significant degree of relationship between choice and estimates of vocational success was obtained as shown in Chart II.
Chart II?Comparison of Vocational Choice and Vocational Success.

Correlation Between
Vocational Test and
Name of Test Success Estimated by
the Employer on a
Scale of Five
, r P.E.
Group I (Educational and Social Service)  0.71 ?0.05
Group II (Homemaking)
Group III (Business)  0.81 ?0.09
Group V (Science)  0.67 ?0.07
Group VI (Law)

The number of cases included represents 63 per cent of the
original group, as 37 per cent are not pursuing paid vocations.
There is no correlation for Homemaking as the estimates of success made by husbands were not taken seriously, first because they,
no doubt, would have been prejudiced by new factors, and second,
because they probably would not have analyzed homemaking into
its recognized components. No one is pursuing Law (the only
other test for which we have no correlation), in fact or in study,
and no one is pursuing Art, Architecture or Music.

It might be stated that, since three of these coefficients of correlation, interpreted by their probable errors are reliable and
"high" (and one "very high") the vocational test is capable of
predicting fairly accurately (within these limits) degrees of success.
If degrees of interests are indicative of success it would seem
that this test has a degree of validity in prediction which is a little
better and more objective than choices as the individual selects and
holds to them; general intelligence tests as used for specific vocational guidance; academic marks; judgments of fitness; extra-curricular achievement, etc. This test will be enlarged eventually to
include content on all major vocations engaged in by college women
in addition to those mentioned. Its validity as well as reliability
as an objective measure of vocational interests is being constantly
refined to the desired limits. It is hoped that the development of
the interest test will allow more objective and adequate guidance in
vocational choice in the future as data are gathered on this and
other college groups. In at least three major vocational fields for
women, this test has proved economical and expedient as a tool for
promoting better vocational adjustment.
