Review
=======

:Author: Davies, S. P., Social Control of the Mentally Deficient,
Thomas Y. Crowell.

New York, 1930, pages XIX plus 389.

The book opens with a consideration of the faulty concepts of feeblemindedness, and especially the misinterpretation of the results of the Army
Intelligence Tests. Three acceptable criteria are listed as (1) marked deficiency
of intelligence, (2) lack of normal development, (3) social and economic incompetence. There follows a brief history of the care and training of the mentally deficient, emphasizing the period from Itard ?s program for mental development through the promotion of physiological functioning, to the most recent work in colonization and parole by Bernstein, Fernald, and others.
Certain phases of the early and middle history are treated in detail.
Among these is the alarm raised by the eugenicists. The family studies of
Goddard, Dugdale, Estabrook and others are reviewed, together with researches
dealing with the fecundity of the feebleminded. In a later chapter the author
presents the opposite side of the question in gathering together what he names
the "changing concepts of heredity." Here are offered Davenport and
Danielson's study, "The Hill Folk," the contributions in genetic research of
Jennings and others, the incidence of feeblemindedness among children of normal parents, etc. as evidence that the hereditary transmission of feeblemindedness is neither so simple, nor so predictable, nor so alarming numerically, as
was formerly believed.

A review of the laws and practice of sterilization in this country leads to
the conclusion that as a general procedure it has its limitations, and that at
any rate it is certainly not a solution of the problem for the present generation.
Segregation of the mentally deficient in the leading states is described
ljy the author as the most generally accepted solution. The history of institutions such as Letchworth Village, Rome, and Napanoch are recorded. It is
pointed out, however, that segregation is not enough, that if we cannot intellectualize we can at least socialize, as is demonstrated by the work of the
above schools, of the Waverly School, of the Vineland Training School and
of others. That rehabilitation may be accomplished through training and socialization is shown by studies of cases discharged or paroled from such institutions. Studies at Letchworth Village and at other institutions show that
rehabilitation can be achieved by large numbers under the proper conditions.
As an intermediate step between full discharge or parole colonization
serves a useful proving ground as well as a means of utilizing man power
at more varied tasks than are provided at the homo center. Davies describes
in detail results which have been accomplished through colonization by Bernstein's institution at Rome and by others who have followed his lead.
The progress made in socialization by institutions for the mentally defective constitutes, in the opinion of the author, a challenge to the public
schools in the care and training of the mentally subnormal. The work which
is being done in New York City's trade extension class, in Rochester's prevocational schools for those unable to make the grade of junior high schools,
and by the state-wide clinic system of Massachusetts in aiding the special class
program, are cited as examples of progress in the socialization of tlie mentally
deficient in the public school.

Even when institutions, schools, and private agencies are functioning at
their best, there is need for an agency of broad scope to cover the field of
community supervision, and to fill in the gaps left by the others. The state,
according to Davies, is the proper agency for the supervision and coordination
of tho work of other agencies. There are many defectives who do not require
close or strict supervision, but who need guidance, and there should bo some
supervisory agency always on the alert to help such cases. The employment
of six field agents in New York to work in cooperation with the schools, courts,
and poor law authorities, and the state clinics of Massachusetts are described
as instances of state supervision and coordination.

Throughout the volume the author stresses the fact that in the adjustment of the mentally deficient, intelligence is not the only factor to be considered, but that other phases of personality and of social circumstances are
of the utmost importance. Behavior is the result of the interaction of two
factors?personality and environment. The problem is to modify the environmental stimuli in relation to the personality in such a way as to bring out the
desired type of behavior.

In conclusion of his volume Davies states four broad principles as a basis
for a program of social control:

1. Specialized education and industrial training from an early age,
through the agency of the public schools.

2. Special training in institutions and colonies with the end in view of
returning the cases to the community.

3. Organized community supervision.

4. Permanent segregation of the feebleminded in whom it is not possible to develop adequate social qualifications.
Only the most favorable comment can be on this excellent treatise. In
addition to a wealth of factual material, tho volume is characterized by balanced critical judgment. The two serve to make this an outstanding volume
in the field. An easily readable presentation of material and adequate bibliography at the end of each chapter contribute to the usefulness of the book as
a reference work for students.
Morris S. Viteles
