Psychonomic Personeering
=========================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1930, by Lightner Witmer, Editor
Vol. XIX, No. 3 May, 1930
:Author: Lightner Wither, Ph.D.

A personal character of surpassing superiority is the engine of
human progress. It is an engine of surpassing power making effective the surpassing motives of men, women and children.
A personeer is one who projects, creates, controls, directs and
perfects this engine of surpassing power.

A personeer may he an amateur?anyone, a parent or teacher.
The professional personeer may be a priest, a physician, a clinical
psychologist or a diagnostic teacher.

Psychonomic personcering is the art and science of organizing
personal character of surpassing superiority so that men, women and
children, operating as individuals or in groups, are able to produce
performance that is psychic, i.e. in conformity to wishes, wants or
needs, and also nomic, i.e. in conformity to law?the creative law
of personal and general progress.

The surpassing motivation is an assertion of the power to surpass oneself and others. Men assert surpassing power, often enough
unreasonably, but presently justified in the outcome of surpassing
venture. Performance matching the surpassing motivation demonstrates the reality of surpassing power. A psychonomic personeer
endeavors to realize in performance realizable ideals of personal
character.

"Psychonomic personeering," ''psychonomics," or psychonomy" is clinical psychology oriented toward the creation of a personal character of surpassing superiority.
