Tbiune Man
===========

594
Art. VII.?
TBIUNE MAN.
THE INAUGURAL DISCOURSE* DELIVERED AT THE OPENING
OF THE LAST SESSION OF THE LONDON HOSPITAL MEDICAL
COLLEGE.

:Author: Andrew  Clark, M.D.
"And Godf said, let us make man in our image and after OUR likeness."
Genesis, c. i. v. 26.

" The invisible things of Him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made."?Romans, c. i. v. 20.
Gentlemen,?It is a great occasion which calls us together to-
day. Fraught with the deepest interests of individuals, and
through them of humanity, its importance cannot he overrated,
nor its objects too zealously enforced. It is the starting point of
one of those great journeys which, collectively, constitute the
business of existence, and the design and conduct of which will
not only determine for ourselves the final failure or success of
the end for which we live, but will reflect upon others also the
good or the evil which must arise from duties neglected or
fulfilled.

It is an occasion which may prove distasteful to the unthink-
ing, frivolous, and idle; but it is one which must prove pecu-
liarly welcome to the earnest in object, the heroic in self-denial,
the resolute in will?to all those who are learning to feel and to
know that man is born into the world to do something else than
to eat, and to sleep, and to drink, and to die; that life is not an
arena of pleasure, but a field of battle ; that the end of existence
is not the fullest enjoyment of its sensuous attributes, but the
completest development of all that is true, and therefore divine,
in man.

We meet, gentlemen, to inaugurate the business of another
academic year; to cast another stone upon that cairn which has
been raised by the long labours of those who have gone before,
which stands behind us now the lasting memorial of all that we
venerate within these walls, and which speaks to us in tones
* This discourse is printed, "with some verbal alterations, as it was delivered. It
is published reluctantly, and. only at the renewed entreaties of several correspon-
dents. It was written under unfavourable circumstances, and within a few days'
of its delivery. It is inadequate to the importance of the subject with which it
deals: it leaves undeveloped the theory of man which it promulgates ; and fails to
define the nature and limits of the relations which that theory holds to the science
and art of medicine. I have on these points, however, sacrificed my own opinion
to that of others, in the earnest hope that the Discourse may suggest something of
what it fails to convey.

f In this and several other passages of Scripture the substantive here translated
" God," occurs in the original in the plural form, and might be rendered " Gods "
or, more literally, the "adorable ones." Hence, (c. iii, v. 22,) "Godsaid behold
the man has become as one of US.

inarticulate, but felt, of what will touch eve^ hopeful heart to-
day?of many a past beginning and its end?of lofty resolve and
base expediency?of tedious self-denial and low indulgence ?
of earnest effort and vacillating desire?of ardent struggle and
cowardly compromise?of glorious triumph and merciless but
deserved defeat.

Present wisdom is often but the reflexion of past teachings
transmitted through new conditions. Humanity is ever the
same, though the circumstances under which it manifests itself
7 O 
may differ. It is ever repeating, renewing, recombinmg, repro-
ducing. And so to-day we are met?like those who have met
here before for the same purpose?to begin our new work,
which, like theirs of the old time, is fraught with the same dangers,
pregnant with the same promise, and stakes upon its success all
that is true?otherwise all that is desirable, worthy, or great in
life. Now if we would learn how to shun the rocks and quick-
sands upon which others have been wrecked or broken into use-
less fragments; if we would learn how to realize something
more of the possible glory of humanity than the compass of
mercenary ends, the enjoyment of unsubstantial pleasures, or
the miserable consciousness of an unmerited repute; if we
would know how to fulfil God's purpose in our creation, and
to become justified at the close of life before God and our fellow
men, we shall not only listen to those inarticulate histories
which now hopefully and mournfully come back upon us from
the past, but we shall pause, and at the outset of this business
which we are about to undertake, we shall solemnly, reverently,
with purged hearts and earnest minds, address to ourselves these
questions :?What is this work which we have before us to do ?
What are the instruments of this work ? How are we rightly to
do it ?

In addressing myself to the consideration of these questions,
and attempting such a rough reply to them as the occasion will
permit, I undertake a task of no common difficulty. There are
assembled here to-day the young and inexperienced, to whom
knowledge is an opening mystery and a strong desire; the stu-
dent who has already penetrated somewhat into the depths of
things, and has begun to speculate about their meanings and
relations; the gifted contemporary with his abundant know-
ledge and ripe reason, casting about for undeveloped truth; and
the elders and fathers among us to whom knowledge and expe-
rience have been in some sort realized and consummated, and
from whose lips I Avould gladly learn wisdom. One has his
sanguine dreams, another his prophet-oracle of materialism.
Some have their eclectics and their reasoned theory; others
their rooted dogmas, their settled systems, and their method.
The object of all may be the same, but each has his different
medium of vision and point of interest; each his own peculiar
standard of judgment, and veracious,* or veritable test of success.
To combine these conflicting elements into one, by enlisting
sympathies and appealing to interests at once great in them-
selves and common to all, and to break ground upon a subject
which constitutes the underlying greatness of humanity, the
everlasting inheritance of individual men, and the medium of
that perfect insight through which we are " to know even as we
are known/' is an attempt which needs, and for which I crave,
your most generous indulgence.

In considering and answering the great questions which we
have preferred to ourselves for solution, we shall have to go
somewhat out of the beaten track pursued on such occasions, to
lead you into what will 'prove to many new and untrodden fields
of thought, to bring to light the fallacies and dangers of that
gross materialism which pervades and pollutes the current of
modern thought, and to lift up our voice, feeble as it is, in sup-
port of that view of the spiritual constitution of man which is
being rapidly engulphed in the whirlpools of a drivelling and
insensate reason. Questions of this kind lie at the root of all
knowledge, all being, all life ; and, for these to be sound, their
/ foundations must be sure. I cannot apologise, therefore, for
leading you into discussions upon the issues of which so much is
staked. If my arguments should carry no conviction with them,
and the hypothesis I advocate be declared untrue, they will not
be valueless; they will provoke you to reflection, they will call
forth your higher faculties into exercise, and they will make you
think about the truth and seek it. However imperfectly these
views may be embodied, I am in earnest about them, and if I
fail in impressing you with their truth, I shall yet believe it is
from no imperfection in the subject, but from impotence in the
speaker.

The burden of the business in which we are about to engage
is knowledge; and that our subsequent reflections may be en-
dowed with unity and coherence, I shall speak to you in the first
place of knowledge in general; and in the second, of that par-
ticular kind of knowledge which in this College it is our privi-
lege to communicate and yours to acquire.

To comprehend the full significance of knowledge,?to perceive
* A friend, with the best intentions, informed me at the close of the delivery of
this lecture, that these terms were synonymous. I apprehend, however, that the
one has a very different meaning from the other. Veracity is the correspondence
between the assertion of a man and his conviction, opinion, or belief. Truth is the
correspondence between the assertion of a man and the absolute reality or fact. A
statement may be veracious (i. e. believed by the maker of it to be true) and yet
not veritable?i. e. true.
the relations whereby it links manhood with Godhood?finitude
with infinity ; to realize its intrinsic .worth and glory, to appre-
ciate in harmonious concord and balance its spiritual and mate-
rial utilities, and to feel it in our hearts as a divine command-
ment, a necessary means of development, and in its highest
sense the object of life,?we must possess some definite concep-
tion of the constitution of man, who is the subject of knowledge
?its sovereign and yet its slave.

But a knowledge of the human constitution is necessary fo.
other reasons than this,?for graver and greater ones than its
being merely the highest gymnastic of the mind, and the noblest
means of its development and growth.

In the exercise of our calling, it is impossible for us to deal
knowingly and wisely with the various disorders of the animal'
body without distinctly recognising the agency of states and con-
ditions of mind, often in producing, and always in modifying
them when produced. There is, indeed, a very intimate relation
between the moral and material elements of the human consti-
tution. They act and react upon each other in modes more
numerous and varied than is yet known or even conceived; and
out of their mutual motions develop phenomena, many of which
remain as inexplicable as they promise to prove important.* The
broad fact of this relation is everywhere admitted, and has be-
come a household word. Special manifestations of it occurring in
the daily business and intercourse of life are familiar to the feel-
ing and perception of every thinking man. Not only do general
states of mind produce corresponding conditions of body, but it
seems certain, from recent and carefully-conducted experience,
that the concentration of the intellect upon particular parts of
the animal frame is capable, within certain limits, of effecting
such a change in them as the will may determine. A large and
growing series of facts of this character lias already been elicited ;
but from our ignorance or indifference, our prejudice or unbelief,
they remain undigested and unclassified?vague subjects of idle
or vicious speculation, and altogether useless in their relations to
the practical business of life. With a liberal allowance for much
in these alleged facts that is either exaggerated, imaginary, or
false, enough remains to excite our most earnest curiosity, and
to justify a deliberate and systematic inquiry into their claims
upon our belief.

But I have further to observe, that the very admission of the
existence of these relations renders it a sacred duty on our parts
* Dr Carpenter's later papers, however, throw much additional light on this
subject. They are full of profound and ingenious thought, and display a remark-
able aptitude in the writer for the investigation of this very difficult department gf
truth to investigate them?to attempt the discovery of the laws under
which they are manifested,, and to render them practically sub-
servient, if that be possible, to the relief of human suffering and
sorrow. There is nothing improbable in the supposition that
such an investigation might lead to the development of a system
of moral therapeutics as valuable as an element of treatment in
chronic, as material therapeutics are in the treatment of acute
disease. If it led to nothing else than the more successful com-
prehension and control of that vast variety of functional disorders
so inseparably allied with advanced civilization, and which form
such frequent and serious hindrances to the duties and enjoy-
ments of life, it would prove a benefit of no common value to the
race. Yiew the question, however, as we will, dubious as we
maybe of its ever becoming realized into a system of practical
utility, it remains for us to remember that whatever is real and
true in these relations should not be lost to legitimate medicine?
that it should be rescued from the hands of impostors and
quacks, who have perverted the knowledge of these relations to
the vilest of purposes, and made it at once a religious abomina-
tion and a moral pest.

For these reasons, then?that you may comprehend the true
significance of knowledge, and realize the true object of its ac-
quisition, and that you may be enabled more efficiently to exer-
cise the noble profession'to which you are called,?it is necessary
that you should possess some knowledge of the mental as well
as the bodily constitution of man. Using the term in its nar-
rowest sense, an ancient writer has said, with great shrewdness
and no little truth, that philosophy should end with medicine,
and that medicine should begin with philosophy.

The universe, says the modern philosopher, is composed of
mind and matter. Man, the microcosm?the universe within
the universe?is composed of soul and body. Knowledge, there-
fore, is of two kinds?that which pertains to matter, physics, or
natural philosophy; and that which pertains to soul or mind,
metaphysics or moral philosophy. This is a classification at
once plausible, practical, and plain. It may be readily realized
by the meanest, capacity. It attracts the methodical by its
broad distinctions, and by the elasticity through which it becomes
capable of such ingenious adaptations to the varying aspects of
things. The pursuit of knowledge under its auspices has con-
ferred incalculable material benefits upon the race. Out of bar-
barians it has developed men. Of man it has made almost a God.
It has placed the powers of nature under the control of his will,
and rendered them subservient to his enjoyments and uses. But,
for all this, it is not perfect. In relation to man, it s not even
true. For, high as man stands in the scale of being?great as
have been his achievements in his conflicts with nature for know-
ledge and power?his position is not so high, nor are his achieve-
ments so great as they surely might have been if, with clearer
views of the human constitution and more earnest efforts for the
realization of his destiny, he had addressed himself with all the
powers and all the purity of his nature to the task of subjugating
the unnecessary accidents of his time and being, and struggled
through legend and prejudice to stand face to face with the
unveiled glory of immaculate truth.

In relation to man, this dual view of the human constitution
is imperfect, because its results are altogether onesided and
incomplete, and because it wholly consults his material at the
expense of his spiritual wants. It is untrue, because, pursued
into its logical consequences, it ignores a spiritual element in the-
human constitution, resolves man into a mere unity of material
organization, attributes that organization to an ordinary com-
bination of elements common to the inorganic world, and solves
the problems of organization and life, of morality and religion,
by the declaration of an unguided history and the enunciation
of' a lawless law.

Admit that man has a dual constitution?that he consists of
what is called mind and matter?and let us look at the logical
consequences of this admission. Mind is known only by its
manifestations. Where sensation, perception, judgment, reason,
memory, arc, there mind is. These properties or faculties are
found in man, and in him we say there is mind. But they are
also found elsewhere. We cannot investigate the psychical phe-
nomena of inferior animals without being forced to admit that,
over and above what we call instinct, there are to be found
sensation, perception, intelligence, reason. In the lowest forms
of animal life we find indications only of sensation; but that is
a property correlative with the others, and an attribute of one
subject. The difference is one of degree only, not of kind. The
psychical quality seems in the last degree clearly referable to the
physical organization. Yet there, according to our reasoning, is
mind. But in the lowest forms of animal existence, both reason
and revelation?if that be admitted?oppose the admission of
an immaterial principle. Philosophy forbids the introduction of'
a second cause of things where the first is sufficient. Entia noil
sunt multiplicanda ?proster necessitatem. Mind, therefore,
comes to be the mere attribute of matter, sensation a peculiar
property of the nerves, and thought as much a secretion of the
brain as bile is of the liver. Hence, by an inevitable logical
necessity, which it is at present unnecessary for me to develop
or demonstrate, has arisen that system of sensationalism which
has culminated in the boasted Positive Philosophy of Auguste
hr2

Comte?a system which reduces our mental operations to forms
of sensation,.morals, to the calculations of self-interest and expe-
diency, and religion to an old wife's fable ;?a system which
ascribes all terrestrial phenomena to the spontaneous evolution
of blind mechanical laws; which professes to demonstrate how
man with his present knowledge could have designed the world
with more excellent purpose and skill; which resolves man into
a mere automaton, and his hope of immortality into a delirious
dream ; which turns God into a figment of the fevered fancy,
and this glorious universe into a sorry system of self-sustained
machines.

Such views are not only repugnant to the innate instincts of
humanity, but can readily be refuted by reason, and?as I am
addressing a Christian audience?by revelation. There is truly
no evil without its counterbalancing good; and the shocking
conclusions forced upon his acceptance by such a system as this
has at last aroused man from his deadly lethargy?urged him
to more earnest inquiry about humanity, nature, and God, and
compelled him to seek some substantial foundation for his irre-
sistible faith.

Thus we see that, dualism ends in unitalism, and that unitalism
makes man merely a common combination of common elements.
But this apprehension of the direful dangers of dualism to the
dignity of humanity is no novel product of modern thought. It
is but in some sort a revival of that subtle intuition which in
ancient days impelled every true thinker to struggle after some
loftier conception of the constitution of man, and bravely, self-
denying^?often fiercely, to compass all the circuits of imagina-
tion and reason for the discovery of the sacred truth which lay
embosomed in their depths.

From Diogenes to Plato the solution of this problem was the
life-struggle of many an earnest soul yearning in deep desire to
realize the divinity of man. Often, through the unsettled mists
of uncertainty and error, they caught scattered glimpses of the
truth. Often were they led to the very threshold of the sanc-
tuary in which she dwelt, and only paused before the veil be-
cause they knew not where or how to lift it up. And though at
last they failed to penetrate the garnitures of this mighty mys-
tery, or rather to prove that they had penetrated them, they
wavered not in faith. They felt, indeed, that they liad probed
the mystery, and that, in their own consciousness at least, they
had even realized its solution. But they felt also that they had
failed to reason this realization into logical form, and that in
struggling after the grounds of certitude they brought to light
only the foundations of doubt. And so, at once mournfully and
and yet hopefully, they appealed to their irresistible belief,
arid left their divine inheritance for posterity to vindicate and
enjoy.

There is something inexpressibly noble iri the efforts of these
great minds to solve this great problem ; something inexpressibly
touching in the confessions of their incompetency; something,
too, inexpressibly delightful to us in the admission, that though
they did not furnish us with the workings of the problem, they
have handed down to us, and all that are to follow after us, the
real results of its solution.

In the productions of all the master-minds of ancient philo-
sophy, there is to be found an uniform tendency to attribute
a tripartite instead of a dual constitution to human nature.
Strabo and Arrian tell us that the Gymnosophists, or Brach-
mans, taught the threefold nature of man. If we examine the'
writings of Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle, we shall find that
each asserts, though in different terms, the same expression of
belief. The last, indeed, not only touches the truth, but probes
it to its very centre. He fails only in reasoning it. Man, says
Aristotle, is composed of three principles: the nutritive, the
sensitive, and the rational. The first principle is that by which
life is produced and preserved ; the second, that by which we
perceive and feel; the third, that by which we reason and feel.
So, among the latter Jewish and earlier Christian authorities,
we find a similar theory of the human constitution enunciated
and enforced.

In the Jewish Catechism, in the Talmudic treatise "Maccoth,"
and in the canonical books of Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, it is
taught, that man consists of three elements: Nepesh, Nescha-
mah, and Teschidah. Nepesh is life; Nescliamah, intelligence;
and Teschidah, the spirit or divine principle by which man may
reach unto God, and become identified with the ensophic
world.

Among the early Christians, too, the same theory was uni-
versally propounded and received. Saint Paul repeatedly speaks
of the threefold nature of man ; and in a solemn prayer for the
Thessalonians, he expresses the hope that their spirits, their
minds, and their bodies should be preserved blameless unto
the coming of the Lord. And if the reasonings of Jowett should
nullify the authority of Paul, God himself has told us, by a
hitherto unquestioned tongue, that He made man after His
own image.

Here, then, is a theory of the human constitution which has
been propounded by the greatest men of all ages, and of all
dynasties, whether pagan or Christian; a theory which, though
unreasoned, has yet been received and believed by the thought-
ful and earnest among men, because it satisfies the instinctive
cravings of humanity, and vindicates the divinity which is felt
to be its divine inheritance and its right; a theory which has
for its only rival a system wholly gratuitous in its foundations,
confessedly imperfect in its objects, and absolutely revolting in
its results.

Against the conclusion from these accumulated ages of reason
and this direct revelation, our modern philosopher opposes his
dual view of the constitution of man ; and in attempting to sub-
stantiate it by reasoning it, lands himself at last in the mires of a
solitary materialism and infidelity.

We have no consciousness, says our philosopher, but that
which is supplied to us by the successive operations of the mind.
These, collectively, constitute the individual. On this single
premiss I pin my faith. The conclusions to which it leads are
decisive in destroying your hypothesis and establishing my truth.
True, 0 philosopher, if we admit your premiss. But is your
premiss true? I am not quite sure about that. Let us look at
it a little more closely.

If we have no cognition of self other than in the changes
which self undergoes, we can have no possible knowledge of the
operative causes of those changes. Personality is lost; the
spontaneous will ceases to be a living fact; the active intellect
becomes a dead machine, and man only a blind, insignificant
puppet, moved by the strings of accidental circumstances, coming
he knows not whence, acting he knows not how, going he knows
not whither?away into the dark, unconscious and unseen.
Why should I go farther? Is not this logical consequence of
the dual theory enough to typify the rest ? Are you prepared
to accept them ? Are you ready to act upon and abide by them
for ever?to make them the bounding lines of your life, hope,
joy, and destiny? Is this really, then, to be the consummation
of all our thinkings and actings?of all bur battles and victories
?of all our triumphs over life, nature, and ourselves?of all our
instinctive and irrepressible longings after the permanent and
divine of this fleeting and visionary world ? Are we to find in
such a theory as this the foundation of all our exalted notions of
right, duty, virtue, religion, love ? Does irresponsible and irre-
sistible response to excitements constitute the boasted glory of
humanity? Is this gross and passive mechanism, called man, all
that is to spring out of that Divine Breath which of erst was
breathed into it by the Omniscient, who is said to have made it
like unto Himself, a living soul?

Thank God, it is not so. For the sake of our common race
and our common destiny, we rejoice to believe that there is
something more in man than the earth?earthy; something
nobler than blindly responsive matter; something spontaneous
something divine?something which lifts him far above the
passive existences of the universe, and links him indissolubly
with God, who became incarnate in his frame.

When I think, I am conscious not only of the thoughts
present to the mind, but also of the self which is thinking, and
to which the thoughts are present. I distinguish the thought as
object, and the self as subject. And though sensations, percep-
tions, and memories do ol themselves constitute a sort of running
consciousness which cannot be separated from them, there is
to every man a consciousness over, above, and independent
of them. This over-consciousness, so to name it, is the absolute
ego?the self?the region of personality, spontaneity, and
abstract reason?the thirdfold element of man?the abode and
sanctuary of the spirit. Do not suppose I hold any or all'
of these to be the spirit. What the spirit is, I neither know nor
conceive. I speak of these as the organs of the spirit, of which
the will, perhaps, is chief. The spirit has profound thoughts,
deep insights, divine impulses, but no language. The subjects of
its consciousness are incapable of investiture in words. They can
be felt and realized, but not expressed except through the mani-
festations of the will and in its control.

Let us to the logical proof of all this?that proof which we
covet when we cannot get, and despise when gotten.
1. Matter cannot become known unless in union with mind.
Mind cannot become known unless in "union either with matter
on the one hand, or self on the other. But we are still conscious
of self above these. This self is spirit ; and so spirit becomes
known to us of itself unto itself?unconditioned and alone. But
spirit is unconditioned only in reference to man. In obedience
to the universal law, and to complete the scale of Intelligence
and Power, spirit must be posited by something higher than
itself?something in which it must become realized and known.
So spirit, so too all possible spirits become objects to God, who is
at once their eternal subject, absolute substratum, and everlasting
source.

2. Again, every possible cognition implies a synthesis of
subject and object. But the mind reflects upon its own opera-
tions, and has knowledge of them. It is certain, however, that in
such ? reflections the mind cannot at one and the same time
be both subject and object, the synthesis of which alone consti-
tutes knowledge. Here, then, mind is the object. But it must
be the object of some subject. That subject is the spirit. Spirit,
then, is the thirdfold element of man?that Divine Breath which
links him on the one side with the universe, and on the other
with God.

The spirit is little influenced by impressions from without, and
only by those which are real. The gaudy shows of the outer
world, our routine reflections, our compensating expediencies for
violated laws, and our ostentatious philanthropies, hang like
cumbrous clouds around the spirit, shut it out from the mind,
and force it back into its unfathomed sanctuary, to brood and
beget there unheeded and unheard. It is in the solemn silence
of night, in the abnegation of barren theories, and under the
influence of earnest aspirations for the realization of God in our-
selves and in the world, that its silent but significant workings
become manifested to us?that the barrier between God's grace
and man's capacities is cast down, and that the divine light rays
out of the abyss through our minds upon nature, and guides us
unerringly to the conquest of her mysteries. It is from the spirit,
stripped of adventitious garnitures, that there has sprung all that
is great, and true, and beautiful, and holy in art, poesy, and reli-
gion. From the spirit must arise the greater glories of the
future, like incense from a censer lighted by the breath of the
Almighty, and fanned by the purified affections of man.
Through the spirit alone can we rise to the knowledge of
God, and hold with him that holy communion which is the
natural privilege and function of every disciple of Christ. Only
through the spirit can we become one with Christ, and the sons
.of God.* Spirit, then, is manifested to man, not from beneath,
but from above : it rays. into his consciousness like an ever-
living light and glory from the hidden but acknowledged
unseen: it is deeply felt amid the shows and insincerities of
social and personal life, and realized under earnestness and faith :
it is the immediate, though as yet imperfect, revelation to man of
the Eternal Image in which he was created, and towards which,
by this very community of nature, he feels himself forced to
struggle irresistibly, and yet consciously, for evermore.
But there are other and higher reasons than merely logical ones
for upholding the tripartite constitution of man : for in whatever
light we examine the characters of this wonderful being?natu-
rally, historically, or theologically?we find equal evidence of his
threefold nature.

Naturally, the threefold man is indicated in the normal
development of his being.

In infancy, there is the incessant energy of animal life, the
play of instinct, and the force of habit. Physical organization is
supreme.

In youth, obedience to instinct is replaced by sensation and
intelligent desire: the exuberance of organization is restrained
by the development of mind: sensation and its products sway.
In the matured man, instincts, sensations, and desires are
* The natural (\pvxuc6c) receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; neither
can he know them, for they are spiritually (Trvtv/xariKuie) discerned.
rendered subservient to tlie spirit, which manifests itself mainly
through the consciousness and will.

The individual is the archetype of the nation. Historically, it
will be found that nations have passed through the same phases
of development as the individuals who constitute them.
Theologically, man peculiarly displays the proofs of his own
constitution.

It was through the medium of the senses that God first com-
municated with man. This was the Patriarchal age.
In the succeeding era of human history, God communicated
with man through the mind. This was the period which began
with palmy Egypt, and terminated in fallen Greece.
In the final stage of man's theological development, God
addressed Himself to the spirit of human nature, through the
incarnation of the Word.

In the Patriarchal dispensation, we have merely material sacri-
fice ; in the times of Law, revelation is written and addressed to
the reason of humanity; in the age of Christianity, the spirit of
man is spoken to through regeneration and the gift of the Holy
Ghost.

In the next place, I would observe (and the observation is a
very solemn one), that unless we admit the threefold nature of
man, we cannot comprehend that which is the ground of every
Christian's faith?the perfect manhood and Godhood of Christ.
Christ had perfect knowledge of God?was God and yet man.
He had a human body?life and all its sufferings. He had,
however, a finite mind, for we are told that he greiv in wisdom
and knowledge. But He had a perfect spirit, for He was God,
and from first to last grace or spirit-full. Man, too, had the
elements of perfection; but the spirit was scant and soiled. So
Christ suffered for humanity, and justified it. He had all, and
was all.

Finally, if there is no spirit, there is no revelation, "Religion
is the revelation of a spirit to a spirit." The natural man under-
stands it not: it is superstition, ignorance, or folly, to him. Sen-
sation and intelligence, which are the natural parts of man,
enable him to investigate phenomena, to discover relative truth,
to develop laws, to upbuild science. When properly cultivated,
they enable him also to reap delight from the varying aspects of
nature and the revelations of genius?from forms of beauty,
melodies of colour, harmonies of sound?and from all that is
great and true in the poet's song, or the chiselled embodiment of
the sculptor's dream.

But all this is finite, physical?earthy. The means of its dis-
covery is sensation; the only test of its truth, experiment; its
highest conceivable consummation, law. But absolute truth is
not to be thus discovered. The truths of the spiritual world,
and our relations to it, and to tlie world in which we yet live
and have our being, are not to be evolved by seeing or touching,
nor exhausted by the expression of a universal law. Out of the
abyss of his own soul, every man, at some time, receives startling
intimations of this truth ; but the clouds and mists of over-culti-
vated sensations, which hang like a thick darkness round the
soul, too often prevent them from becoming operative in their
Divine design. Truly, eye hath not seen and ear hath not heard
the blessed truths which the Creator communicates to his crea-
tures. Who by searching can find out God ?

Reason, as well as revelation, therefore, demands our acknow-
ledgment of a tripartite constitution in man. Man possesses
life in common with plants, mind in common with animals, spirit
in common only with God. Life, mind, and spirit are the three-
fold elements of the living world. Imperfect apart?perfect
joined?individually manifested in plants and animals, they are
combined and consummated only in man. He, like a well-
ordered State, exhibits for our consideration,
1. The Spirit?the sovereign power.
2. The Mind?the deliberative council.
3. The Life?the subordinate executive.
Man, the centre of connexion between the universe on the
one hand, and the Deity on the other, is, like each, a trinity in
unity?the threefold perfected in the one.

Body, mind, and spirit are God's loans to man, which he is
required to put out to use, and to return with interest. Life is
a probation period; its end, eduction, development, or, as it is
commonly called, education. The means of this education are
three :?faith, grace, and will, for the spirit; sensation, percep-
tion, and knowledge, for the mind ; food, labour, and law, for the
body. The due development of these elements in their proper
and fixed relations to each other, constitutes the harmonious
unity of man. Excessive eduction of one part, at the expense
of another, disturbs the balance of the whole, develops discord,
and determines disease. Perversion of the bodily development
makes the sensualist; of the mental development, the infidel; of
the spiritual development, the fanatic and the mystic. The fluc-
tuation of these elements throughout the past ages of the world
have become the landmarks of human retrogression and progress.
Like, a wave of the sea in alternate ebb and flow, sensation now
swells into scepticism, and faith subsides into superstition. Life,
in all its present aspects, is but the battle of one-sided develop-
ments?the blind and blinding struggle of one element for supre-
macy over the other. Hence the loss of catholic unity, and the
dogmatisms of modern socialists and sceptics; hence the viru-
lence and bigotry of religious sectaries; hence our party politics,
petty philanthropies, poorhouses, penitentiaries, and prisons?
man's attempted but vain compensations for the wilful violation
of eternal laws. Solemn and weighty thoughts these, which it
were well for all of us to meditate upon, but which, I remember,
it is neither my province nor privilege at this time to discuss.

From this one-sided development of the elements of humanity,
too, have sprung other evils far more melancholy and deplorable
than even those of the grossest materialism and the most
rampant infidelity. The logical consequences of the Positive
Philosophy have proved so repugnant to the native instincts of
humanity, that some minds?even earnest and true ones?pro-
testing against their validity, and searching eagerly for the
grounds of their refutation, have been carried away by the force
of their instinctive beliefs, and have rushed madly into the oppo-
site extreme of sacrilege and superstition. The reaction from
materialism drowns itself in mysticism, and has developed
a spirit which, manifesting itself in the unhealthy forms of mes-
merism, electro-biology, table-turning, spirit-rapping, and other
mane, false, partial, and exaggerated developments of man,
" makes familiar play of the holiest instincts of humanity, and
barters our firm beliefs and our righteous reverence for the
sickly aberration of perverse and prurient imaginations." This,
reaction has revived the blasphemous idolatries of human power,
and evolved a spirit which, arrogating to itself the power of a
God, " yet gropes for the very holy of holies in kennels running
deep with the most senseless and God-abandoned abomina-
tions/'* " Our natural superstitions are bad enough ; but thus to
make a systematic business of fatuity and profanity, and to
imagine that we are touching the spiritual kingdom of God and
controlling it, is inexpressibly revolting and terrible. The horror
and disgrace of such proceedings as those of the mesmerist and
spirit-rappist were never approached even in the darkest days of
heathendom and idolatry. Oh, ye who make shattered nerves
and depraved sensations the interpreters of truth, the keys
which shall unlock the gates of heaven, and open up the secrets
of futurity ;?ye who inaugurate disease as the prophet of all
wisdom?who make sin, death, and the devil the lords para-
mount of creation ;?have ye bethought yourselves of the down-
ward course which you are running into the pit of the bestial
and abhorred? Oh, ye miserable mystics, when will ye know
that all God's truths and all man's blessings lie in the broad
health, in the trodden ways and in the laughing sunshine of the
universe; and that all intellect, all genius, all worth, is merely the
power of seeing the loftiest wonders in the commonest things?"
* Quoted through memory, with alterations, fromFerriar, the distinguished and
eloquent author of " Knowing and Being."

{To he continued.)
