Notes Of A Visit to the Public Lunatic Asylums of Scotland
===========================================================

:Author: John  Tvevsteb, M.D., E.B.S., AND E.B.C.P.,
Physician to the Scottish Hospital, fyc.

In former numbers of the " Psychological Journal," I communi-
cated an account of various visits made to public asylums for the
insane in France, which were repeated during subsequent years
although not published, from entertaining the opinion that, any
additional data then collected would have too much resembled
j3revious statements, to make them sufficiently interesting. Last
autumn, my sphere of observation was changed. Then I visited
Scotland, in order to inspect different institutions for lunatics in
that part of the empire: as well to obtain correct information re-
specting their organization and management, as also to compare
these national establishments with asylums of other countries
Believing an outline of my proceedings may prove acceptable'
I would therefore remark that six public institutions were ex-
amined,-namely, Edinburgh Glasgow, Perth, Dundee, Mon-
trose, and Aberdeen: upon each of which I propose giving a brief
notice, wherein it will be my object to detail facts, rather than
to enunciate opinions so that readers may thereby be enabled to
form their own conclusions, regarding the different establish-
ments thus brought under review.

However, before adverting to any of the institutions above-
mentioned, some notice of the laws applicable to lunatics in
North Britain will not seem inappropriate, especially to members
of the medical profession resident in England: many of whom
perhaps, may not be fully cognizant of the legal enactments
respecting insane persons, and the administration of asylums
throughout Scotland. With the view of enabling psychological
jurists to study this important subject more minutely than could
be given by any cursory statement on the present occasion, I
would observe that the following Acts of Parliament, recently
passed in reference to the insane, may be consulted advan-
tageously ; since, by these statutes Scottish lunatic establish-
ments, or madhouses, according to parliamentary phraseology?
but which improper designation ought to be revised?are now
regulated: whilst " fatuous or furious persons, or lunatics/' are
taken care of and treated throughout the countiy. The Acts
now referred to are,?1st, the 55th of George III., cap. 69 ;
2nd, the 9th of George IV., cap. 34; and 3rd, the 4th and 5th
of Victoria., cap. 60, each of which will repay perusal.
Considering it unnecessary to discuss at any length the various
clauses of the above enactments, I would for the present observe
that, no person can be received into any public hospital or
asylum for the insane in Scotland, without a warrant from the
sheriff of the county, or his substitute: upon the petition of some
relative or friend of the lunatic, which specifically states the
party named therein " is in such a state of mental derangement
as to require treatment in a lunatic asylum." This document
must be accompanied by the certificate of some legally-qualified
medical practitioner, who declares, on soul and conscience,
that, to the best of his belief and knowledge, the patient desig-
nated is insane, and a proper person for admission. Where no
legally-qualified medical practitioner can be procured to put his
name to the required certificate, it will then be sufficient if
signed by any medical man of character whom the sheriff may
think proper to employ: not being the medical officer of the
asylum to which it is proposed to send the lunatic.

Such are the chief formalities, requisite prior to the reception
of a lunatic patient into any licensed house ; but in reference to
private individuals who take charge of single maniacs, it is en-
acted by the 9th of George IV., that no person shall receive
into his exclusive care and maintenance, except a relative, any
one insane patient, without first having an order, and certificate
signed by two medical practitioners : a copy of which the party
receiving such single lunatic must transmit to the sheriff of the
county in which he resides, within five days after the party's
reception, accompanied by a statement correctly designating the
parish wherein the house is situated, and also the name of its
occupier. Afterwards, annually, on or within seven days of the
1st of January, a certificate must be transmitted to the sheriff,
signed by two physicians or surgeons, describing the then state
of such insane person; and lastly, should the party die, or be
removed elsewhere, these events must be forthwith notified to
the sheriff. Besides the above essential formalities, any indi-
vidual incurs a penalty of 501, who receives into his house an
insane person contrary to this enactment.

Although the clauses now specified embody the principal
regulations respecting lunatic asylums, nevertheless, believing
some readers ot this paper might desire to possess more precise
knowledge respecting the law generally, in Scotland, with refer-
ence to lunatics, particularly those who have not the Acts above
quoted, or any legal publication upon the subject in their library,
even at the risk of being reckoned tedious, I would subjoin the
following additional remarks upon the subject: only premising,
if more agreeable, the next nine paragraphs may be passed over
as supererogation.

According to the several statutes previously mentioned, no
one can, under a penalty of 200?. and expenses, keep an asylum
for lunatics, without a licence from the sheriff of the county
or his substitute, which must be renewed yearly : a certain sum
being charged upon every mad person therein specified, both
for the first granting, and each annual subsequent renewal of
the licence. Further, all sums so received form part of the
rogue money of the county, as ordered by fiat of Parlia-
ment. The last regulation seems, to say the least, a most extra-
ordinary application of monies thus obtained. It looks as if
classing the insane actually with rogues: or, like ancient pro-
ceedings, when lunatics were consigned to prisons, and there
treated the same as vagabonds or criminals. Of this kind,
examples were formerly too frequent: although, thanks to
the present enlightened _ views entertained by all classes,
such harsh treatment is now repudiated, and a more
humane mode is happily pursued, almost universally. This
reality having been acquired, even the semblance of connecting
asylums with law-breakers, in any way, should be avoided;
and therefore, making the proceeds obtained from granting
licences to institutions for the insane form part of such a fund
as county vogue money, is most objectionable, and ought to be
altered ir with.

Besides ueing invested with other official functions, as already
stated, sheriffs are directed to use all means for ascertaining
whether persons placed in asylums ought to be detained therein,
and to make such order for the lunatic's care, or confinement, or
liberation, as circumstances require. They may also commit
vagrant maniacs. Again, no person can be admitted into any in-
stitution for the insane, without a sheriff s order ; whilst every in-
dividual receiving a lunatic into his house, to be treated or
confined, without such authority or licence, forfeits 200?. and
expenses, toties quoties. Further, every medical practitioner
giving a certificate of lunacy, without having taken proper means
for ascertaining the fact, forfeits 501, and expenses. Lastly,
asylums are inspected twice a year; once by the sheriff or his
substitute, and once by the sheriff in person, with such medical
man, or others, as he thinks should accompany him 011 that
occasion.

Various books or registers ought to be kept in every licensed
house, which must be produced to the inspectors, who insert
the date of their inspection, together with any observations
they deem expedient. The sheriff may recal any licence upon
a report of two authorized inspectors. He can likewise make
fitting rules for the management of asylums, and enforce the
same with penalties, not exceeding 10?. for each offence. Houses
of reception having 100 patients must have a resident physician
or surgeon, or if the institution contains fewer inmates, unless
kept by a physician or surgeon, it must be visited twice weekly
by a qualified medical practitioner. Such visiting or resident
physicians or surgeons being directed to make reports to the
keeper, as he is termed at present, and once weekly to enter
their remarks, signed, in a register, according to forms given in
the schedule, which must be afterwards exhibited to the in-
spectors. An account of all monies received from asylums, and
expenses incurred, is transmitted by the sheriff to the County
Commissioners of Supply; besides which, he mutt also send a state-
ment of the number of asylums in his county, and of the names,
amount, and description of persons therein confined, to the
Clerk of the High Court of Justiciary, as also to the College
of Physicians at Edinburgh.

Inspectors of asylums are elected by the College of Ph}r-
sicians of Edinburgh, and the Faculty of Physicians and Sur-
geons in Glasgow: each of these bodies appointing, annually,
four of their ordinary resident members to that office. From
amongst these, the sheriffs of Mid-Lotliian and Lanark may employ
any of the so elected gentlemen, within their respective jurisdic-
tions. In other counties, sheriffs can choose for inspectors any
physician qualified to make such inspection, unless local or other
circumstances render that proceeding inexpedient. Justices of
the peace may also appoint, at the Michaelmas quarter sessions,
three of their number to visit and inspect any private or public
asylum within their own county, and to report annually " there-
anent." Ministers are also empowered, with written consent of
the sheriff, to visit madhouses within their parishes: although
the keeper may refuse them admission, if he thinks such visit
would be prejudicial to the patients; but he must always enter this
refusal, and its cause, in the register. In addition to the above
regulations, provision is likewise made for the procurator-fiscal
of the county to enforce the acts now existing, and to recover all
penalties incurred by parties contravening the law : which sums,
like those received for licences, form part of the Rogue vioney !
The above constitute the principal laws in reference to insti-
tutions for the insane, and the admission or confinement of
lunatics therein. Other minor regulations might be mentioned,
but it is consideied unnecessary. ^Nevertheless before proceed-
ing with my Notes respecting the present condition of public
asylums in Scotland, I must beg permission to add to previous
legal observations, that there are various decrees of aberration
of intellect recognised by lawyers in North Britain. These
may be divided into two classes. The first comprehends every
person who is, in judicial language, fatuous, and naturally an
idiot, or furious mad, and a lunatic ; or whose external senses
are so imperfectly organized, as to render the party implicated
totally unfit to undertake and superintend the independent
management of him or herself, or affairs. The other division
includes those persons who, although not so devoid of reason as
to be absolutely incapable of acting for themselves in the minor
affairs of life, are yet, from imbecility or weakness of judgment,
considered by the law fit subjects for a limited degree of restraint
in matters of importance. The remedy in the former case, is to
place the fatuous or furious person under permanent and un-
limited " curatory." The proceeding in the latter example being
?'< interdiction," as it is denominated ; by which lavish and facile
individuals are disabled from signing any deed to their prejudice,
without the previous consent of their appointed interdictors.
To enter into any lengthened discussion respecting the above
forensic questions^ would be rather incompatible with the chief
purpose aimed at in the present communication, therefore I will
only now briefly observe, when thus bringing several important
features characterizing the lunacy laws of Scotland, before readers
of the " Psychological Journal," that one of the objects proposed,
among others, was to^ notice briefly a procedure in that portion
of Great Britain, which has many recommendatory reasons for
its adoption, from being applicable to individuals not certainly
altogether sane, but yet quite incompetent to manage their own
affairs without some control. Interdiction here adverted to
becomes truly a kind of mezzo termine, as it might almost be
called; or, something like that peculiar issue designated in the
criminal law of Scotland, a " non proven verdict." Upon the
above legal proceeding, prevalent North of the Tweed, in reference
to imbecile persons, one or two observations seem advisable, with
a view to induce subsequent discussion by legists and psycho-
logical physicians.

Tliis system of interdiction, according to Scottish legal authori-
ties, constitutes a species of restraint provided for those who,
from weakness, facility, or profusion, are liable to imposition.
It is directed at the option of the judge or Lord Ordinary at
Edinburgh, on proper evidence proving the facility of the person
arraigned: or is voluntarily imposed by the party applying for
such protection. Hence the distinction into voluntary, and
judicial interdiction. A sentence of judicial interdiction is pro-
nounced, either in an action at the instance of the prodigal's
heir, or his next of kin : or ex propria motu of the judge,
during a suit in court. This kind of interdiction can only be
removed by the authority of the court. Voluntary interdiction,
again, is the act of the party applying; but after bond has been
once executed, he cannot withdraw it by his own hand.

The person who, from being conscious of mental facility, thus
lays him or herself under voluntary restraint, signs a bond,
whereby the granter comes under an obligation to execute no
deed which may effect" heritable estate, without the consent of
certain persons therein specially named. This form of interdic-
tion may, however, be removed :?]. By a sentence of the Court
of Session at Edinburgh, either on the ground that such a pro-
ceeding was originally unnecessary, or, that the party has, since
the bond was executed, become rei sui providus, as so ex-
pressed by jurists. 2. Without judicial interference, it may be
quashed by the joint act of the interdicted party and interdictors.
3. And lastly, where a quorum of interdictors is mentioned,
the restraint ceases, if, by death or otherwise, the number be-
comes reduced below the denominated quorum. Such are the
chief characteristics in reference to interdicting any facile or
insane person in Scotland: notwithstanding which, I would
add, that this procedure is now more rarely adopted than
formerly; the course usually pursued, of late years, being the
appointment by the Court at Edinburgh, of a Curator bonis,
speaking j udicially.

As Dr Winslow is on the eve of bringing before the legal
and medical profession in England, some important suggestions
respecting a modification of the law relative to persons alleged
to be mentally incompetent for the government of themselves
and their affairs, but who cannot be pronounced to be either
" insane," "lunatic," or of "unsound mind," I consider it would be
out of place, if not altogether superfluous, to pursue so interesting a
topic any further in these pages; more especially, as the whole
question will assuredly be treated in the fullest manner by that
able writer, and distinguished psychological physician. Leaving,
therefore, the investigation of such forensic, yet professional
matters?whatever phase they may assume?to be discussed
by the above-named eminent medico-legal authority,* I now
proceed to describe the different establishments visited during
my recent excursion to Scotland, and first, respecting?
1-?The Royal Edinburgh Asylum.

This public institution for the insane is of modern construction,
and although not yet completed, already contains the largest
number of lunatics, compared with any other similar establish-
ment throughout Scotland. It is situated near the village of
Morningside, about a mile and a half to the south-west of Edin-
burgh. The position is beautiful, slightly elevated, airy, and
salubrious. It has a southern exposure, with the Braid and
Pentland hills in front, but at a considerable distance, whereby
the prospect enjoyed from the main building, as also from the
garden and adjoining precincts, is really splendid, and only sur-
passed by that of Gart-navel Asylum, near Glasgow, and of
Illnau, in the Grand Duchy of Baden : amongst all the public
institutions for lunatic patients which I have ever visited, whether
in Great Britain, or on the Continent. The grounds are exten-
sive, being about forty acres, in which horticultural and agricul-
tural occupations are carried out extensively by the inmates.
The asylum possesses a bowling-green, cricket-ground, and
curling-pond, which is now being considerably enlarged. There
is an extensive piggery, designed by a former patient, which is
really a model for imitation, and where, in consequence of the
superior feeding, unusual cleanliness of all the pigsties, as also the
great attention paid to other requisites, some of the best hogs
are here reared throughout this district of Scotland. In addition
to being placed in a healthy, open situation, Morningside has an
ample supply of water?so essential in all establishments for the
insane?and likewise a good well on the premises, for special
purposes. The general form of the chief building is that of the
letter H, having the kitchen and offices behind ; whilst, farther
off, are numerous workshops for patients; and at each side, when
all the proposed constructions are finished, there will be a smaller
but separate building, joined by covered passages, for the accom-
modation of noisy and refractory inmates of both sexes: each
having their own bed-rooms, dormitories, day-rooms, and sepa-
rate airing-grounds. Altogether, when completed, this Asylum
will be of a superior description, and, in addition to its present
capabilities, will afford room for nearly 200 more patients, than
it can now accommodate.

Besides the buildings here briefly described, there is also another
house, or rather mansion, situated within the Asylum enclosure,
* Indeed, Dr Winslow has already mooted tlie question of interdiction, at
page 126 of his valuable Lettsomian Lectures.

which is entirely distinct, but where only insane ladies and
gentlemen are received. At the period of my visit to Morning-
side, this department contained sixty private patients, whose
board and lodging varied from 601, to 3501, per annum. In
short, this portion of the institution resembled in every particular
a private establishment for the reception and treatment of insane
patients, excepting that its pecuniary transactions did not aug-
ment the profits of individuals, the whole being under one
management. In illustration of this point, as likewise to show
the magnitude of its operations in reference to money matters,
it may be here mentioned that the total ordinary receipts
throughout the past year, as reported by the treasurer, amounted
to 16,053?. 4s. 6^d., whilst the whole expenditure is stated at
] 5,5321. 9s., during the same period.

When I inspected the Asylum now under review, early last
autumn, the aggregate population of both departments?viz.,
pauper and private?amounted to 556 lunatics; of whom 273
were males and 283 females. Amongst these, 48 were epileptics,
28 being males and 20 females. The dirty patients reached to
31; of whom 16 were male and 15 female inmates. Those
affected with general paralysis were 10 in number; 8 being
males and only 2 females. Lastly, in reference to the physical
health of the entire population, it was reported in such a
satisfactory condition that not more than 16 individuals were
indisposed?3 being male and 13 female patients ; their ailments,
however, appearing nearly all of a very unimportant description.
No inmate was confined by any kind of personal restraint, ex-
cepting two females, who were then placed in temporary seclu-
sion, in consequence of their violence whilst labouring under a
paroxysm of excitement. The general aspect of this establish-
ment, therefore, seemed highly satisfactory ; and I was much grati-
fied on witnessing the order, quietude, and apparent comfort of its
numerous residents: notwithstanding the hopeless nature of many
of their mental maladies.

During the past year, 212 new patients were admitted; of
whom 98 were male and 114 female lunatics. The numbers
discharged cured being 28 males and 66 females, or 94 in all;
hence it appears that the recoveries reached a ratio of 44'3 per
cent, to the total admissions. Fifty-one patients died during the
year, 24 being males, and 27 females, which gives the propor-
tion of 9*2 per cent, to the average population; this mortality
being, it is important to mention, rather less than in any pre-
vious year since first opening the pauper department of this
Asylum. Such result is the more satisfactory, seeing cholera
prevailed in the neighbourhood during great part of last year,
but without a single case of that malady having occurred
throughout the establishment: notwithstanding two epide-
mics actually appeared within its walls?namely, diarrhoea and
influenza.

Amongst the 212 new patients received into this Asylum
during 1854, the following were the principal forms of disease
which they exhibited at their admission. Acute mania was
recognised in 50 cases; monomania of various types affected 47
individuals; 30 were classed under the head of dementia; 29
under melancholia; 16 were examples of moral insanity ; whilst
14 were cases of general paralysis, all of whom, it should be spe-
cially noticed, being male patients.

Respecting the latter form of mental malady, which has
attracted so much attention in France, and is now often noticed
by British medical practitioners, I would beg to transcribe the
subjoined interesting observations contained in Dr Skae's valu-
able " Annual Report, read at a meeting of the contributors
held last February,?viz.

" The number of cases of that most hopeless and deplorable malady,
general paralysis, is nearly double that ot the previous year. Of the
fourteen sufferers from this fatal disease, two only laboured under
melancholy ; to all the others, although sinking slowly but perceptibly
under a gradually progressive paralysis of mind and body,?to most
of them even when the speech was inarticulate, and the power of loco-
motion nearly gone, the external world continued bright with visions
of wealth, and power, and beauty, which were all their own. Even in
the midst of the most extravagant delusions of all kinds, the passing
events of public interest helped to dress up the pageant. One was
busy fighting the Russians?another was aide-de-camp to Sir Colin
Campbell, and about to walk to the Crimea?another had already
taken St. Petersburg, and captured the Emperor; a fourth offered
cheques upon Lord Palmerston for sums of money of fabulous amount,
and was in daily expectation of his lordship's carriage to take him up
to London; another spoke garrulously what he imagined to be a
variety of' foreign languages; whilst another was now lieutenant-
general of Scotland, and anon general of India,?now the greatest
statesman and the most renowned warrior alive, and again the uni-
versal king of the earth and the Almighty himself. Two of the oases
were ascribed to falls fiom a height, several of them to intemperate
habits, and the others to over-worked minds, anxiety, and excitement."
With reference to the causes assigned as chiefly instrumental
in producing mental disease in those admitted, it may be men-
tioned, on the same indubitable authority, that intemperance
figured, as heretofore, the most frequent cause of insanity: a
seventh, or actually 33 cases out of the total 212 admissions
being of that category ; two-thirds of whom were male, and one-
third female delinquents?all slaves of drunkenness ! Dr Skae
next observes, in reference to causes, that?

" Griefs, anxieties, and distress occasioned by reverses of fortune and
domestic afflictions, come next in order as the most frequent causes of
this malady. The case ascribed to imprisonment occurred to a young
lad who stole under the urgent cravings of hunger, and became insane
two days after he was committed to prison. In one of the cases
ascribed to epilepsy, the symptoms of insanity were developed under
the influence of mesmerism, which was being employed for the purpose
of curing the epilepsy. Of the puerperal cases, one was ascribed to
the use of chloroform during delivery ; but of all the cases of puerperal
insanity admitted into the Asylum since the introduction of chloro-
form into medical practice, amounting to 44, this is the first and
only one to which this anaesthetic had been administered during
labour."

The latter fact respecting puerperal insanity is highly impor-
tant, not only as indicating the rarity of cases where chloroform
was employed during child-birth, but that, in the single instance
where the above often dangerous anaesthetic was administered to
relieve labour pains, the patient became subsequently insane. If
the whole truth were always known, similar results from the use
of chloroform, in- so natural a process as parturition, would be
found more common, I believe, than some proselytes for its use
will perhaps willingly admit, or could even imagine.

At this Asylum, one great object constantly kept in view during
the treatment of insane patients, especially throughout the pauper
department, is to occupy or amuse the inmates in the way which
may be deemed most advisable. Consequently, many are em-
ployed daily in various trades and occupations, such as tailors,
shoemakers, smiths, carpenters, and so forth. Working in the
garden and adjoining fields, for males, and in the washing-house
or laundry, for females, may be mentioned as the most beneficial,
as also having the greatest repute amongst the different modes of
employment. Upon an average, about 300 inmates are usually
so occupied. The patients likewise enjoy all the customary
means of recreation and healthy amusement, which are now
deemed essential in every well-regulated institution for the insane.
Frequent walking parties, daily drives, occasional excursions to
the neighbouring hills, or pic-nic meetings, are permitted to
inmates. Games of bowls, quoits, cricket, and curling on the ice
in winter, are common amusements. Besides these, in-door
recreations, such as billiards, bagatelle, and some other games,
are never-failing attractions; whilst concerts, evening parties, and
a regular weekly ball every Wednesday?where both sexes meet
to enjoy the healthy, exhilarating influence of active exercise and
music?must not be overlooked. I received a kind invitation to
be present at one of these weekly re-unions; but unfortunately
my limited time, and other engagements, did not permit accept-
ing that gratification : which proves, not only a source of much
pleasure to those insane persons who participate therein, but it
likewise benefits many of them, by the discipline thus imposed
upon their behaviour. r r
An interesting feature in the management of this public
asylum must.also be specially noticed?namely, the "Morning-
d^i^ n^ly tnCyeSl^
printed at the Royal Asylum Press; the profits b "nTdevoTed
to the patients reading-room A<? n c
supplied to readers, whether insane or otCS,
{=bribed6 "feS ^ ^ * heri

" MONTHLY EETE08PECT.
" Notwithstanding the heavy rains of late thp? l,?? i
exciting amusements out of doors, the players of criol'of l ^ S?mj
quoits taking advantage of every sunny blink to make a ' sorHp^
force, to have a throw at their favourite game, while small parties of
skirmishers, making sudden attacks on the outer-works of 1
beans were often visible, and had sometimes to make a hast^^f
on the ' staff' approaching. Since the destruction of Strawberrv-hM
Gooseberry-lane has become the chief object of assault, and although
a small handful only may be carried off prisoners at a time still b -
perseverance and repeated attacks, they must ultimately be reduced
numerous though they be at present.

" We have again to acknowledge the kindness of the instrumental
musicians belonging to Messrs. Nelson's printing establishment for
their recent visit; but we have again to regret also that the weather
though not so wet, was rather uninviting, and prevented numbers
from perambulating in the vicinity of the band, which would havo
greatly enlivened the scene. It is hoped, however, that before thl
season is over there may be a grand gala day, with cricket, bowline
promenading, &c? with the band in the ccntre, playing in th0 u "V
enlivening manner, while we hope also to hear at intervals across the
lake the warlike strains of the bagpipes. These on the ' pibroch sound
ing, sounding we think, with other martial airs must become tit
favourites while the spirit of war remains in the ascendant. It is
p easing to see that on the Wednesdays, the ball-room is occasionally
visited by some eminent professional musicians such as Mr Wou J
and Sons, Mr Mackenzie and Brothers, with a number of JwSE
appearance is hailed as a guarantee of something extra instrumental^
The vocal department can never be at a loss while the Misses M'Pher-
son continue to come out. The younger sister, whom we shall here
designate ' Mattie'-?she haying appeared with us in that character
made her vocal debut last night, and'came out strong' and beauti-
fully in 'Ye banks and braes.' We are much indebted to Mr E
Drummond, in the dramatical line, vve might say personally so as lie
has occasionally studied parts and dialogues to oblige, and has shown
himself well up in the characters on very short notice. While he con
tinues to lend his valuable aid, it is intended to get up a series of
comic dialogues, with an occasional effort at something more lofty, in
the tragic walk, by way of a change."

The medical staff at Morningside consists of one consulting
physician, Dr Gillespie: a resident physician, Dr Skae : and
two assistants?viz., Drs. Howden and M'Culloch; to the former
of whom I feel especially indebted for the courtesy with which
he accompanied me, in the absence of Dr Skae?then on leave,?
throughout the entire establishment, when he gave me much
valuable information.

Glasgow Royal Asylum.
----------------------

This establishment for lunatics?situated at Gart-navel, about
four miles north-west of Glasgow?has only been recently con-
structed, to replace the old Asylum located within that city : but
which has now been converted into a poor-house. The situation
it occupies is rather elevated, open, airy, and enjoys an extensive
prospect on every side, embracing the Grampians, Ben Lomond,
with the banks and rising grounds bounding the Clyde. Indeed,
the locality of this Asylum really seemed one of the finest pos-
sessed by almost any public building in Scotland; and on first
approaching its precincts, the structure externally, and the eleva-
tion altogether, remind the spectator much of Windsor Castle:
especially when passing near the main entrance.

Although superior in respect of position, and equally salu-
brious, when compared with the Asylum previously described, never-
theless, in the general plan and some interior arrangements, it
appeared inferior, according to my judgment; whilst, in regard to
the supply of water, Gart-navel is occasionally defective, parti-
cularly during dry weather. However, so soon as the gigantic
scheme of supplying that essential element to the city of Glasgow,
by conveying it from Loch Katrine, shall be achieved, it is then
expected, the quantity of water will always be sufficiently plen-
tiful for every purpose.

Like that at Morningside, this public institution also receives
both pauper and private patients within its walls; each division
being, however, quite distinct, although the buildings adjoin. At
the period of my visit to Gart-navel, there were 85 private lunatic
inmates of both sexes, who paid from ]5s. and 1?. Is. to 4I. 4s.
per week: with one at 51. 5 s., who had consequently special ac-
commodation. The total pauper patients, whose board averages
from 8s. 6d. to 9s. per week, amounted to 296 individuals; hence
giving an aggregate population of 381 lunatics, both sexes in-
cluded, of whom 199 were males, and 182 females: thereby
making the former most numerous; which coincidence is seldom
observed in public asylums for the insane. No restraint exists
at this Asylum, in which the strait-waistcoat is unknown. The
patients appeared quiet and cleanly; many were working in the
gardens and at various occupations; whilst I remarked, with
much satisfaction, that the dormitories seemed more lofty and
better adapted as sleeping-rooms, than many similar apartments
met with m various other establishments of this description.
Amongst the female pauper patients, 118 were employed out of
the 143 then resident ; 6 were sick or indisposed, and one was in
seclusion > Of the 153 pauper male lunatics, 101 were occupied
in some kind of manual employment; only one was confined by
sickness; and not a single individual appeared in any way re-
strained. These facts consequently speak most satisfactorily, not
only respecting the physical health of every inmate but' tW
likewise bear ample testimony in favour of the judiciois manaJ-
ment exercised throughout this establishment.

During the past year, 2?0 new patients' were admitted of
whom 123 were male and 117 female lunatics, thereby giving a
greater relative proportion of the former over the latter sex ? but
which preponderance is not accidental, the same circumstance
having been very generally observed, in the past history of this
institution, ever since its first openin'g, fourteen years ao-o. Of
those admitted, 107 were affected with mania, 83 exhibited
monomania, including melancholia, and 50 laboured under de-
mentia : which form of mental disease is by no means rare amoncr
the poor of Glasgow, and seems evidently induced by the priva^
tions and miseries, to which many of that class are exposed. The
number of patients dismissed cured, during the same period were
GO males and 56 females, making a total of 116 cases, or 'about
48 per cent,, compared with the admissions : whilst the deaths
amounted to 62, comprising 32 male and 30 female patients or
24 per cent, for both the sexes being nearly equal in mortalitv
Amongst the assigned causes producing insanity in the patients
admitted, the intemperate use of alcoholic liquors stands forward
pre-eminent; 4o, or about a fifth of the entire admissions, beino-
attributed to this cause, 27 of whom were male and 18 female
victims.

Upon this too frequent cause of mental derangement and other
evils, throughout Scotland the following judicious observations
made by Dr Mackintosh, the able physician-superintendent of
the Glasgow Asylum, merit record and mature consideration
They are extracted from his last "Annual Report/' which like
previous similar documents, deserve being read by all who'take
an interest in the management of institutions for the insane
The writer observes on this sad but important subject:

" It is a mistake, however, to suppose that intemperance is, in everv
instance where it exists, the cause of the attack; for there are cases i
which it is clearly evident that the pernicious habit is the result of
is consequent upon, the mental derangement. In a considerable
number of instances, it was ascertained that one or other of the parents
of the patients (1 speak of patients generally) had been addicted to
intemperance. It was not, however, clearly ascertained in any in-
stance that their habits had been such previous to the birth of their
offspring; so that although it appears that this vice is indulged in by
no means rarely by the parents of those who become insane, it is not
proved by our investigations this year that the intemperance of the
parents produced a predisposition in the children; it is nevertheless
very likely, but this is a subject we cannot pursue farther here. Our
inquiries, however, show that the children of parents having a procli-
vity to intemperance, and, at one period or other of their lives, actually
of intemperate habits, are apt to become insane ; that where the mental
or physical organization of the parent is favourable to the development
of intemperate habits, the offspring have a predisposition to insanity.
That the children of drunken parents are apt to become intemperate
is well known, and may be explained possibly by reference to the in-
fluence of example alone. But it is not of this I speak now, but of
intemperance in the parent as a cause of insanity in the offspring."
Respecting general paralysis, which now so deservedly attracts
the special notice of all psychological physicians, it appears 15
cases?general or partial?existed, of whom 10 occurred in male
and 5 in female inmates. In reference to this intractable
malady, the same experienced authority observes, with much
truth, upon the cases under treatment:?

" One boasts of his amazing prowess, and that he can perform the
most herculean feats ; another fancies that he is possessed of enormous
riches, and property of untold value; that he is the Supreme Being, a
king, and the like. Voracity of appetite, and a restless activity, are
not unfrequently found among patients of this class. The number of
males here affected with paralysis is just double that of females. One
case had been preceded by an attack of chorea; and in another case, a
brother of the patient suffered from the same affection. In one, the
attack was consequent upon, and was supposed to be caused by, the
sudden healing up of old ulcers upon the legs. In another case, gene-
ral blood-letting had been twice employed previous to the admission
of the patient, and, according to the statement of the relatives, with a
decidedly injurious effect. One fancies he is a king, and attaches
' Ilex' to his signature; another is a Russian diplomatic agent; one
says that she is the true Messiah, and denounces the greater part of
the Old and New Testaments as a fabrication and imposture; another
is a great Evangelist; a third has been dead and has come alive again,
and believes that the millennium has begun, and that she has been
inspired and commissioned to convert the world; some accuse them-
selves of having committed enormous crimes; others, by far the
greater number, are the victims of plots and conspiracies ; some profess
to be the special favourites of Heaven, and to have divine revelations,
while others are possessed of devils ; one fancies that part of her body
is made of glass, and dreads being touched; another that she is the
Evil One, and tliat her skin has become black; some are tormented in
one way or other by means of gas ; others are under mesmeric or elec-
trical influences."

Daring the past year, 116 patients were discharged cured;
many of whom, however, appeared so hopeless of benefit on
admission, that it was scarcely expected they would ever have
become convalescent. If the proportion of cases be calculated
according to the total number admitted, the per centage hence
amounts to 48 3 : and as 62 died, the deaths upon the same
ratio reached 22 14 per cent. Amongst the cases ending fatally,
32 were males and 30 females; but although the mortality in
each sex was recently nearly equal: still, past experience of this
Asylum proves the proportion of deaths ranged considerably
higher in male, than female lunatics. Of the chief causes of
death, it may be stated, as showing the physical diseases under
which the patients succumbed, that 13 died from paralysis, 1]
through exhaustion, 9 by diarrhoea, 9 were phthisis, 3 originated
in cardiac affections, 3 by apoplexy or cerebral disease, and 3
followed pneumonia or peripneumonia.

Dr Mackintosh being so well known as an experienced prac-
titioner in mental maladies, it seems almost superfluous to allude
to the treatment, whether medical, physical, or moral, pursued
in this Asylum. Nevertheless, the subjoined paragraph from the
recent official Report of that accomplished physician seems worthy
of being quoted on the present occasion, since it conveys to
readers a correct notion of the general views entertained. He
says: ?
" The use of warm baths has been cautiously extended, and long-
continued immersion practised, in some instances with a marked bene-
ficial sedative effect, in cases in which there was much excitement.
Although general blood-letting has now been almost if not entirely
discarded in the treatment of the insane, recourse is still occasionally
had to the local abstraction of blood, either by means of leeches ap-
plied to the head or cupping-glasses to the nape of the neck. The
great mass of the patients, however, cannot bear depletion in any form,
but the reverse; and therefore, from the time of admission, stimu-
lating nourishment, with alcoholic agents, as they are clearly indi-
cated, are freely given, and with beneficial results. When in Forfar-
shire, I found, in my practice there, that the insane could bear any
sort of reduction, whether by means of blood-letting or medicine, very
much better than they can do here. The patients in this quarter are
more exhausted, more reduced every way on admission."

Amusements and occupations of various kinds are assiduously
pursued at the Gart-navel institution. Four subscriptions to
the libraries of Glasgow are paid, so that the patients may pos-
sess the newest books and periodicals for their recreation, if not
NO. I.?new series. 
instruction. There is a printing-press in the Asylum, which con-
tinues to be used by inmates. They compose the articles, put
them in type, and then act as pressmen in throwing off the
printed copies : whilst a great many schedules, and similar sheets
have been thus printed, as also part of Shakspeare, with
original introductory notes by a resident lunatic. To one patient
?a profound melancholic?marble, and the necessary imple-
ments were procured, whereby he was induced to commence
work ; and before leaving the institution convalescent, this party
had executed several sculptures in a very superior manner; thus
showing the utility of occupying maniacs in a way their natural
genius often indicates.

The medical staff of this Royal Asylum consists of Dr Mack-
intosh, physician-superintendent, with Drs. Robertson and
Ferguson as assistants ; besides Dr Fleming, of Glasgow, who is
surgeon to the institution, but non-resident. There being thus
three resident medical officers ; it hence follows that, for every
127 patients one special medical attendant has been provided,
which constitutes a much higher proportion than prevails in
many other similar establishments; consequently such an
arrangement deserves particular notice, as also high commenda-
tion.
{To be continued.)
W
