The War
========

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY.
JANUARY 1, 1856.
JSavt dFtrgt
ORIGINAL COMMUNICATIONS
Art. I.

The moral as well as the physical world is full of the evidences
of change, transition, and progressive development. Our public
institutions and our language are but the fossil remains of a
former state of society ; just as the geologist shows us in certain
strata the fauna and flora of species and genera long since ex-
tinct The Latin tongue and the old Roman law are to be found
in the statutes and language of every people in Christendom.
Imbedded in present forms and manners, we pass them by with-
out considering that mere testimonies of the past are as thick
and frequent as the zoophytes that stud the limestone slab on
which we are standing ; that what is social is as antique as what
is natural; and that we ourselves are but the children of a race
subsisting amidst the repeated transmigrations of ages. It is
the same with every other branch of science. Astronomers tell
us that the fixed stars have a proper movement of their own;
that new stars have appeared and old ones disappeared; that
nebulse are forming or have formed within the memory of man ;
and that aerolites are but the portions of a disrupted planet, cir-
culating round the sun, ++111,1 " together hurl d,
Tlie fragments of a former world."

The violent shocks of nature are not limited to our own globe,
and meteoric, if not volcanic, agency is at work m the realms of
space as powerfully as it is within the bowels of the earth.
If we descend from nature to man, the story is the same.
They planted and builded, and married and were given in mar-
ls 0. I.?NEW SERIES. B
2 THE WAR.

riage, and the flood came and took them all away. Nineveh,
Thebes, Babylon, Memphis, and Tyre are synonymous with war
and miseries; and their names stand out like the salient angles
of a bastion that conceals the cares of ordinary life behind its
bristling parapets. The sculptured blocks recently arranged
along the Museums of Paris and London, stammer forth, as voices
from the dead, in broken hieroglyphics or arrow-headed inscrip-
tions, the worn-out chronicles of their times. Nor do the arts
and sciences of the present day change the burden of the song :
steam and the electric wire only add velocity to life, and life,
whether slow or fast, is evermore the same.

Upwards of a thousand years ago, the Greek Emperor, Theo-
philus, was, like ourselves, devoted to the progress of civiliza-
tion.* He longed to surpass the splendours of Bagdad, at that
time in the zenith of the caliphate. For this purpose, he en-
gaged the most skilful artists to construct for him a toy of gold,
set with precious stones, that played tunes of its own accord,
like a musical snuff-box; and two golden lions that roared, and
a golden tree with leaves rustling in the wind and boughs filled
with singing birds. These puerile curiosities, together with
many others of a similar kind, were enclosed within a spacious
edifice, open to the admiration of all. It was the Crystal Palace
of the ninth century?the harbinger of amity and peace. But,
in humble imitation of our own, it was followed by war, a bril-
liant victory, a successful siege, abundance of spoils, and a
triumphal return to the peaceful curiosities of the Crystal Palace.
The war was renewed, but victory changed sides ; and Theophilus
died contemplating the bloody head of a rival held up by its
hairs before his glazing eyeballs.

Suetonius tells us,f that when Augustus Caesar heard of the
loss of the three legions with their cohorts under Varus, he was
inconsolable, paced his corridor, beat his head, and exclaimed in
anguish, "Varus, give me back my legions I" But the legions
were lost; and it was not till years afterwards that Germanicus
fell upon their remains, and ascertained the precise spot of their
destruction.^ He traced the intrenchments, collected the bones
of horses and men, and recognised some portions of armour
mouldering into rust. When Tiberius was informed of this sen-
timental exploit, he was wroth, and rebuked Germanicus for
leading the troops under his command to witness such dismal
sights, and making them acquainted with so signal a reverse of
the Roman arms. The rebuke was just; and though he was blamed
* " Histoire du Moyen Age." Paris: 1843. Tom. i. p. 524.
+ Sueton. "in Oct. August." xxiii. "Per continuos menses, barba capilloque
submisso, caput interdum foribus illideret, vociferans, 'Q. Vare, legiones redde;'
diemque cladis quotannis maestum liabuerit ac lugubrem."
X Tacit. " Annal." i. 62. Quod Tiberio haud probatum.
the war. 3

for it at the time, Tiberius was in the right. For, in spite of his
depravity, he was an astute politician, who, with exquisite dis-
crimination, saw in this misfortune the earliest warnings of decay.
Xerxes, who was quite as luxurious, if not so debauched as
Tiberius, was certainly just as farsighted in political affairs as
that crafty old statesman. Herodotus gives us a peep into the
Persian cabinet, and reports a speech of Xerxes upon the threat-
ening rupture with Greece. " If we remain quiet," said the
youthful tyrant, " they will not; for they will certainly invade
us. Neither we nor they can stand still; we must attack
them ere they attack us; they must submit to us, or we
to them ? there is no other alternative;"* and his pride
instigated him to decide upon a war so plainly justified by his
political acumen. But the decision cost him the severest trouble
of mind. His sleep was broken, and his thoughts bewildered.
In the night he was hallucinated ; and Herodotus relates two of
his spectral illusions. The war, however, was entered on ; and the
contest evoked the crisis that he dreaded. It hurried on Greece
to its maturity; and not only were the Asiatics repulsed and chas-
tised, but Persia, in her turn, trembled for her homesteads, her
cities, and her fanes. Alexander came, and cut a high-road
through the heart of her dominions.

The fifty years that followed the battles of Mycale and Plataea
are the most brilliant and extraordinary on record ; and we know
the more about them, because their histories have reached us
entire, and their well-known authors, Thucydides, Herodotus,
and Xenophon were men of first-rate talents. In the midst of
a rapid military career, by sea and land, the Athenians cultivated
the liberal arts with the utmost enthusiasm, and carried them
to a degree of perfection which few nations have been able to
imitate, and none have surpassed. Under the administration
of a single man, Athens was adorned with those magnificent
structures, which Rome, on becoming the mistress of the world,
did not disdain to avail herself of, in after ages, because she felt
she was unable to copy what she could not but fall down and
admire. So great, indeed, was the lustre shed by the name of
Athens, that, from the age of Pericles, it designates the nation,
country, and language of Greece. The Attic dialect, brought to
perfection by its transcendent writers, became the model of all
that is beautiful, and still holds the lofty privilege of being the
most copious and the sweetest ever spoken by man.

The Persian war stands out in history as one of the landmarks
of human greatness. The blood shed in battle was the first seed
of liberty sown in Europe; but it required a series of wars?a
succession of ages,?before it opened into blossom, and ripened
into fruit; for the tree of liberty is no exotic of Eastern extrac-
tion. It is a hardy sapling that grows upon the bare ground or
in the clefts of the rocks, luxuriates amid the ruins of empires,
and strikes its roots the deeper the fiercer blows the blast.
The final cause of war is liberty. The immediate cause may
be the gratification of personal ambition or national aggrandize-
ment and pre-eminence ; but its end is liberty. Man is not born
free?he must fight for it. In all times and all places, slavery,
in some form or other, has always been considered a necessary
piece of state machinery. The moment absolute freedom is in-
troduced, the state engine gets out of gear. This is the fact in
republics as well as in monarchies and despotisms; for a republic
is only a monarchy disguised. The smallest number governs
the many, or a single genius rules them all; and the crowd fol-
lows its leader as blindly as sheep do their bell-wether. No
ancient philosopher ever seriously entertained the notion of abo-
lishing slavery and liberating two-thirds of his fellow-creatures.
Plato and Aristotle were parasites afraid of offending the reign-
ing fashion of the day, or at the best, they were only speculative
sophists. Nor was it till Christianity had sapped the foundations
of Paganism, that man awoke from his social lethargy, and found,
to his amazement, that he was no longer a nonentity, either in
time or eternity. Rousseau, in his " Social Contract," affectedly
exclaims, L'homme est ne libre, etpcirtout il est dans lesfers!?
but Lucan more honestly makes Caesar say, Humanum paucis
vivit genus:* life is only for the few, and though freedom be our
birthright, yet subjection or subjugation is the lot of most of us.
But to return to the moral or social cause of war. It is the
effort for freedom. There is a moment in its affairs, when the
world is stung to the quick with the sense of Liberty?a watch-
word that startles the repose of kings, breaks up the routine of
life, and stuns the monotony of peace. Nations abhor foreign
rule. The most respectable communities are those who govern
themselves, or who are governed by their own princes, electorates,
or presidents. This has always been the case. To be devoid of
this nationality, is a proof that a people are already dead, or are
ready to die. The foreigner is not only a conqueror, which is
detestable, but also a tyrant, which is insupportable. His gauntlet
is steel, and his sceptre iron. His dignity crushes those whom
he pretends to govern, and the reaction is tremendous. There
are some evils we cannot shun, but which must be faced, sub-
mitted to, or overcome; and rebellion or war provoked by
tyranny is one of these.

Hence it happens that war, horrid as it may be, develops some
of the noblest passions of the soul, and purifies the heart as much
as it enlarges the intellect. The condition of the weak, the
needy, the ignoble, and the low is ameliorated by its means,?
condignly, indeed, as each may suffer from it during its blood-
stained progress. The penalty paid is enormous; every transi-
tion is a period of confusion and loss; nor is society ever revolu-
tionized without its proportionate measure of suffering and woe.
We are not its advocates?we are only stating the case.*
The next most eventful epoch in the history of mankind is the
age of Julius Csesar.| He was the most gifted man the world
had ever seen, and his laurels are still green. .A.S a warrior or
a statesman, as an astronomer or a writer, as an architect or an
orator, as a conqueror, a civilian, or an engineer, he stands alone
and equally distinguished in each department. He is chiefly
known as a great captain; but he was much more than a mili-
tary man. Over the darkest portion of Europe he cast a gleam
of light which has never been extinguished. His eye saw farther
than the mere winning of a battle ; for he was a diplomatist of
the highest class, who reorganized^ those ^ whom he subdued with
the same masterly hand as that with which he had fought them
in their own territories. By the firmness of his policy he de-
layed the fall of his country by the space of three hundred years
or more; for he foresaw, not only what his political opponents
* "War, then," he said, "war, the grand impoverishes is also a creator of the
wealth which it wastes and devours ?"

" Ye3," replied Bridgenorth, "even as the sluice brings into action the sleeping
waters of the lake, which it finally drains. Necessity invents arts and discovers
means ; and what necessity is sterner than that of civil war ? Therefore, even war
is not in itself unmixed evil, being the creator of impulses and energies which could
not otherwise have existed in society."

"Men should go to war, then," said Peveril, "that they may send their silver
plate to the mint, and eat from pewter dishes and wooden platters ?"
"Not so, my son," said Bridgenorth. Then checking himself as he observed
the deep crimson in Julian's cheek and brow, he added, " I crave your pardon for
such familiarity ; but I meant not to limit what I said even now to such trifling
consequences, although it may be something salutary to tear men from their pomps
and luxuries, and teach those to be ivomnns who would otherwise be Sybarites.
But I would say, that times of public danger, as they call into circulation the
miser's hoard and the proud man's bullion, and so add to the circulating wealth of
the country, do also call into action many a brave and noble spirit, which would
otherwise lie torpid, give no example to the living, and bequeath no name to future
ages. Society knows not, and cannot know, the mental treasures which slumber
in her bosom, till necessity and opportunity call forth the statesman and the
soldier from the shades of lowly life to the parts they are designed by Providence
to perform, and the stations which nature had qualified them to hold. So rose
Oliver?so rose Milton?so rose many another name which cannot be forgotten?
even as the tempest summons forth and displays the address of the mariner."
" You speak," said Peveril, " as if national calamity might be, in some sort, an
advantage."

"And if it were not so," replied Bridgenorth, "it had not existed in this
state of trial, where all temporal evil is alleviated by something good in its pro-
gress or result, and where all that is good is close coupled with that which is in
itself evil."?Walter Scott.
+ Sueton. "in J. Caesar," passim.
imputed to him, the coming empire, but also the overthrow of
that empire by the very barbarians whom he was engaged in
defeating. And never was there a greater blunder perpetrated
than in his assassination. His murderers could not supply his
place: they were disunited, soon dispersed,?some committed
suicide, others treachery, and each of them came to ruin. The boy
Octavius gathered up the fragments of the state, and cemented
them into a whole, to which the name of Csesargave importance
and renown. Now, as the Median war, five hundred years pre-
viously, had sown the first seeds of liberty in Europe, so the wars
of Caesar called into existence the first germs of civilization in
the West. It was the punctum saliens of the modern world.
The question has often been agitated, whether Rome would
have fallen if Carthage had stood. A glance will show that
the fall of Carthage was only a matter of popular rivalry. The
dominant power of the day must be all in all, or else it is
nothing. Rome saw the alternative, and acted upon it with her
instinctive sagacity and promptitude. Carthage was razed ; but
with her fell nothing but a nation of shopkeepers. For mer-
chants are only money-dealers, whose views are no larger than
their coffers, and whose ideas of national prosperity do not ex-
tend beyond their balance-sheet at the end of the year, or a
clever speculation in some remote corner of the globe. A trades-
man can never be either a statesman or a soldier. In Hannibal
there is nothing akin to Napoleon, Caesar, or Alexander. They
were more than soldiers, while he was only a general; and
Carthage, the centre of commerce and wealth, had not advanced
the world a step forwarder in its progress, but left it where she
found it, in the government of others, instead of her own. She
has not bequeathed to us a single writer of note, her language is
forgotten, and her spirit, except for trade, has left not a trace
behind.

On the contrary, Rome consolidated the world, and held it
together for many a long century; her fall loosened the bond,
and scattered the growing nations around her. It was a moral
earthquake greater than any that had ever yet shaken the frame-
work of society. It was accomplished with war and disaster.
The effect was instantly manifest: Christianity dared to show
herself, and many nations arose out of the one. The cross, senti-
ment, and devotion crept forth from beneath the statues of the
ancient gods, whose worship was now defunct, for the world had
changed its mind and its tastes. Charlemagne, breastplates,
shields, and the lance in rest became the novel order of the day.
It was a pantomime on a gigantic scale. Casar, Cicero, Pompey,
and Mark Antony would have found themselves sadly out of place
in company with Odoacer, Clovis, Pepin, and all their chivalry.
Quickly, another phantom stalked upon the stage; it was
Mahomet with his crescent, turban, and scymitar?Mecca, Kaaba,
and the Koran?his cruel disciples, and the Saracenic host.
Battle, and murder, and crime were not only the usual, but also
the religious precepts m vogue among them. Opposition of
principles begat contention It was no longer the stale design
of conquering many kingdoms on purpose to convert them
mto one but of fighting for faith, as the essence of life*
The knight in armour was a reckless enthusiast, but a great
favourite for the time being. His plume, his helm his po-
lished hauberk, thigh-pieces, and leggins, his gauntlet, shield,
and spear, with its fluttering pennon and quaint device was the
gew-gaw that once represented the mind of the age, but which
now graces in effigy the mantelpiece or bracket of'some well-
furnished drawing-room. Nevertheless, the cause was a real
one ; the man within the iron mask was in downright earnest ?
the Saracen was wrong, and the Christian was right; ?and Charles
Martel proved it to be so, at the battle of Tours.f From that
hour, the Crescent withdrew its diminished head, and, except for
Charles, the hammer of the North, except for his Norman horse-
men and their heavy arms, except for the blood spilt and the
numbers slain on that memorable battle-field, we might, for
aught we can see to the contrary, have been Turks instead of
Christians at this present hour, worshipping Mahomet instead of
Christ, both in England and France.

The eighth century dawned upon the world a wilderness of
war, want, ignorance, darkness, crime, and famine, both spiritual
and corporeal. It was chaos returned. But from this seeming
confusion arose, like a morning mist, the present states of
Europe, in their youth and prime. The old governments were
gone, the new were unsettled and inexperienced. The Franks
had conquered Gaul and Germany. Beyond the Rhine fresh
populations were in continual ebullition, menacing those on the
south, or menaced themselves by others on the north The
Lombards possessed Cisalpine Gaul. A Duke governed Rome
under the title of an exarch?a figment of the past. The little
city of Gaeta was the only mart of promise, with municipal laws
and a militia of her own. Upon a rock, by the sea, she pro-
tected the plains of Garigliano, the orange trees, the aloes, the
cactus, and the African vegetation that still adorns that coast.
It was a trading community, while in the volcanic region, the
Solfaterra, of Vesuvius, Sorrento and Amalfi, with the mariner's
compass, revived the commercial spirit of the Phenicians.
* " Ex multis gentibus nationibusque, unum regnum populunique constituit "
(Justin.)
f Gibbon, c. 52.

The terrified inhabitants of Padua, who had fled from Alaric,
passed over to the Rialto, at the top of the Adriatic Gulf; and
the others, who subsequently retired before Attila, perched them-
selves on the neighbouring isles, like so many sea-fowl. They
founded Venice, and became the merchant princes in a cluster
of palaces emerging from the sea.* The Doge of Venice was a
great man in his day. Arsenals, docks, ships, and trade arose
at his bidding; and in strength and importance the merchant-
city played no mean part among the other cities of the earth.
The British isles were still uncivilized. Spain, rescued from
the Visigoths, fell a prey to the implacable Moors, who extin-
guished the light of faith everywhere, except the spark that
smouldered in the Asturias. The Greek Empire, mutilated and
dismembered, retreated from the Danube, abandoned the
garrisons stationed by Justinian upon its right bank, and
stretched a feeble arm of authority as far as Istria, Dalmatia,
and Mount Hjemus. Africa, that had been either Greek or
Eoman, Palestine with Syria, the seat of the Caliphate, and the
whole of Asia as far as Cilicia, had been seized on by the Arabs ;
and Arabia itself extended from the Euphrates to the Mediter-
ranean, and from the Indus to the Iaxartes. The North was
darkened by a mob of nomadic savages, who, under various de-
signations, wandered and prowled from the Caspian to the
Euxine, and from the Euxine to the Baltic.
Such was the scene disclosed as the curtain rose after the fall
of Rome. It looks like a solemn masquerade, so motley are the
figures, and so diverse from all that had gone before. There
is no kindred feeling between the Dictator Sylla and Luke
Anafetta, the first of the Doges?there is not the slightest re-
semblance between Attila and Scipio Africanus, Quintus Curtius
and Leo the Great. The form, the features, the costume, the
speech, the manners, principles of action, hopes, fears, plans,
thoughts?all are changed ; myriads have perished in the direful
struggle; blood has flowed in torrents, cities have been sacked
and destroyed, plains and villages ravaged with fire and sword,
the mighty have been lowered, and the low exalted?everything
upset: and all for what ?

The fifteen decisive battles, so often spoken of as the fifteen
critical turning-points of the world, are far less pregnant in their
grand results than the five successful sieges which occurred in
the course of the two thousand years that intervened between
500 B.C. and A.D. 1454 The siege of Babylon liberated the
Hebrews; the siege of Sardis dissipated the wealth of Croesus;
the siege of Jerusalem by Titus dispersed the Jews; the siege of
Rome broke paganism to pieces, and ihe siege of Constantinople
* "Histoire du Moyen Age." Paris: 1843. Tom. i. p. 273.
by tne Turks started the modern period. For sieges are so much
the more important in their consequences than battles, as cities
or fortresses are the strongholds of empire, and the concentrated
focus from which emanate those political ideas that govern a
nation a set of nations, or the world. Thus, the world fell when
Rome fell, and with the fall of Constantinople the middle a^es
passed away. ?

A note was sounded, long loud, and clear, at the fall of Con-
stantinople, that re-echoed along the remotest shores of earth-
it was the invention of the art of printing, the circulation of free
opinion, and the discovery of the New World It was the
clarion-note of freedom and intelligence. It was the death-note
of spiritual darkness, feudalism, and prejudice. It was the signal
that awoke the giant-genius from his sleep. The mail-clad
warrior raised his vizor, and glared around him ; the monk threw
back his cowl, and looked astonishment; the stoled priest paused
on the steps of the altar, and listened; the turbaned Turk
brandished his sheathless scymitar, and counted the years of his
Hegira.* Remember, thundered Cicero in the ears of Mark
Antony; remember, wherever thou art, thou art still within the
limits of the Roman dominions! *f- That threat could now no
longer be repeated. Beyond the sparkling waves of the Atlantic,
another land was lying, ready to receive the fugitive of oppression,
the victim of persecution, and the child of adventure. New plains,
new rivers, new foliage, new mountains, and new scenes, invited
the curiosity and courted the imagination of the Old World
standing on its shores, and gazing impatiently on the sea " the
fresh, the blue, the ever free I" The first discoverers came back
and told them of cataracts larger than their own volcanoes
loftier than Vesuvius, oceans without a storm the smooth
* "No sooner was Mahomet sovereign of the city than the duration of the
Ottoman sway was predicted. It was to last 400 years. No prophecy is more
explicithas been more widely extended, or has raised greater expectation From
the White Sea to the Persian Gulf it has been the belief of millions. Its origin
we know not; but, unhke most predictions, it has been equally received bv those
who feared and those who hoped its fulfilment. Greek Russi-m -,?,1 T? I- \
alike accepted it It has stimulated the ambition of the Czars;' it has encouraged
the obstinacy of the Rayahs; it has unnerved and depressed the Turks, made them
more reckless of the iuture, and more selfish in the concerns of to-dav The
Christian has never ceased to speak of Roumelia as his country and St Sophia as
his church; the Mussulman has acquiesced, and often seeks to' bury his dead on
the Asiatic shore, that they may rest in peace in their own land : natural causes
esteemed so likely to have inspired and to be tending to fulfil the prophecy, that
even Gibbon?no ready believer?gives an ear to its revelations. 'Perhaps,' he
says, 'the present generation may yet behold the accomplishment of the'pre-
diction?of a rare prediction, of which the style is unambiguous and the date un-
questionable.' "?The Times, Oct. 24, 1855.

+ "Ubicunque terrarum sunt, ibi est omne reipublicse presidium, vel potius
ipsa respublica," (Cicero "in M. Ant.," Phil. ii. perorat.) By this taunt, Cicero
provoked his own destruction. In the game of life, the same cards that'we deal
out to others are dealt back again to us at the next deal.
Pacific?constellations unusually bright, a tropical climate, and
a virgin soil. And well might man rejoice ! What a blessed
epoch in the course of events ! What a prospect of a new order
of things in the dull round of human existence ! Nor, after the
lapse of more than three hundred years, has the beneficent illusion
lost its charm, for the sight of the southern cross, the Magellanic
clouds, the coal-sacks, and stars, with a portion of the Milky Way,
unseen in northern latitudes, the sight has, in our days, been alone
sufficient to draw the aged Humboldt from his fatherland, and
fix our own countryman, Sir John Herschel, in a fit of scientific
ecstasy, at the Cape of Good Hope. There are now no longer
any more lands remaining to be discovered, while those that
have been discovered are already becoming macadamized as
fast as possible. Civilization expels nature, and the smoke of
science dirties the skies. The ancients found gold in the golden
Chersonese, or India; the gold found by Philip of Macedon in
Thrace, or Thessaly, served to suborn the orators of Athens;
and the Phenicians worked the silver mines of Spain so well,
that the prows of their ships and their anchors were made of
the precious metal. Australia and California must be worked
bare of their rich supplies at last; and then we must follow the
guesses of geologists, and look for it anew in Japan, Kamschatka,
or the Crimea.

What we have written seems but the fiction of a poet, and
yet what is the poetry of life but a fiction as unsubstantial as it
is real ? " I would the gods had made thee poetical," says Motley
in You Like It; to which Audrey most discreetly answers,
"I do not know what poetical is." We, who are wiser than
either Audrey or Motley, declare it to be the very essence of
life. To be poetical gives animation to all we say or do, and
gilds the vacuity of our days. The " Bride of Abydos," the
" Lay of the Last Minstrel," or the " Rape of the Lock," is
worth a thousand philosophical treatises; it is the wine after
dinner, the summer cloud in the morning of affairs. It is in
stirring times, and in seasons of excitement, that song resounds
the best: the National Anthem never comes home to the
feelings with so much force as it does on the battle ground of a
day of victory. It is to these moments that we owe the patriotic
* Speaking of Philip of Macedon, Justin says, "auraria in Thessalia, argenti
metalla in Tbracia occupat." (Lib. viii. c. 3.)
"L'Espagne fut longtemps le Pdrou de l'ancien monde. Prbs de Castalon, une
montagne de la chaine de la Sierra Seruga avait re<;ut le nom de Montague
d'Argent. Aristote rapporte que quand les Phdniciens d^barqubrent pour la
premiere fois en Espagne, ils firent une telle provision de ce mtjtal, qu au retour
ils en fabriquerent tous leurs ustensiles, jusqu'aux ancres de leurs vaisseaux."
" Histoire Ancienne." Paris: 1845. Tom. i. p. 268.
Of the gold in Spain and Portugal, Justin says it was so abundant, "adeo etiam
aratro frequenter glebas aureas exscindunt." (Lib. xli v. 3.)
airs of all nations: the Marseillaise Hymn, Partant pour la
Syrie, the Croatian March, and God Save the Queen. The
Scotch melodies in memory of Charles the Pretender originated
in similar circumstances; and Moore's Melodies, although most
of the airs may be traced to chants and litanies, arranged to his
measure, or sometimes traduced to a jig, derive their popularity
from a feeling of national sentiment. AVar has given rise to
some of the best music ; and the military band has greater
charms for the cultivated as well as the uncultivated ear than
the maudlin concerts and the sing-song of domestic life. Homer
sang of a siege in a style that no man ever sang before; and
Mr. Russell, the admirable correspondent of the Times, 'may,
some thousand years hence, share with the Greek bard the safe
and enviable honours of a poetic campaign. They both of them
tell of things addressed to the common feelings of mankind, and
music alone is wanted to render their records the most enchant-
ing of their kind.

The love of glory is another passion inherent in the breast.
It is not easy to define it. To love danger, and to delight in
peril and woe, is a contradiction in terms; but then it is the
pleasure of peril past and of danger overcome. But perhaps
there is a deeper philosophy in it than this namely, a profound
sentiment of immortality. Wellington is reported to have said,
" What will they say of us in England, if we lose this battle ?"?
the last he fought. It is evident the feeling was worth a bullet
through the heart at the moment, or else it was worth nothing
at all. To live after we are dead is a universal, but not a vulgar,
passion. What is man without immortality? Nothing worth
the name of man : a dead dog would do as well. To live here-
after is the hope of a rational being; to live in the memory of
those we love is all that most of us desire; but to live in the
everlasting regards of a nation of our own that we have served,
is the highest ambition," that last infirmity of noble mindsthere
is nothing but heaven beyond it. War alone affords scope to the
indulgence of a virtue so legitimately sublime as this. Yet they
who die for earthly glory, know not the bauble for which they
bleed. Democritus laughed, and Heraclitus wept, at the mise-
ries of life, which point the shaft of satire with irresistible keen-
ness. The celebrity of a great name is mostly consigned to the
morning state of an army in the field, the obituary or casual
remarks of a newspaper, the sealed registers at the Horse Guards
or the Admiralty, the short-lived wonder of the town, or, at its
best and rarest lot, the brief memory of a long-tried and solitary
friend. Posthumous fame is the most precarious of commodities :
the Wellington Despatches will live as long as the English lan-
guage, and?so will Johnny Gilpin !

Besides glory and poetry, there are some meaner sentiments
that would remain hidden in their own obscurity, except for the
stimulus imparted to them by the parade and circumstance of
war. Dress is one of these. Modifications of costume are refer-
able to periods of violent convulsions. Weapons, offensive and
defensive, are changed, and dress also: the breastplate gave
place to the jacket, whether of cloth or leather, as the jacket is
now yielding to the tunic; and the Greek fire, that foiled the
lance and shield, gave way in its turn to the use of gunpowder.
Satin and velvet belong to the piping times of peace, and the
amorous moodings of a lady's chamber; but at the sound of the
trumpet all is changed, from the fashion of the baldrick to that
of the beard and headgear. For warfare is a great reformer,
tantamount to the experience of a whole life, or of many lives
in one. What is trifling flies away, and the useful, the grand,
and the durable alone remains. Hence it comes to pass, that
at the termination of great wars the chief actors involuntarily
fall into the attitudes of the early drama, and the last act closes
on a group exhibited in the happiest combination of colour,
light, and shade. The spectacle is bright and evanescent: it
passes away, like everything else; but the impression abides, and
for a season the aspect of the world is changed.
Again, the weak and sickly die off. The old are removed by
care or disaster. The young are cut short in their prime ; none
but the robust and vigorous survive the hardships of the times.
The next generation increases in strength and stature ; marriage
is more frequent. Property, which had been tied up, is un-
expectedly set free by premature or sudden deaths; and the
destitute are supplied with fortune, while the young, who would
otherwise have grown old in filial obedience and single blessed-
ness, are placed in a position to gratify those longings, which all
feel, but which so many are forced to repress from prudential
motives. It is, so to speak, the harvest of the world, when mul-
titudes are cut down and gathered to their account, and the field
of life is gleaned to the last blade of mortality. What follows
is a new epoch : the old are gone and the young begin a new
career.

There is likewise an intermingling of nations; nation blends
with nation, foreigner with foreigner. Antipathies clash with
antipathies ; hatred faces hatred ; indifference confronts indiffer-
ence. Nothing is idle ; everything is on the alert. We test our
capabilities and our reason; we measure swords, and measure
things; discover that others are wiser than ourselves, and our-
selves wiser or weaker than others. The divisions of province
and country are levelled, and we perceive with surprise that
those who dress in straw hats on the south side of that range of
mountains are much the same as those in beaver on the north.
This social fact staggers us just as much as the point of the
bayonet in the deadly charge. Sometimes the straw hat con-
quers the beaver, and at other times the beaver the straw. We
compare notes, settle differences, mate concessions, compromise
a great deal embrace each other, and are friends. National pre-
judices are dissolved or softened; and we engage ourselves to
observe the ordinary rules of fellowship for the rest of our days
Language undergoes a change. The Assyrian superseded the
Hebrew, and the Egyptian modified them both' the Greek
swallowed them up, and the Latin swallowed up the Greek
Then came the modern tongues and dialects, each of them re-
sulting from national discords, peculiarities, and contests No-
thing was done in peace ; everything was done with strife' New
ideas required new words, new phrases, and new technicalities
New knowledge creates a language of its own. The whole was
metamorphosed, so that Pliny could not understand those who
in our modern universities and colleges examine and lecture in
Latin according to the rules of a Latin grammar unknown to the
Latins of old. This farce is a shred of feudalism, and the sooner
it is got rid of the better.

The Teutonic races, the descendants of Japhet, have hitherto
conquered the world; and there seems no reason to suppose they
will not continue to do so in future. They govern Europe,
America, India, Australia, New Zealand, aud Oceania?the
northern and the southern hemispheres. What they have once
acquired, they have always retained; and they will eventually
conquer the entire globe, unless time should be no more, or thev
themselves should belie their name and origin. Their lano-ua^e
superseded the Latin as early as the seventh century (a d?675)
They may fail here or there, be defeated in this battle or lose that
campaign, but the motto that waves from their masthead or flag-
staff are the invincible words, We will succeed /?where there ts
the will, there is the way;

... , ... .. " let b?th worlds rack,
At least we 11 cue with harness on our back."
Who can withstand this ? It challenges the world. Their ships
navigate every sea, and their writings uphold the cause of freedom
in every quarter of the globe. The Hanseatic League was theirs ?
theirs is the light of battle, popular elections, and free trade. '
In peace, we may regulate our lives as we please; and, pro-
vided we keep within the pale of the law, and take care not to
insult the conventions of society, we may indulge in luxury and
vice to our hearts' contentment or bitterness. The sun shines the
air is tranquil, and all is still. We bask in the noontide warmth
and prolong our days in a sort of soothing dream. But it is not
thus in Avar. In the clash of arms and the stern vigil of the
foughten field, a dreary grandeur imposes both sobriety and
caution. We cannot then mistake facts for fancies, nor realities
for whims. There is nothing imaginative in a round shot, a shell,
or a Minid ball?a wet tent, scanty rations, the dismal trenches,
or an outlying picket. Nor is this forlorn feeling peculiar to the
soldier on active service, for all feel it alike. The instability of
affairs comes home to all. The rapidity with which everything
is precipitated from life to death, and from certainty to uncer-
tainty, forces the stoutest heart to quail, to meditate, and to re-
flect ; and the miseries incidental to open hostilities throw a sable
mantle of grief over many a tender soul far removed from the
actual scene of violence and bloodshed.

Of the 25,000 or 80,000 soldiers who quitted these shores, full
of health and spirits, in the spring of 1854, how many are now
left alive to tell the tale? Only a few, a very few. Of the
stalwart Guards and Highlanders, the complete regiments of the
line, the well-equipped artillery, and the splendid cavalry, almost
all are gone?even their gallant leader is no more; and well-
trained horses without number, and men who were but as yester-
day both veterans and heroes, are now numbered with the dead,
the food of vultures, or dogs, or worms. The malaria of Gallipoli
and Varna, the cholera, the glorious battles of Alma, Balaclava,
and Inkermann, the weary siege, the storms of autumn, the winter's
snow and frost, the damps of returning spring, tattered clothing,
green coffee, starvation, did their worst, and changed them to
" Sucli tilings?a mother had not known her son
Amidst the skeletons of that gaunt crew." *

The matchless naval brigade suffered comparatively less than the
troops, for the simple reason that they were near their own sup-
plies, and Jack knows how to look after himself; although in the
trenches they shared equal honours and equal dangers with the
rest of the army. For the same reason, the Highland brigade
and the marines fared better in the winter than if they had
been posted well up in the front; but then these noble and un-
rivalled regiments preserved Balaclava for us:?ils ne reculent
jamais !

" In times to come it will be a chosen terminus of Saxon pilgrimage, this
Cathcart's-hill. Whether the traveller beholds from its humble parapet the
fair aspect of the Imperial city, guarded by threefold mightier batteries than
* "Famine, despair, cold, thirst, and heat had done
Their work on them by turns, and thinn'd them to
Such things?a mother had not known her son
Amidst the skeletons of that gaunt crew;
By night chill'd, by day scorch'd, thus one by one
They perished." Byron.

now, or sits upon the broken wall to gaze upon the ruins of Sebastopol, he
must, if he has any British blood in his veins, regard with emotion that little
spot which encloses all that was mortal of some of the noblest soldiers who
ever sprang from our warrior race. He will see the site of those tedious
trenches where the strong man waxed weak day after day and the sanguine
became hopeless, and where the British soldier fought through a terrible winter
Ion, Gordon's Attack, Chapman's Attack under his 'ejesX win'revive Titlx
the aspect of the places where they stood the memories of this great stnJde
and renew the incidents of its history How many more of our gallant officers'
this cemetery mayJ,old it is impossible to say; it is too full already. It is a
parallelogram of about forty yards long by thirty yards broad, formed by the
base of a ruined wal which might;m former days have marked the lines of a Tartar
fort, or have been the hrst Russian redoubt to watch over the infniov of SpW
topol. Although many a humble tumulus indicates to the eye of^ S ion the"
place where some beloved comrade rests till the last reveil the pare nnd l!?
of friends here and at home havc^left memorials in solid stone of most of those
whose remains are resting here."?The Times' Special Correspondent, October
The sadness of heart inflicted by war is the penalty of sin or
the inevitable condition of humanity. We must all die in our
turn, but the anguish of parting for ever on this side the grave is
the more poignant when the blow of separation is struck by the
hand of man, instead of the more gentle operations of nature and
decay. " Killed in action" means a violent, a sudden, or a cruel
death: the consolations of a calm deathbed, surrounded by friends,
a wife, a mother, a sister, or a child, are irretrievably wanting;
the last words and the last kiss are given to the gory ground, and
the last pressure of the hand is spent in struggling with the
desperate foeman or grasping the weltering blade of slaughter.
A bullet may dismiss the soul in a moment, or a heavier missile
destroy vitality by a stun, at a long range, far off from the imme-
diate conflict, but the end is the same?it is what the epitaph
says, Killed in action. 1 1

Among the mental phenomena produced bv war, the love of
bloodshed is one of the most singular and revolting It is not
the savage villain, hackneyed in brutal deeds, that i! alone prone
to this horrible propensity; for, when once engaged in it the
gentle and the polite, the amiable and the mild, the handsome
and the winning, become unconsciously infuriated with the sense
of this diabolical thirstiness. When it is first spilt, and lies in a
clotted pool upon the earth?the reeking earth!?the sio-ht of
the fresh blood inspires the awful passion. It is a mixture of
fury and alarm, of ardour and revenge; nor can we accurately
distinguish between bravery and a love of slaying?between
the cold-blooded murderer whose deed is criminal and the
bold soldier whose bloody work is glorious, patriotic, and praise-
Avorthy. The motive alone excuses the deed, and the consent
of mankind justifies the end. "While it lasts, the passion is
incontrollable; and, considered in its elemental form, it is clearly
a madness.*

From this violent emotion arises another, which is akin to
theft?it is the love for destruction and plunder. Those, who in
ordinary life never think of appropriating what is not their
own, nor of injuring, much less destroying anything good they
happen to meet with, are instigated, in common with the rest of
their companions, to demolish the fairest works of art, to ran-
sack whatever is sacred and secluded, and to take possession of
what does not belong to them, without the slightest hesitation
and scruple. It belonged to the enemy, and it is theirs by the
right of the war. Hence, the dreadful accounts we read of in
the sacking, and burning, and overthrow of captured cities;
as, for instance, that of Kertch in May, and that of Sebastopol,
as far as its ruins allowed it to be so, in September last.
Connected with these two barbarous and debased propensities,
let slip as the dogs of war, to torment man, is the excitement of
the sexual passion :?but, enough ! drop the veil over this lurid
glimpse of hell, and bewail our fallen nature, and the victims of
havoc and lust! We question whether any of those who have
passed through these terrible ordeals, and have afterwards grown
grey in the lap of peace, ever feel remorse or compunction arise
within their breasts at the recollection of the share they have
taken in the scenes they have witnessed ? If not, it is an act of
oblivion on the part of the moral sense, the more remarkable,
because it occurs among Christian and civilized communities as
frequently and as intensely as ever it did in the pagan and rude
populations of antiquity ; and it deserves the special attention of
psychologists, moralists, statesmen, and divines.

Add to these vices, the habits of roving, and wandering, and
restlessness, which are so contrary to domesticity, and which are
acquired by soldiers and sailors from their particular modes of
livelihood. A large army, accustomed to the field, or, in plain
language^ a select band of practised marauders, sent home and
returned into store upon the conclusion of a peace, is the most
grievous burden that can be laid upon an industrious people.
They are so many consuming mouths which cannot supply
themselves; and the ways of peace are no longer familiar to
* An anecdote is told of a young officer, of a remarkably mild disposition, -who
was engaged in the cavalry charge at Waterloo. He was accosted, on coming out
of the affray for a moment, and asked why he wiped his bloody sword with so
much eagerness ? "We are here to kill our enemies, he replied; " and he is the
best man who kills the most." W illi these words, he turned round and spurred
his horse into the midst of the fight once more. 1 acitus frequently mentions the
gratification with which the legions fleshed themselves in slaughter. The idea is
too shocking to be dwelt on.

them. But it is not thus with the sailor; for he can find his
proper home again upon the waters, and his love of roving may
be successfully turned in pursuit of trade and adventure, so con-
ducive to the wealth, the happiness, and the greatness of a
nation.

The last passion peculiar to warfare, is the state of mind
engendered before during, and after an action* On the eve and
morning of pitched battles, a sullen gloom pervades the camp?
the silent presentiment of the coming event; which, as Banquo
said on the night of his own murder, was a heavy summons,
that lay like lead upon him. Officers and men are irritable and
morose,?they are bending their courage to the point At the
first onset, the boldest are uneasy and reluctant, or rash and
precipitate; but, when once in the midst of the' enffa^ment
the sense of danger is lost, delirium of a not unpleasino- kind
overwhelms them, together with a sensation, in some cases of
being lifted from the ground, and carried on by a preternatural
movement. It is evidently hyperemia of the brain, which sub-
sides the moment blood flows from A wound, or the battle ceases ?
and then the paroxysm ends in fainting, or a disposition to shed
tears, or apathy, or sleep.

Considering the subject "pathologically, actual fighting appears
in the light of an abnormal condition of the cerebrospinal
system; and were we, as pathologists, to assign to it its proper
place in our nosology, it would be among the Protean forms
of exalted nervous sensibility. But we dare not affirm that an
entire community, or several communities at once, should thus
transgress the bounds of reason and discretion, when we see the
greatest minds deliberately engaged in conducting the greatest
wars to a prosperous termination. There is no doubt, war occa-
sionally assumes an epidemic character, the result of a morbid
principle of imitation?like suicide, and some of the convulsive
diseases; while, among populations of an excitable temperament
this propensity is so easily called into action, that the slightest
provocation is enough to kindle the spark, and light up the
flame of revolution, civil contest, or foreign invasion, almost with-
out the pretext of a casus belli. The lively people of ancient
Greece might furnish many an instance in proof of this. It
has likewise been remarked, that periods of warfare are usually
associated with seasons of rare meteorological phenomena such
as earthquakes, tempests, droughts, volcanic eruptions, comets
bad harvests, and epidemic mortality; so that the phrase of
* Tacitus, describing the feelings that pervaded a camp on the night previous to
a battle, says:?"invalidi ignes, interruptre voces, atquae ipsi passim adjacerent
vallo, oberrarent tentoriis, insomnes magis quam pervigiles. Ducemque terruit
dira quies," &c. ("Annales," i. 65.) The madness of victory is proverbial war, pestilence, and famine, is both historically and scripturally
correct. These phenomena, moral and natural, taken together,
impart a formidable character to the passion for bloodshed, of
which the preceding account is but its natural history, as it is
exhibited in the histories of nations.*

It is the autumn of life, and the storms are stripping the
leaves for the ensuing winter of the world. The migratory birds
are on the wing; their time is short, and they are taking to
flight or ever the frost and the snow stamp their cold seal on the
hybernating death of nature.

" Like the leaves of tlie trees when the summer is green,
That host with their banners at sunset was seen;
Like the leaves of the trees when the autumn is blown,
That host in the morning lay withered and strown.
" There lay the steed with his nostril all wide,
But thro' it there rolled not the breath of his pride ;
And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf,
And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf.
" And there lay the rider distorted and pale,
With the dew on his brow, and the rust on his mail," &c.
Byron.

Were finer lines than these ever penned by poet ?
Never was a siege undertaken on a soil more replete with
classical legend and historic recollections than that of Sebas-
topol. In the Crimea, the Tauric Chersonesus of the ancients,
upon the borders of the Black Sea, the Pontus Euxinus of the
Latins and Greeks, beyond the Thracian Bosphorus, and close to
the Palus Mseotis, or Sea of Azoff, the moderns have played a
memorable part in the annals of modern warfare. It was of this
* " On the field of battle one soldier at the appearance of blood experiences the
intoxication of carnage ; another will swoon at the same sight. Sir Walter Scott,
in the poem in which he has referred to the battle of Bannockburn, alludes to the
various feelings that influence the mind in the heat of an engagement ; and, it
will be perceived, that he directs particular attention to those who are influenced
by no other motive than the pleasure they derive from sacrificing human life :?
" ' But oh! amid that waste of life,
What various motives fired the strife!
The aspiring noble bled for fame,
The patriot for his country's claim ;
This knight his youthful strength to prove,
And that to earn his lady's love ;
Some fought for ruffian thirst of blood;
From habit some, or hardihood;
But ruffian stern and soldier good,
The noble and the slave,
From various cause the same wild road
On the same bloody morning trode
To that dark inn, the Grave.' "
The "Anatomy of Suicide." By Forbes Winslow, M.D.

spot that Euripides chanted his real or fabulous tale of " Iphi-
genia; and there it was that the Greeks actually reclaimed the
Tauri from their brutal manners. There they fixed their mari-
time stations, perhaps m Balaklava itself, or the now half-calcined
harbour of what was once Sebastopol. There, where the Cim-
merian Bospherus joins the Euxine with the fcfeotis, is situated
Kertch, or Panticapceum, the site of Cssar's far-famed ban mot,
or pithy despatch, ot Vem, Vidi, Vici. The Romans once ad-
vanced withm three days march of the Tanais, or Don, the native
ground of the marauding Cossacks, and the boundary between
Asia and Europe. In frail flat-bottomed barks, framed of timber
only, without a particle of iron, and covered with nothing but a
slender roofing of reeds, the Goths carelessly trusted themselves
to the mercies of an unknown sea. Their natural darin^ and
the hope of plunder, stimulated their ignorance and inexperience.
They pillaged the Crimea; but at a later period the republic
of Kherson assisted Constantine against them. The Genoese
the Venetians, and the gallant Franks, in their turn, penetrated'
those distant waters in pursuit of gain or adventures, till at last
they fell under the rule of the Tartars, the Turks, and the Russians.
The basin of the Black Sea is a volcanic hollow, looked into
by the snowy Caucasus, the heights of Ararat, and the shores of
Mithridatic Pontus. Sinope furnished a god to Egypt, and
the delta or liman of the Danube was the pitiful spot of Ovid's
exile, for what he had seen?quod vidi?in the halls of Au-
gustus Caesar.* Some of the largest rivers of Europe empty
their floods into its stormy bosom, which is as black as it is
fathomless: f and an old proverb declared the mariner to be a
fool who entered the Euxine before the ides of May or tarried
in it after the kalends of October. Yet such is the sea navigated
by our ships of war, which have floated upon it throughout the
whole year, prepared for action, and scatheless of shipwreck or
disaster. 1

The long line of the Danube, from Galatz at its embouchure
* "Cur aliquidvidi?-curnoxia lumina feci? (Ovid. ?de Ponto,"lib ii \ He
says "Carmen et error was the cause of his exile : the verses were Ovid's own
but the error is the supposed incest of Augustus with his own daughter For s3
a sight, if true, banishment was only less than death. He makes the same allusion
in other places.

f A young friend of ours, who has lately joined his regiment in the Crimea
says, speaking of his voyage thither : " The water of the Black Sea is certainly
black. I was very much struck with its dark appearance on our passage from the
Bosphorus to Balaklava."

"It is very deep, no bottom having been reached with a line of 140 fathoms "
Mrs. Somerville, " Phys. Geogr." 1851. Vol. i. p. 359.
Upwards of forty rivers, many of them the largest in Europe, flow into it It
receives the melted snows from the Caucasus, Ararat, the Balkan, the Carpathian
and the Swiss mountains; and the waste waters from Central Russia' and the
Oural mountains.

up to Singidunum or Belgrade, on the Austrian frontier, is over-
charged with mediaeval and imperial recollections; Trajan's Wall
at the Dobrudscha and Hadrian's Bridge beyond Kalafat are too
well known for more than a casual allusion to them ; and it was
between these two extremities that the barbarians rushed across
in winter, when the river was frozen over. The most active of
the Roman emperors were continually engaged in fortifying this
long extent of open country against their frequent incursions :
here Aurelius earned or lost his laurels, and so did Probus and
others ; here were signed the famous treaties of Unkiar, Skelessi
and Balta Liman; and here did Omar Pasha win his undying
military renown. It was here that the Goths crossed over in
force in the fourth century, seized upon the present point of
Schumla, passed the defiles of the Balkan, descended into
Roumelia, and fought and defeated the Emperor Yalens near
Adrianople. Yalens,* with his personal staff, took refuge in a
cottage, which the Goths set fire to, and burnt both him and his
officers to death. . It was in Gallipoli that the Turks first set foot
in Europe. The whole locality is full of the living past: Mount
Olympus, Achilles, and Troy?the Cyanean rocks, or floating
islands, Hero and Leander, and the Argonauts.

The modern and ancient worlds have touched each other. The
difference of mind and manners is immense. Steam brings us in
communication with the land of Cimmerian darkness in ten days
over a distance of three thousand miles, and the electric telegraph
in as many hours. The mode of warfare is also frightfully dif-
ferent. The Russians lost 200,000 men in less than a twelve-
month, and the Allies can have lost scarcely less. Perhaps the
grand total of 400.000, both sides taken together, is not too large
a number to put down to the score of battle and disease in the
short space of time that elapsed between the siege of Silistria
and that of Sebastopol. The defence of Sebastopol alone cost
the Russians, according to Prince Gortschakoff's account, " from
600 to 1000 men a-day for the last thirty days;"f and when
the Allies triumphantly entered the fortress, they found the
dead piled up in the streets, and mutilated limbs stowed away
* Gibbon, c. xxvi.

f "No English writer would have dared to rate the Russian loss so hio-h ?
it would have appeared an ignorant exaggeration. ' During thirty days,' says
Gortschakoff, 'the garrison lost from 600 to 1000 men a-day.' This is' inde-
pendent of the slaughter of the last three days' bombardment, and in the last
supreme struggle during six terrible assaults.^ What the Russian losses have been
during the whole campaign it is scarcely possible to conjecture, for we believe that
no adequate idea has been formed of the terrors of this wonderful siege. Disease,
cold, and combat have laid men low in numbers which it requires some boldness
to state. We say nothing of the allied loss, but that of the Russians seems likely
to have fallen little short of 200,000. Never in modern times has there been so
great a destruction on so limited a field,"?The Times, Oct. 8, 1855.
in empty barrels. We turn from the account with sickening
horror ; yet the necessity was stern and unrelenting. Russia was
stealing a march on the south of Europe: had she conquered
Turkey, she would have made a flank movement on Italy,
Austria, and Spain; had she not been checked, France must at
last have fought her on her own borders, and we along our own
shores. The necessity was obvious; and the people, with their
natural sagacity, perceived the dilemma, and boldly extricated
themselves from between its horns by insisting on war.

The present contest will strengthen more than ever the cause
of freedom and the power of the people, who prove themselves to
be as far-sighted in their diplomacy as the most finished diplo-
matist ever pretends to be in his. The result is already visible
in the temperate but firm tone with which the British nation
continues to address itself to the war, and bear the necessary cost
of its being carried on to a successful issue. The liberality with
which they provided for the sick and wounded was not less esti-
mable than unpretending. They< openly did their duty, without
looking for applause or recommence. A frame of mind of this
cool and deliberate character is more than an omen of success,
because it is the means of success itself, and the inferences to be
drawn from it in favour of the future are bright and encouraging.
The first Napoleon said, " Fifty years after my decease, Europe
must make up its mind to become Republican or Cossack. That
crisis has arrived, and France and England united have faced the
rising foe on his own ground, and encountered him in the secret
lair of his vast dominions.

The end of war is peace, and peace upon a higher elevation
than it was before the commencement of the struggle. Examples
without end could be adduced from history to prove that right
ultimately prevails over might, and that the poetic justice awarded
in works of fiction, is but the conclusion drawn from our expe-
rience of the world; for were it otherwise, we should be dis-
appointed, because its failure would not be in accordance with
profane or sacred truth. But it is from this confidence in the
course of events that we so fearlessly rely upon the fate of
arms?a proceeding which, though it may be discountenanced
by the consent of mankind, yet is practically found to be the
surest, if not the only means left for determining the balance of
power or equity in the final adjustment of affairs. War is,
therefore, the trial by battle on a large scale, in which thousands
die instead of one, and the magnitude of the question at stake
involves the welfare of millions instead of the particular interests
of a king, a noble, or a plebeian. Nor is the appeal to Heaven
in vindication of ourselves one iota less sincere and legitimate
than the appeal to our drawn sword; since the dangerous
expedient of leaving the justice of our cause to the arbitrement
of Heaven or of arms, seldom betrays us. The experiment is
not likely to prove too much for itself?the capricious choice of
victory decides in favour of the injured party. A single battle
or campaign may apparently go against this superstitious dogma;
but, in the long run, success protects the deserving, and war
never fails to yield the triumph incontestably in favour of truth,
of justice, and of peace.
