Psychology Of Malebranche
==========================

608
Art. VIII.?
*
:Author: PROFESSOR HOPPUS, LL.D.

Father Malebranghe ranks among the profoundest thinkers
which the school of Descartes has produced. With a somewhat
daring imagination for a philosopher, and a tendency to mysti-
cism in his speculations ; he was nevertheless an acute, analytic
metaphysician, as well as a devout Christian moralist, jealously
attempting to guard those of his doctrines which seemed to
others most to lean towards fatalism from abuse. He was born
at Paris, in ] 638, his father being one of the royal secretaries.
In consequence of his personal malformation, he had a domestic
education, until he was of an age to enter the college De laMarche,
with a view to holy orders; whence he passed to the far-famed
Sorbonne for his theology. Having refused a canonry at Notre-
Dame, he entered the Oratory, in 1660. He now devoted himself
much to ecclesiastical histor}^, and read the principal Greek
writers on this subject. Richard .Simon next drew him to the
study of Hebrew ; but he had not yet found the line of pursuit
which was most deeply to engage his mind. His passion was
destined to be for psychological inquiry and original think-
ing ; and he despised the merely historical knowledge of lan-
guages, and of the opinions of other men, and was anxious to
discover truth, if possible, for himself. It is remarkable, con-
sidering his imaginative powers and his enthusiastic tempera-
ment, that he never could read ten lines of poetry without dis-
gust. In his studies, his habits were quite those of the recluse ;
and he meditated with darkened windows, that he might more
readily retire within himself; though his manners are said to
have been simple and modest, cheerful and complaisant.
Being once in a bookseller's shop, a copy of Descartes' " Traite
de l'Homme" was accidentally handed to him?an unfinished
posthumous work by no means ranking with the most celebrated
pieces of that great philosopher. It made an extraordinary im-
pression, however, on the ardent mind of Malebranche. He
found a new world instantly opening to his contemplation, a
science of man which he had never before dreamed of. His admi-
ration for Descartes, and the simple child-like docility of that great
philosopher as an inquirer after truth, was unbounded. He was
delighted with the freedom and independence of thought which
characterized his book ; nor was he less pleased with its author's
avoidance of everything that could tend directly to clash with
religious faith. As he proceeded with the perusal, his excite-
ment was so great that it brought on violent palpitations of the
heart, and he was obliged repeatedly to lay the book aside.
Henceforth neither Greek nor Hebrew, nor ecclesiastical history,
had any charms for him; and he devoted himself without reserve
to the study of the new philosophy, which was so complete an
innovation on the scholasticism that had hitherto reigned?one
grand object of which had been to solve all questions, and get
over all difficulties, by finding out methods of bringing them
under the dogmas of Aristotle, or at least reconciling them with
his opinions, so far as these could be made out. Malebranche at
once became an ardent disciple of his master, regarding obser-
vation as the basis of philosophy, and rational evidence as the
rule of its conclusions. He soon appropriated'Descartes' entire
doctrines, and zealously declared that if his works were by any
chance lost, he would do his best to re-establish them. In theo-
logy, however, especially so far as regarded the doctrines of pro-
vidence and grace, he was decidedly a disciple of St. Augustine.

The first fruit of Malebranche's enthusiasm for the new
method of philosophical study, was his Recherche de la Verite
published in 1 674 ; a book which had prodigious success, passing
through many editions, and being translated into several lan-
guages. The author here points out, in an exact method, the
sources of error in the search after truth to which we are liable,
from our senses, imagination, inclinations, and passions; and he
then treats of the remedies which ought to be applied. All the
other publications of Malebranche may be regarded as little
more than the development of this work ; and his grand aim,
throughout, is to show the agreement of the main principles of
Descartes* with, religion, and their bearings on the illustration of
nature and grace. The acutene?s, originality, and fertility of in-
vention with which this book abounds, procured for it the highest
eulogy. His mystical theory of our vision of all things in God,
however, subjected it to attacks on all sides ; and some remon-
strated strongly against the tendency of his doctrine respecting
the Divine agency to absorb all subordinate and secondary
causes, and along with them man's responsibility.

This first work of our author was greatly altered in the suc-
cessive editions. He adhered, however, to the theory that the
will is the source of error in man, not the cognitive faculties;
for the will, he says, guides the formation of our conclusions from
the objects presented to us. We know, for instance, that we
feel warmth or see light; and here we are not deceived, but
only when the will chooses to hold that the light or the warmth
exists in the object without. But as sensation gives us pleasure
or pain, which chiefly move the will, sensation becomes the main
remote cause of error. Hence the false ethical systems which
* For our review of Descartes, see the Number for January, 1855.

make pleasure the highest good ; whereas the only true and real
good is God himself, whom we can know only by the pure reason
or intellect. But how can man know anything of the relations
subsisting between mind and matter in the universe around him,
since these two natures are so diverse from each other ? He can
only know them, each and both, in God, and by means of God's
ever-acting agency. In this way, alone, is man freed from a life
of hopeless and never-ending delusions. Man has ideas, indeed,
as his consciousness tells him : but his ideas do not guarantee to
him the existence of the objects around him; for imagination
also presents ideas, many of which are mere chimeras which
never do or can exist. Some of our ideas are internal, or
thoughts, strictly sso-called modifications of the thinking soul
only; other ideas relate to objects which we believe are external
to us. These objects are material or spiritual. Material objects can
only be perceived mediately, because they are extended, and are
not homogeneous with the soul, and have no natural means of
community with it: but external spiritual objects may be per-
ceived mediately by ideas, though imperfectly, as well as imme-
diately and clearly, in the Divine vision.

Malebranche wholly rejects the ancient Peripatetic idealism of
films, effluxes, species, or phantasms (tenuia rerum simulacra)
of the shape of bodies, and perpetually flowing off from them to
our organs of sense?an inconceivable hypothesis ; for what is the
image and shape of a sound or odour ? He equally opposes
whatever glimpse may be found in the Grecian schools of a doc-
trine analogous to the egotistical idealism by which the name of
Fichte is remarkable in later times, according to which the mind
spins out from itself the whole web of its own ideas, and creates
the entire universe of mind and matter for itself. Our author's
argument for rejecting the principle of innate ideas would not
be admitted by Descartes or Leibnitz, whp supposed that the
ideas they termed innate were limited in number. Malebranche
argues against these ideas, on the ground that the " number of
ideas which the mind may entertain is potentially infinite, and
we cannot suppose, without absurdity, that an infinity of ideas
has been originally furnished to our minds." Now, be the doc-
trine of innate ideas, in any sense of it, right or wrong, nO one
but Malebranche ever imagined that in order to exist at all, they
must be infinite in number. As to the commonly-received
notion, that in order to have available perceptions of the objects
of sense and thought, the soul only requires its present faculties,
and their just development and use?this our author regards
as a profane theory, which does nothing less than make man
" equal to God," who alone is able to take cognisance of the ob-
jects of knowledge, by means of his own proper resources and
energies. As the Divine Being, therefore, necessarily lias in His
infinite mind the ideas of all things, He alone is man's "intelli-
gible world :" all His works must be seen and known in Himself.
The result is, that not matter only, but even created mind, has
only, in and for itself, a sort of passive activity ?: all its operations
and agencies are only secondary ; it cannot possibly, from its very
nature, have any independent power or spontaneity conferred on
it: it can truly originate nothing.

In order to render his views, which some thought obscure, and
others (what was still worse for an ecclesiastic) heterodox, more
adapted to the popular mind, and to obviate the idea that any
of them were not in accordance with the doctrines of the Church,
he published his Conversations Chretiennes in 1677, at the .

instance of the Due de Chevreuse. In 1680 appeared the
Traite de la Nature et la Grace, occasioned by a controversy
with Arnauld on the subject, in which Bossuet also took part
against Malebranche, but which ended, like many other such
disputes, without result. In the same year he published his
Meditations Chretiennes et Metaphysiques, a dialogue between
the Word (Aoyoe) and the author, with a view to throw further
light on the above Treatise ; for he held that the " eternal -Word
is the universal reason of spirits :" " Comme je suis convaincu
que le Yerbe eternel est la liaison universelle des esprits, je
crois devoir le faire parler comme le veritable Maitre."* In the
year 1682 the Traite de Morale followed, in which Malebranche
endeavours to derive all human duty from his own philosophical
principles as perfectly coinciding with Christianity, and to prove,
in his own way, the union of all spirits with the Divinity. The
Entretiens sur la Metaphysique et sur la Religion were pub-
lished in 1687, and some have pronounced this work to be the
author's chef-d'oeuvre. Its tone is, as usual with Malebranche,
elevated, solemn, and devout; and it is written in a finished and
attractive style of dialogue ,which Plato might have envied : our
author himself, however, preferred the " Meditations." Both works
are in his best manner; but the " Entretiens" may be regarded
as furnishing a clear, animated compend of his entire philosoph}7".
Being accused by Regis of abetting the ethical system of Epi-
curus, and by Father Lamy, on the other hand, of advocating an
exclusively disinterested love of God, he published his brief
tract entitled Traite de I'Amour de Bieu, in 1697, in which
he maintains a medium between extremes ; and his book conci-
liated Bossuet, and was praised at Rome. From some of his
works having found their way to China, probably in the hands
of Catholic missionaries, he composed his short dialogue, Entre-
tien d'un Philosophe Chretien, et d'un Philosophe Chinois
* " Mudit. Clirdt.Avertisscment.

sur I'Existence de Bieu ; a work which procured him blame from
some quarters for his assertion that the Chinese philosophy was
atheistic, while the retort of symbolizing with Spinozism was
made upon himself for his mystical views regarding the " exten-
sion of the infinite.

We must not attempt to enumerate the other writings of our
author, epistolary and polemical. His replies in the controversy
with Arnauld were collected and published in four small volumes,
at Paris, in 1709. We may add that he was a geometrician and
natural philosopher, as well as metaphysician ; and he was re-
ceived as an honorary member of the Academy of Sciences in 1699.
A small piece of his is extant, entitled Traite de la Communica-
tion du Mouvement, in which he recants his statement in the
"Recherche," that the same quantity of motion is always preserved
in nature; and he added some physical remarks on the general
system of the universe. Though our author's philosophy has not by
any means preserved the reputation which it had when it first
became known, (in a sphere where new lights have mostly been at-
tractive till they were neglected for newer,) his metaphysical talent,
the beauty of his style, the sincerity of his aims, the seriousness
of his tone, and the elevation of his thoughts, will always insure
to his writings a considerable amount of well-deserved attention.
Occupied as he was with abstract studies, he appears to have
possessed an eminently pious mind, and to have been very punc-
tual in all his duties. On a visit which he once paid to the
great Condd, at Chantilly, the attendants remarked that ' he
" spoke more of God in those three days than the prince's con-
fessor did in ten years." His company was much courted,
notwithstanding his great love of solitude, and a certain irri-
tability which crept on him in his maturer years. King
James II. sought an interview with him ; and he was visited by
Leibnitz and Berkeley. In a conversation with the latter, the
discussion became so warm, and Malebranche was so excited,
that his feeble and aged frame could not sustain the shock, which
hastened his end. I hough naturally of a weak constitution,
with frequent ailments, his great temperance and regimen pro-
longed his life to the age of 77, when he died, in the year 1715.

In the strict chronological order, Spinoza comes before Male-
branche ; but in the order of development the philosopher of the
Oratory stands nearer to Descartes, the original founder of the
first school of Continental idealism. Malebranche's advance from
* "Oui, sans doute, 1'Vendue, celle que vous apercevez imm&liatement et di-
rectement, 1'tStendue intelligible, est ^ternelle, ndcessaire, infinie. Car c'est l'idee ou
l'arch^type de l'^tendue cr66e, que nous apercevons imniddiateinent ; et eette idde
est l'essence ^ternelle de Dieu menie, en tant que relative b, l'dtendue mattSrielle."
Eniretien, etc.

the Cartesian point of departure, though well defined, fell short,
in its extent and boldness, of that of Spinoza, whose system
amounted decidedly to a theoretic Pantheism. With Descartes,
Malebranclie sought for truth in our intuitive and rational con-
viction of certitude; but he looked at this subject in his own
mystical way, and what he says on it only presents another
phase of his leading doctrine of vision in God. He maintains that
there is, first, an "essential reason" common to all intelligences??
an eternal light superior to our minds, which contains in itself
all. the principles of the sciences and the arts, morals and laws??
a reason supreme and necessarily existing. This comes very
near to, or is rather identical with, the doctrine of " impersonal
reason" in the Eclectic school of France ; and it would seem of -
necessity to mean one of two things, each of which is incon-
ceivable. Is reason, we may ask, ours, or is it not ? If it be
ours, how can it be impersonal?no part of us?beyond our
minds ? Is it, then, like the light of heaven, by which we see,
but which is not dependent on our senses ? Such an analogy,
we repeat, is inconceivable as applied to mind. Reason, as
human, must be individual; its individuality is no more set aside
by its uniformity in the race, than the individuality of diges-
tion is overthrown by its being common to all mankind. But is
reason God's, and not man's ? (of course, we are here speaking of
the " essential reason'? the " eternal light," which, according to
Malebranche, contains all the principles of our rational know-
ledge :) if so, then how can man, as man, attain to truth ?
Figuratively and poetically, we may speak in this strain of the
superlative excellence of reason very well; but our author meant
it for philosophy. Secondly, according to Malebranche, there i3
a natural reason common to all men, the gift of the Creator, and
analogous to the eye of the body: it is, in fact, the intellectual
eye which contemplates the light of the supreme reason. And,
thirdly, there is in the world a sort of arbitrary or factitious
reason, purely human, which every man makes for himself, to
substitute in the place of the universal reason, and more parti-
cularly in all matters which relate to his own conduct. From
this last form of reason, according to Malebranche, moral evil
arises ; for error and moral evil are the consequence of the
natural reason not being properly turned to the contemplation of
the eternal reason.* Many of our author's remarks on this sub-
ject, in various parts of his works, are exquisitely beautiful and
sublimely devout; but when viewed psychologically and analy-
tically, and as offering a system of the mind, they are of too
mystical a cast to approve themselves to our understanding. If}
* " Meditations Chr^tiennes," etc., passim.

however, we ought not to say, with some of his admirers, that he
was the " profoundest thinker" whom France has produced, we
may well admit that he is one of the finest writers who ever
graced the French language. Diderot said, " One single page of
Locke contains more truth than all that Malebranche has
penned ; but one line of Malebranche is marked by greater
subtilty, more imagination, acuteness, and genius, than Locke's
whole ' Essay.

As a priest, Malebranche was more called than even his
cautious master Descartes to avoid giving offence to the Church,
and he constantly aims at illustrating theology by metaphysics.
Though his ideal theory of perception, by maintaining that we
" see all things in God" {nous voyons tout en Dieu,) rendered
the outward universe unnecessary; yet he did not, with Berkeley,
deny its existence : for he conceived that the cosmogony of the
Mosaic statement, that God, in the beginning, "created the
heavens and the earth," obliged him to admit the real existence
of matter ; while Berkeley, on the other hand, does not appear to
have felt any difficulty in understanding the language of the
Pentateuch in regard to the creation of the world as merely
accommodated to the general impressions of mankind, and the
natural tendency of their sensible ideas, and as not at all affect-
ing the metaphysical question respecting the independent reality
of matter. In many instances, however, we see in Malebranche,
as Dugald Stewart has observed, "a remarkable boldness and
freedom of inquiry, setting at nought those human authorities
which have so much weight with men of unenlightened erudition,
and sturdily opposing his own reason to the most inveterate
prejudices of his age. His disbelief in the reality of sorcery,
which seems to have been complete, affords a decisive proof of
the soundness of his judgment when he conceived himself to
have any latitude in exercising it." In fact, the Congregation of
the Oratory at Paris was always distinguished not only by the
learning, but by the moderation of its members, and was more
Jansenist than Jesuit in its complexion. Malebranche himself
appears to have had strong misgivings against the persecuting
spirit of the Romish Church.

It was not till he had spent about ten years in the study of
Descartes' philosophy, that he published his principal work,
already noticed, and first announced his main doctrines respect-
ing understanding, or " pure spirit," (of which, our author says,
thought is the only essential attribute,) and respecting our
" seeing all things in God," which he seeks copiously to prove
from Scripture, maintaining that God is the place of spirits, as
space is the place of bodies, and that it is therefore certain that
the mind of man can see in God those ideas which must exist
in the Divine Spirit, representing all created things. The mind
can see in God the works of God ; and God allows it to do so, and
prefers giving to man this vision in himself and of his divine
ideas, to creating an infinite number of ideas in each spirit. The
latter alternative is precisely the Berkeleian idealism; but,
according to Malebranche, since God is united to us closely by his
omnipresence, we as much see his independent ideas with our
minds as Ave see with our eyes bodies around us in space.* It is
only thus that we can have ideas of pure truth, unmixed with
the delusions which are blended with the operations of sense and
imagination, which, together with pure mind (esprit pur) or
understanding, are the three faculties of the soul. He develops
this theory of a kind of theosophic vision, in the third book ; and-
the whole discussion on this subject, both here and elsewhere,
savouring as it does of Platonic mysticism, cannot fail to be inte-
resting to the reader, on account of the deep spirit of devotion
with which it is animated. The next two books are on the
inclinations and passions, with the errors and evils which they
may occasion, and the inquietude of the will in our search after
happiness. The last book of the " Recherche" is on Method, or the
means of strengthening the attention and enlarging the mind,
and the proper use of the senses, the imagination, and the pas-
sions : rules are added for the discovery of various kinds of truth.
Our author, in the above work, and in all his other pieces,
evidently appears in a twofold capacity. He is the commentator
on Descartes, reproducing his ideas, not excluding his faults, in
a very animated and perspicuous manner; with his master,
assuming the material theory of animal spirits, and its bearing
on memory, imagination, and other faculties of the mind; but,
like his master, rejecting the ancient doctrine of species emanat-
ing from material objects. He was Cartesian in setting out from
observation external and internal, and in his doctrine of soul as a
thinking, and of body as an extended substance ; and on this sub-
ject, like Descartes, he often substituted the language of direct
idealism for that of attributive description, by speaking of exten-
sion as the essence of body, and of thought as the essence of
wind : he was Cartesian in the theory that the idea of the infi-
nite (God) proves the existence of the infinite, and in holding
that the veracity of God is the basis on which our belief in the
existence of matter ought to rest; but we must not omit the
fact that Descartes held that veracity to be involved in the testi-
mony of sense and consciousness merely; he did not adduce the
Mosaic account of the creation, with Malebranche. Our author,
* " II est certain que l'esprit peut voir eg qu il y a dans Dieu qui repr^sente les
etres cre& . . . l'esprit peut voir en Dieu les ouvrages de Dieu," etc.? Recherche
however, was an original speculator, as well as a disciple of Des-
cartes ; and he evidently put forth views which, though their
germ may be found in Cartesianism, were such as Descartes
himself would have startled at, and have regarded sometimes as
altogether untenable, and, at other times, as exaggerations if not
caricatures of his own theories. Malebranche's vision in God,
when regarded as a philosophical tenet, and not as a piece of
poetical imagery emanating from a mind filled with devout
enthusiasm, is none other than a paradoxical dogma, accompanied
as it is with the denial of any power in the mind to have true
ideas of its own. Its popularity in France, among numerous dis-
ciples, was partly owing to its being supposed to be in harmony
with certain views of no less renowned a Christian Father than
St. Augustine. Even in England the doctrine was not destitute
of countenance; witness Norris's "Essay towards the Theory of
the Ideal or Intelligible World/' in which the writer is more of
a Platonist than Malebranche himself. On the other hand, he
was combated with much wit and humour by Antoine Arnauld,
in his book " Des vraies et des fausses Idees and Locke replied
to him in a small treatise among his posthumous works. The
prominence which Descartes had given in his speculations to our
idea of the infinite, more particularly as involving an ever-efficient
interference in sustaining and actuating all the operations of
nature, tended to throw into the shade all finite power and action,
whether in created intelligences or in the universe of matter.
Geulinx of Antwerp, a zealous Cartesian, distinctly maintained
that all created agency only marked the occasions on which the
Creator himself put forth his own causative energy. Malebranche
completely endorsed this theory of the dynamics both of matter
and mind; and it is obvious that this decidedly pronounced and
extended development of the original Cartesian view of the
" concursus" and " assistentia" of the Deity, when once it had
assumed its last form of " occasional causes," strongly tended to
merge all things, including all mental operations, in the infinite :
so that not only our true perceptions, but even our very con-
sciousness itself, could only be depended on, according to Male-
branche, in proportion as we see ourselves, and all besides,, in
God. The way was thus prepared for the pantheistic system of
Spinoza.

Descartes had already too much restricted the sphere of the
soul or mind to thought: he regarded the thinking being chiefly
in the light of an intelligence, not a power. This, at ail events,
was the point of view which he mainly fixed on in surveying
man ; and his speculations in reference to human activity, tended
to a considerable extent to lower the faculty of volition into mere
inclination and desire. Malebranche, who had far more imagi-
nation and much less of a tendency to cold logical abstraction
than his master, almost merged the creature in the Creator:
human power became in his philosophy a vanishing quantity,
losing itself in the Divine agency; and even thought itself only
possessed validity as reflected from the pure mirror of the Divine
essence?not, indeed, itself seen, but exhibiting to the mind of
man all the real forms and images of truth. The mode in which
substances act on each other has always been a jaroblem in philo-
sophy, and all that we still know of this reciprocity, after ages of
speculation, is the fact itself. The difficulty has been supposed
to be increased, from the earliest times of philosophy, when the
substances are heterogeneous ; but while the fact, if we put any
trust in our senses, is as indisputable in the latter case as in the-
former, the solution is not easier in the former than it is in the
latter. Malebranche at once denies both the fact and the possi-
bility of any such intercommunication as can be efficient, between
created substances, like or unlike. He regards the distinction of
body and soul as the basis of all our knowledge of man ;* but he
maintains that neither matter nor finite mind can produce any
effect on either mind or matter. The real abyss which lies be-
tween two things apparently so near together as mind and matter,
can only be spanned by the Divine intervention ; the chasm is
bridged over only on the principle of 11 occasional causes " and
of Divine grace which comes under them : in other words, the ap-
parent agency of what are termed second causes is not real?these
so-called causes are the mere occasions of the putting forth of
the Divine power. The will of my soul is not the immediate
antecedent to the motion of my body; it is only the occasion on
which God himself produces that motion: so of the impression
apparently made by an external object on any organ of sense.
" For example, when my hand is burned by the fire, it is not the
fire which raises the idea of pain, but an opportunity is thus
given for the Almighty to produce such an idea in me. And
when I wish to move my finger, it is not my soul that moves it;
but the Almighty, through the channel of my will, takes occasion
to move that portion of my body.

From the mode in which our author treats of vision in God
as the source of all pure knowledge, and as the result of " union
with him," it follows that the laws of human reason and thought
which, we have evidence, have existed coevally with man, and
which we cannot but believe will exist as long as the^ race is
in being, are not to be regarded as constitutional principles of
the human mind?they are rather the very intelligence of God
himself, of which man partakes. "The Word of God alone,"
* " Entretiens sur la Metapliysique,
repeats Malebranche, "is the universal reason of spirits."* We
wish our space would allow of our quoting a number of long
extracts on this subject: many might be introduced which are so
exquisite in the expression, and in a tone of such impassioned
devotion, that they would be well worth the perusal for their
own sake. We must be content with introducing a few of them
to the reader, agreeing, as we do, with Dugald Stewart's remark,
that it is seldom possible to do justice to Malebranche in an Eng-
lish version.f We will, however, translate a passage of a more
expository character, illustrative of the subject, and of the
author's quieter and more didactic manner, in which the " Word
of God, the universal reason of spirits," is introduced as instruct-
ing the serious and docile inquirer:
" Wlien thou seest that twice two make four, and that twice two
do not make five, thou seest truths; for it is a truth that twice two
make four, or that twice two do not make five. But what dost thou
see, then, but a relation of equality between twice two and four, or a
relation of inequality between twice two and five? Hence truths are
only relations, but relations real and intelligible. For if a man were
to imagine he saw a relation of equality between twice two and five,
or a relation of inequality between twice two and four, he would see a
falsehood; he would see a relation which did not exist, or rather he
would believe he saw what in fact he does not see.

" Now, all these relations may be reduced to three kinds: relations
between created beings, relations between intelligible ideas, and rela-
tions between beings and their ideas. But as 1 include in my sub-
stance only purely intelligible ideas, it is only the relations exist-
ing between these ideas which are eternal, immutable, necessary
truths. The relation of equality between twice two and four is an
eternal, immutable, necessary truth; but the relations existing be-
tween created beings, or between these beings and their ideas, could
not begin before these beings were produced ; for there is no relation
between things non-existent: a nothing considered as such cannot be
double or triple of another nothing, nor can it even be positively equal
to it.

" I am thus eternal truth, because I include in myself all necessary
truths. I am truth, because there is nothing intelligible out of me:
it is not that I pour light on spirits as a quality which enlightens
them, but that I discover to them my substance as the truth or the
intelligible reality by which they are nourished: it is that I unite
* "II n'y a que le Verbe de Dieu qui soit la raison universelle des esprits."?
Meditations, ii.

t " 0 Dieu, que d'obscuriteset de tenebres dans rnon esprit!"etc.?Meditations,iv.
" 0 J^sus ! vous m'avez dit que vous etes 1 ordre aussi bien que la vdritd," etc ?
J bid.
" O raon Jdsus! vous etes la raison universelle des esprits et leur loi inviolable ;
vous etes la luinifere et la sagesse ^ternelle ; vous etes l'ordre imniuable et n^ces-
eaire! Dieu n'^claire les bonimas que par vous, qui etes son Verbe," etc. ?Medita-
tions, v.

them directly to myself as to the reason which renders them reason-
able : it is that I give myself entirely to every one of them, it is that I
pervade them, and that I fill the entire capacity which they have to
receive me. But thou art not in a condition to comprehend clearly
how I communicate myself to men.

We will quote one more expositor3r passage on the sub-
ject of the nature and office of reason, from the " Traitd de
la Morale
"The reason of man is the Word or the Wisdom of God himself;
for every creature is a particular being, but the reason of man is uni-
versal. If my own individual mind were my own reason and my light,
my mind would also be the reason of all intelligent beings; for I am
sure that my reason enlightens them all. My pain no one can pos-_
sibly feel but myself, but every one may recognize the truth which I
contemplate; so that the pain which I feel is a modification of my
own proper substance, but truth is a possession of all spiritual beings.
-Thus, by the instrumentality of reason, 1 have, or may have, some
society or intercourse with the Deity, and all other intelligent beings;
because they all possess something in common with me, namely, rea-
son. This sjjiritual society consists in a participation of the same intel-
lectual substance of the Word from which all spiritual beings may
receive nourishment. In contemplating this divine substance, I am
able to see some part of what God thinks; for God sees all truths,
and there are some which I cannot perceive. I am able also to dis-
cover something of the will of the Deity ; for He wills nothing but in
accordance with a certain order, and this order is not altogether
unknown to me. It is certain that God loves things according as they
are worthy of love or esteem ; and I can discover that there are some
things more perfect, more valuable, and consequently more worthy of
love than others."

In regard to matter, Malebranclie was as much a cosmothetic
idealist, tactically, as Berkeley himself. He admitted matter,
from necessity, believing that its existence was a subject of reve-
lation ; but he made no use of it. All that we have really to do
with, according to him, are the things whicli we see in God. He
was, in this respect, more Platonic than even Plato himself;
who, while he sought to elevate himself and his disciples to the
contemplation of the intelligible and archetypal world, as it sub-
sisted in God, did nevertheless admit a certain commerce with
sensible tilings, a certain vision of the sensuous images of the
ideas which were wholly intellectual and beyond the ken of
sense. Malebranche is more restrictive: with him the faculty
of perceiving the Divine ideas is the only intelligence which
man can arrive at. Even when we fancy ourselves looking at
the external world, it is only spiritual or non-sensuous ideas
that we see, and such ideas alone are the objects of knowledge.

The presence of objects is the occasion only, not the cause of our
sensuous impressions. Our ideas are neither derived from
matter, nor from the operations of our own minds. Our author
thus speaks on the subject, in the first of his " Entretiens sur la
Metaphysique,"* which consist of very animated and attractive
dialogues, much in the manner of Berkeley. Theodoras, who
represents Malebranche, thus addresses Aristus, a learner who is
not yet quite able to digest all the mysticism of his able and
painstaking instructor:

"You do not follow me, Aristus; your room is, in itself, absolutely
invisible. What I see when 1 look at your room, and survey it from
side to side, will be always visible, though your room were destroyed.
What do I say!?yes, though your room had even never been built.
I repeat it, Aristus, strictly speaking, your room is not
visible. It is not properly your room that I see, when I look at it;
for I could see all I now do, even had God destroyed it. The dimen-
sions which I see are immutable, eternal, necessary. These intelli-
gible dimensions occupy no place. But I am afraid of multiplying
your difficulties, by telling you too many truths; for you appear to
me to be embarrassed enough in distinguishing ideas, which alone are
visible by themselves, from the objects which they represent, which
are invisible to the mind, because they cannot act upon it, nor be
represented to it."

Elsewhere! Theodoras tells Aristus that, " though bodies are
invisible by themselves, the sense of colour which we have in us,
and even in spite of ourselves, on occasion of them, makes us
think we see them/' Arnauld remarked that, to suppose things
to be only visible in God, and consequently that we also see
space in Him, is impossible, since the Divine Being is not ex-
tended. The reader must judge how far Malebranche threw any
further light upon the controversy, when he replied that " intelli-
gible space, which we see in the Divine substance as including
it, is only this same substance in so far as representative of
material beings, and participiable by them."|

The theory^ of occasional causes, which, as we have seen,
identified all tne operations of mind and matter with the direct
agency of the Deity, and rendered every movement of the
human body, and every human volition, a result carried into
execution by an immediate act of the Divine power, easily har-
monized with the other grand tenet of Malebranche's transcen-
dental mysticism, which involved not only the whole field of
activity, but also that of human perception. It was not in action
only that there was contact with the Deity?in the vision which
man can have of God, and in Him, there was a revelation to
man of everything by a Divine union and illumination ; so that
ideas or images which appear to be states of our own minds are
really attached to the Divine intellect, in whom we perceive
them : our ideas, so far as they are ours, are but ideas of ideas
already existing in God, and seen in him. Bayle, in his Dic-
tionary, has well remarked,* that while these views of Male-
branche approached to some speculations of the latter Platonists,
there is a still closer resemblance between them and the opinions
of some of the Hindoos; who, according to Sir William Jones,
" believed that the whole creation was rather an energy than a
wor/fc, by which the Infinite Mind exhibits to his creatures a set
of perceptions, like a wonderful picture or piece of music, always
varied yet always uniform." Of course, Malebranche was con-
sistent enough in arguing, as he did, against the reality of the
secondary properties of matter, such as smell, taste, and the
like; but his reasonings, if fully developed, would equally avail
against the primary attributes of resistance and extension.

Bayle remarked this consequence, in anticipation of Berkeley.
Yet Malebranche held fast to matter as a substance revealed on
the Divine veracity. This tenet, however, was an isolated part of
his system : for having got matter, he may be said not to have
known what to do with it. Man had no concern with it in itself,
but only through the Deity: our perception (idee) of the pri-
mary qualities he regarded as a kind of objective intuition of
them as manifested in the Divine intellect. His distinction,
however, between primary and secondary properties, and be-
tween perception and sensation (sentiment) is more precise, as
the late Sir William Hamilton has remarked, than that of
Descartes himself, or any previous metaphysical writer.
All the parts and aspects of our author's theory of human
knowledge are ruled and pervaded by his fundamental dogma
of the theosophic vision. His formal definition of the term idea,
excepting so far as he distinguishes it from sensation, is vaguely
expressed as marking that which is the " immediate object ot the
mind, and is present to it when it perceives anything."! He
further states that the general object of all ideas is the extension
of the infinite, supersensible, unchangeable, and incommen-
surable; from the perception of which we obtain an image of
everything we perceive either within or without ourselves ; and
this, he repeats, is truly an insight into God himself. While
thus contemplating the extension of the infinite and the super-
sensible, we do not perceive the very substance of the Deity: we
perceive him " only in so far as all created beings partake of his
substance." What our minds actually see, our author tells us, is
imperfect, while God is perfect. W^hat they perceive is finite,
divisible, figured, and individual: but the Deity himself is

" all beings, but no being in particular."* (Here is a decided
point of contact with the doctrine of Spinoza.) Further, there
is a wide difference, says Malebranche, between that perception
of ideas, i. e., modifications of the infinite, which we call knowing,
and the perception which we have of modifications of ourselves
as subject, which is feeling. It is knowledge alone that furnishes
objective truth, the senses only afford subjective experience :
nevertheless, sense can lead us to a knowledge of truth, if we only
remember that the qualities and modes of objects which appeal
to our senses merely exhibit the relations of one and the same
extension of the infinite to our intellect.f We are here reminded
(bating the mysticism) of some of the views which Kant has
elaborated in his doctrine of the sensible intuition (anschauung)
of space. Our author concludes that the source of error lies
partly iu sense, which perceives only what is external, but not
what lies concealed under the exterior, which alone is objectively
true ; partly in imagination, which can only survey what is
material; and, finally, 'partly in the freedom of our reason itself
to follow either the sensuous or the supersensible (rational) mode
of perception, j Our perception of God is immediate, without
image or idea; but bodies are perceived by means of images or
ideas in God himself, as modifications of the extension of the
infinite. In regard to the vexed question of innate ideas?on
Malebranche's principles, it is evident that there was really no
place for them. They are totally unnecessary, for true know-
ledge of all kinds is identified with seeing and knowing all in
God. The true ideas are in His consciousness, primarily, and
there man takes cognizance of them.

The student of our author, as he advances in the perusal
of his writings, and compares together the reiterations of his
fundamental doctrines, in varied forms of expression, will find
more and more evidences of a Spinozistic view of the relation
between God and his works. Not only does the Divine Being
" contain in Himself the perfection of all created things ?" not
only is He said to comprise within Himself all finite spirits, and to
he their place; not only is His substance their intelligible (super-
sensible) world, in which they live and perceive ; not only is He
the " life and soul" of all spirits, as being intimately united with
and present to them : if all this, did it stand alone, might be
interpreted as nothing else than the poetic imagery of devotion,
we have more?we are told that " all spirits, all souls, and
all bodies, subsist as modifications of the extension of the
infinite and the supersensible.?

* "Recherche," iii. pt. 2, c. 6. See also "Entretiens."
f " Entretiens." + "Recherche," i. c. 4, 5.
? "Recherche," ii. c. 6.?" R^ponse a. M. Regis."?"Conversations Chre-
tiennes," Dial. iv.

One of the most striking illustrations of the length to which
our author went in attaching weight and significancy to the
language in which he, as above, describes his views of the relation
subsisting between the Deity and his creatures, is found in the
remarkable fact that he denies that man can have any inde-
pendent personal self-consciousness! He cannot know himself
by reflection?by introverting the mental eye, as it were, and
turning it on the operations of the inner man. He can only
become conscious of himself by seeing himself as reflected
from the mirror of the Divine mind. Descartes had held that
our mental constitution was capable of giving us clear and dis-
tinct ideas not only of nature around us, but primarily and most
convincingly of ourselves. Consciousness of the ego was, with
Descartes, the solid fundamental ground on which man might go
forth to the business of reasoning and searching after truth. The

consciousness of thought was the irresistible voice within, which
announced the most certain of all truths to me?my own existence;
and this beyond the possibility of contradiction or even doubt.
Malebranche, however?Cartesian as he professed to be?would
not admit even the testimony of consciousness as an earthly wit-
ness : consciousness herself must first have her apotheosis, before
she can be credited?the very consciousness of man must be an
appendage to the consciousness of God. " We know ourselves
by consciousness, or the inward sense which we have of our
actions/'* says our author ; yet he maintains that it is not con-
sciousness that gives us a true notion of ourselves, or of our
being: "We remain unintelligible to ourselves till we see
ourselves in God, who presents to us an idea altogether clear of
our own existence.

Of course, human reason is not more strictly personal than
human consciousness. We have already remarked that it is in
Malebranche that we find the element of the doctrine of the im-
personality of man's reason, as derived through some of the later
Germans to the French Eclecticism. " Human reason," says our
philosopher, (and he is here speaking of it in its essential nature,)
" is the Word and Wisdom of God himself. It is therefore a
participation of the Divine substance ; and we may, by means of
it, see on our part what the Infinite God thinks."% " And being
thus united to the Deity in intelligence and perception, all good
will be revealed to us, and all happiness?in His light: and we
may thus will and accomplish some good things, as He wills and
accomplishes all that is good.""?

"V irtue, our author regards as the habitual and predominant
love of the immutable order which proceeds from the cognition
* "Recherche," iii. pt. 2, c. G. + Ibid. iii. pt. 3, c. 1.
X Ibid. iii. pt. 2, c. 6.
? Ibid.?"Traits de la Morale."

of God; and, to attain to it, man must be delivered from the
dominion of sense and passion. It was to be expected that his
views of human volition should be wholly ruled by his doctrine
of occasionalism already noticed. Every action, according to
him, is properly such that all real exertion of force belongs, not
to the creature, but to God: we will, God produces?our will
precedes the effect, God causes it; there is but one cause, for only
one being is efficient, that is God. It is true, created beings are
made the " means" of the Divine action, but only " according to
the exigency of the occasional causes." God alone is the true
cause of all things that take place. It is evident that ? Male-
branche considered the doctrine of assistentia and concursus,
which we have remarked was propounded by his master Des-
cartes, to be precisely identical with his own; though it was not
so prominently brought forward and blended with the whole
method. " Creatures/' says our author, " are nothing but occa-
sional causes ; and this entire world is only a system of occasional
causes, as Descartes has correctly taught."* On the doctrine of
final causes, the disciple differed from his master, who had rejected
them as an object of inquiry, or an evidence of Theism. To the
mind of Malebranche, they appeared in a different light: all
events and all harmonies are to be traced immediately to the Divine
intention and will: and he attaches importance to the remark,
that " if created spirits could know anything as detached from
the Deity, it would follow that they were not formed entirely for
the knowledge of him/'f God is " the infinitude of space and of
thought; bodies and minds have only a passive capacity in him
occasional causes involve in their very nature the final causes
which led to the occasion of their being employed by the great,
first, and only true and efficient cause. It is obvious that the
doctrine of Malebranche on this subject involves, or rather re-
quires, the whole length of Leibnitz's pre-established harmony.
Descartes had grounded philosophy in God's being and sub-
sistence, as the absolute basis of a priori truth ; man's own con-
scious existence leading immediately by a single step (the
psychological idea) to the irresistible belief in a Creator. Male-
branche followed his master in seeking to arrive at truth by the
a'priori road ; though'he gave more prominence to the important
axiom that the laws of physical nature must be discovered by
an inductive logic, a principle which he properly set in a strong
light. On the other hand, where Descartes would have reasoned
by deduction, Malebranche had recourse to that pure intuition
which was the bond that united the finite mind to the absolute
and the infinite. " We see, and know, and do all things in God,"
is the single text of his entire philosophy.

'Entretiens sur la Metaphysique." f "Recherche," iii. pt. 2, c. G.
No theologian could go much further than our author in main-
taining the doctrine of human impotence, in respect to what is
morally good. It was an essential part of his creed; and he
carried it to an extent which seems scarcely to leave room for
man to be fairly regarded as a being fully accountable for his
actions. Not that we would attribute such an intention to
Malebranche himself?he is far enough from it: we only speak
of the obvious tendency of his theories, and of many of his com-
ments on them. He denies to man all moral power, excepting
that of deceiving himself as to what is morally good or evil.
Man cannot form even a particular desire of good ; he can only
have a general apprehension of it. Of course, he cannot really
pray to God?his devotional consciousness must itself be a con-
sciousness that can hardly be called his own. His prayer, if we
put the usual interpretation on Malebranche's language, would
scarcely seem to be different from that of an automaton so con-
structed as to utter words.* No doubt we are bound to take
into account the religious and highly imaginative strain in
which he treats all the subjects that come under his notice?we
do not wish always to hold him to the letter: after all deduc-
tions, however, little scope seems left by his theory for such a
rational freedom as is absolutely necessary for realising the idea
of man's accountableness.

Nevertheless, like many other sanguine minds, not masters of
themselves, and still less of their beloved theories, (Leibnitz
eminently for instance,) Malebranche thought he saw the recon-
ciliation of reason and revelation?of philosophy and faith, and
the solution of the great and awful mysteries of moral evil, pro-
vidence, grace, and human destiny, in the sublime ecstatic vision
of the eternal reason, light, and love, to which man may attain
in this world, in proportion as he is freed from the illusions of
that " arbitrary and factitious reason" which he substitutes for
that which is divine. Like Leibnitz, wishing to explain, if not
to comprehend everything, Malebranche also had his optimism,
though not by name. He does not speak, indeed, of a " best pos-
sible world/' but of a world " constructed according to the most
simple and general principles." He asks whether it would be
well for evil not to have existed, on condition of a greater com-
plication of means and laws? and he decides the question in the
negative. God desires good by the most simple possible means,
and general laws are more of a good than evil is of an evil. 1 he
stability of the whole system depends on the performance of the
Divine volitions, that is, of the .Divine laws: these volitions do
not change?because " God necessarily loves the eternal arche-
* "Que vous exauciez cette priere, apres que vous l'aurez formee en moi!"?
Meditations, v.
typal forms which are included in His own substance/' Nothing
could be farther from our author than to symbolize with certain
wild speculations of a portion of the Neo-Platonic school of Alex-
andria, to the effect that " God himself would have been more
perfect, if imperfect creatures had not received existence from
His poweryet, in one cf his Meditations, he singularly speaks
of the Deity as " condescending to assume the low and humi-
liating character of creator."*

Nothing can be more excellent than the practical moral tone
which pervades all the writings of our philosopher; who, in
reference to his speculative theories, was named by some of his
opponent contemporaries the " Dreamer of the Oratory/'f At
all events, his dreams are pure, devout, and elevated?contrasted
enoiigh with the mass of visionary matter contained in the novels
and romances which are always issuing from the European press.
We wish that our educated youth of both sexes who desire to
exercise themselves in French reading, would procure the two
small and portable volumes of M. Simon's edition of Male-
branche, as a substitute for the trash which is sometimes de-
voured on the plea of improvement in the language. The
charms of the style, the ingenuity, the animation, and the subject
itself, would amply repay the perusal ; and though, as in all
other books which aim at solving the mysteries of God, in
nature, providence, and grace, and framing them into a system,
the philosophy breaks down?much, very much remains that is
eminently calculated to benefit the understanding and the
heart. The excellent qualities of the author's mind are every-
where patent, and never perhaps was the saying Le style c'est
I'homme better illustrated than by Malebranche.

Whatever inferences might be consequently drawn from any
of his dogmas, it is certain that neither his own practice nor his
general views of human nature and duty were injuriously
affected by them. The grandeur, piety, and justness of his con-
ceptions break forth even when lie is treating of his theory of
occasional causes, against which so much objection has always
been made. After having laboured to show that the will of God
alone is efficacious, and that it is His power which pro-
duces all effects, he exclaims: " O Theodorus! 0 Theotimus!
God alone is the bond of our social union ! Let Him then be
the great end, since he is the beginning. Let us not abuse His
power. Woe to them who make that power the pander to their
passions ! Nothing is more sacred than power; nothing is more
* "Meditations," xix. 5.
+ An epigrammatic line was current: "Lui qui voit tout en T)ieu, n'y voit-il
pas qu'il est fou?" La Harpe adds: " C (Stait au moins un fou qui avait beau-
coup d'esprit."

divine. It is a species of sacrilege to make a profane use of
power. I see, to a demonstration, that it is to render the just
avenger of crimes a slave to iniquity! Of ourselves we can do
nothing, therefore we ought of ourselves to will nothing. We
can only act by the efficacy of the Divine power, therefore we
ought to will nothing but what is in accordance with the Divine
law. Nothing is more evident than these truths. The law of
duty is the foundation of all morals. Holy law ! which Chris-
tians call the love of God, because their God being goodness
itself, to obey duty, to love duty, is to obey God, and to love Him
above all creatures. We should never love any good absolutely,
if it is possible for us not to love it without remorse."*
It is remarkable (and it ought to be a motive for candid judg-
ment) how often we find men shrinking, with a degree of horror,
from what appear to others to be the legitimate consequences of
their principles when logically and in detail carried out. The
whole tendency of the more abstract and theoretic part of the
philosophy of Malebranche was unquestionably to merge all
second causes in the agency of the one, first, infinite cause ; and
in like manner to absorb all created being in the infinite and the
absolute?especially to sink the very perception and conscious-
ness of man in a mysterious union with the Deity, in whom all
was seen, and known, and done. Malebranche, in fact, conducted
the Cartesians to the threshold of Spinozism. Yet nothing was
more painful to his mind than those criticisms of his contempo-
raries which endeavoured to establish analogies between his
system and that of Spinoza?" that miserable and impious man,"
as he always termed him. Mairan, who had been reading the
"Ethica" of Spinoza, pointed out to Malebranche the similarity
of many of its statements to those of his own " Recherche but
he positively refused to discuss the subject. In one of his
dialogues, in evident allusion to the dogmas of Spinoza respect-
ing the Divine Being, and with little disposition to exercise any
gratuitous candour towards that writer, he makes Theodorus say
to Aristus : " What a monster, Aristus !?a God necessarily hated,
blasphemed, despised ! Assuredly, if there are people capable of
inventing such a God, upon ideas so monstrous, it is either that
they wish to have no God, or else such spirits are born to seek,
in the idea of the circle, all the properties of triangles."f
While the reputation of our author, as a thinker and writer, has
survived him without interruption to the present time, especially
in his own country ; one reason why he did not very long retain his
influence as a leader in philosophy was, that he was eclipsed by
Leibnitz in Germany, and by Locke in England and France.
* " Entretiens sur la Mdtaphysique," vii.

His works, however, can never cease to attract readers, so long
as the French language lasts. He addresses himself, with
Descartes, to the philosopher, and with Pascal and Fenelon to the
devout; he is the metaphysician, the moralist, and the theolo-
gian ; and those parts of his writings, especially, which are penned
in the dialogue-form, have never been surpassed in brilliancy,
point, and life, by any similar production on subjects mainly
addressed to the understanding, and cannot fail to prove both
instructive and interesting to all readers whose object is improve-
ment.
