On The Physiological and psychological Phenomena of Dreams and Apparitions
===========================================================================

Aet. III.

[No. II. of a Series.]
(Continued from page 384.)

Having offered some few general remarks on the external senses?
as being suggestive of dreaming under the partially waking con-
dition of the brain, and also when the latter is partially conscious
of some atmospherical conditions, when the body is rendered more
susceptible to the effects of cold and heat, that these phenomena
are suggestive of trains of thought during the state of sleeping,
when the dream which is thus induced, although having many
discrepancies and contradictions, still preserves a kind of unity
in perfect keeping with the disturbing agents which first sug-
gested the particular association, we shall next consider the
particular phenomena, when the " mental faculties are some of
them in a state of excessive activity, arising from some abnormal
condition of health premising that the trains of thoughts
which are experienced by the sleeper will, in the majority of
instances, still indicate his individuality, subject to certain modi-
fications induced by the painful or other states of the body. The
following instance furnishes some curious subjects for the psycho-
logical reflections and physiological phenomena :?

Partial Coma, with Faintness? Some time since, a friend
of the writer had a most singular dream. We cite the narrator's
own words. He said:?" I thought myself dangerously ill, so bad
that I was not surprised when the physician assured me I was
dying; nay, I felt a consciousness that such was the case. My
affectionate wife and dear anxious children surrounded my bed,
and seemed deeply sorrowful; and when I spoke to them, they
sobbed most bitterly. Jt was then that I reasoned with them,
and pointed out to them as a source of consolation, that my con-
dition was merely one of transition from the present existence to
a better, where pain would cease, and endeavoured to impress
them with the fact that this change would be for my own advan-
tage ; that I should give up a life of anxiety for one of unmixed
happiness. This was urged to sooth their grief, which was
intense. Then I added what seemed to me a more serious decla-
ration : Our parting must be painful; it is so ordained ; but my
faith convinces me that in a few brief years there will be a
reunion/' He described that for a few minutes he seemed un-
conscious, and was partially recovered by the sobs of his family;
that he attempted to resume his discourse, when his spirit
appeared as if waning, and all external objects became dim and
indistinct. The great problem he would soon learn; and so
awfully did his position affect him, that he awoke. But he was
in a state of partial coma, with drops of cold perspiration on his
forehead, and so deadly faint that he then actually concluded
that the dream was a premonitory warning " that his time was
come."

In this instance it was therefore the peculiar condition of his
stomach and nervous system that induced the train of thought
which had so vividly affected him (as fainting is an approxima-
tion to the state of death), and this sickly sensation, and the inca-
pacity for any kind of movement, had caused the mind to produce
the scene just related, which had had all the painful vividness of
a real occurrence.

How marvellous are these phenomena of the mental faculties i
that as our bodily powers seem on the wane, the immortal spirit
acquires a greater and more intense capacity, and by anticipation
produces events which may in all probability happen at some
future period.

It is, however, not our intention of multiplying examples, but
only cite one instance to illustrate each separate phase under each
section. Therefore, by the way of contrast, and to render it
manifest that disordered conditions of stomach or derangement
of other viscera, predispose to dreaming, and that the j)roximate
cause will induce the speciality of the dream.

Mr. M  A  was in easy circumstances. He was a
hearty man, but liable to great biliary disturbance. ^ His tem-
perament was nervo-lymphatic, and lie was very stout in his per-
son, and took very little active exercise. He had had in conse-
quence several attacks of what the ancient writers called /ueXcuva
with its constant results?great depression of spirits, and
what we modernly designate melancholy. But under judicious
regimen he had recovered a very fair state of health.

Occasionally, however, he had bilious attacks. When in this
condition, he one night awoke in a state resembling insanity. He
cried out in a most fearful manner, uttering the most extraordi-
nary noises, until some of the members of his family awoke, and
entered his bedroom to ascertain the cause. They found him
struggling with fearful energy, striking away with his fists with
great force and apparent rancour, as to render it dangerous to
approach him. And this state was the more surprising, as he
was a most benevolent and kindhearted man. Some of the party
addressed him, and discovered that he was asleep, and evidently
affected with some painful dream.

It was, however, thought to be a probable cause of his condi-
tion that the shirt-collar was too tight round his neck, and was
acting as a tight ligature on the carotids, and thus impeded the
circulation. By an immense effort and great presence of mind
he was approached from behind, or rather at the head of the
bed, and the shirt-collar was unbuttoned. It required great
caution, from his enraged blows. This plan succeeded, and soon
fortunately brought the sleeper relief, and he awoke much
exhausted by his previous efforts; and when he recovered his
consciousness he retained all the scene which had so affected him.

He related that he was attacked in a most ruffianly manner by
some thieves, who attempted to strangle him ; and that he dis-
tinctly remembered that he experienced a conviction that his life
was in jeopardy, and he therefore made a vigorous resistance, and
struck them with more than usual savagery. It was a battle for
existence; for the more he seemed to resist them, the tighter
they grasped him round the throat; and in his terror he thought
he must succumb, but that his only chance would be to make
some one acquainted with his perilous condition. He said, with
a good-tempered smile, "I roared out with all my might,
' Murder! murder !' " We have mentioned this was done so
lustily as to arouse the sleepers in an adjoining room. It is evi-
dent that the tightness of the shirt-collar, induced in all probabi-
lity by his restless condition, by causing him to slide down-
wards from the pillows, had occasioned the annoying circum-
stance; and in this instance the dream may have saved him an
apoplectic fit; for, with the constriction round his throat, in a
comparatively short time such a casualty might result.

Here is another example, that the state of the body, even
when there is not any indisposition, may predispose the parti-
cular kind of dream. And the one we select from many others,
arises from a striking phenomenon to be indicated. A friend
of mine awoke one morning coughing most violently, which ex-
cited in him expressions of anger, as each involuntary spasmodic
effort proved unavailing in relieving him; he said in a most
pettish manner?" Why do you hold that lucifer match so near
me? It's choking me!" His wife, who was lying awake,
assured him that there had not been any lucifer match ignited.
This, for a moment, rendered him still more irritable, and lie
coughed with greater violence. And yet he was, evidently, not
exactly awake ; and when this extreme effort relieved him from
the phlegm, he recovered his perfect consciousness, and had not
the slightest remembrance of his harsh expressions, and the
angry tone in which he had previously uttered his protest, for
he said, " How curious it is, that I have just dreamt that one
of the children had used a lucifer match quite under my nose,
although I told him that it annoyed me ; and, the fact seemed
that instead of heeding my reproof, he repeated the annoying '
experiment." Now it was evident that the irritation resulted
from an accumulation of foreign matter, which gave the ten-
dency to cough, and the supposed burning sulphur might appear
a myth of the partially awakened faculties. But as he was a
man of accurate observation, he himself gave a reason for the
supposed offensive combustible, for, strange to say, the dreamer
was an habitual smoker, having a cigar almost constantly in his
mouth. Having a slight cold on his chest, had caused an accu-
mulated deposition on the mucous surfaces, which had, in conse-
quence of his habit, received an empyreumatic savour, and owing
to this circumstance was the suggested notion of the supposed
cause of his sense of suffocation.

We have a number of notes of dreams induced by some local
pain, either from a certain active inflammation or from some
position which may produce a similar sensation. A lady of a
highly sensitive temperament, with great susceptibility of both
mind and body, and with such strong moral perceptions, that
she was one of those beings whom nature designed as a Sister
of Mercy, had, on one occasion, a most painful dream. She felt
greatly distressed because there was a most extraordinary epi-
demic in the town, which curiously attacked the sufferers on the
bridge of the nose, and soon destroyed this imjDortant feature.
The agony she endured from seeing so many noseless persons
affected her greatly, and from her extreme sympathy at such a
melancholy occurrence, she awoke ; but for some time she could
not disabuse her mind as to the reality of her painful vision; as
she gradually gained more complete consciousness, she ascertained
that her own hand rested on her nose, and had affected tempo-
rarily the circulation, occasioning her much pain in the nasal
organ. This circumstance had evidently been the predisposing
cause of the dream. These instances differ in many particulars
from wliat is called, by Plato, Ephialtes, or nightmare; and
they are often classed under this section. But in true incubus,
or " nightmare," the respiration is seriously affected, and in con-
sequence of some disturbed action of the heart, either mediately
or immediately, there are always associations of immovability
on the part of the dreamer. The mediate predisposing cause is
pressure on the heart, by some uncomfortable position; the im-
mediate tendency arises from gastric disturbance, when the
pneumogastric nerve, by reflex action, affects more or less the
heart's action.

Incubus, or Nightmare.?From the experience of many
observers, and my own, it seems evident that in all cases of in-
cubus, a disturbance of the circulation is the predisposing cause,
and the dreamer thus affected invariably seems to lose all power
over the voluntary muscles, and this condition of the muscular
system differs from others to be subsequently indicated.
And, further, we make remark, that in true incubus the in-
tercostal muscles are implicated, hence the impotent efforts of
the dreamer to resist attacks, and so forth. One example will
suffice to illustrate the latter statement. A gentleman of our
acquaintance, of a robust and active temperament, and well-
formed head, dreamt that he saw a low, dirty-looking boy open
his bed-room door, and in the most impudent manner stare him
in the face, seemingly without heeding that he was wide awake ;
that from this circumstance he became alarmed, from a convic-
tion that there were some adult associates at the outside of the
bed-room ; that he attempted, nevertheless, to speak to the in-
truder, but he could not, and yet he saw, with a sense of indig-
nation, the juvenile thief open different drawers, from which he
abstracted a gold watch, diamond studs and rings, with a hand-
ful of notes and a bag of sovereigns; and after packing them
up deliberately, the delinquent came up to his bed-side, and
with a most impudent leer, nodded his head, and said, " Good
night, old chap." The wrath of the sleeper was so great that he
tried hard to rise and seize the thief, but could not; he was
equally impotent in the attempt to throw something at him, or to
make any noise to arouse his servants. But these efforts awoke
him, lying on his left side, and his arm pressed against the
heart, whilst his lower extremities were cold. We may, there-
fore, reasonably refer the whole phenomena to the fact, that
some of the muscles were deprived of a due supply of blood,
and to an excessive supply of this fluid to the brain.

An amusing instance of nightmare occurred to a relation of
the writer, induced by actual pressure on the chest. "VVe will
relate it in his own words:?

Case of Nightmare from actual Pressure on the
Chest.?" I had been," says the narrator, " travelling all day on
the outside of a coach, and as the weather was cold, had imbibed
a larger quantity of brandy than is my usual custom. It was
late at night when the coach arrived at the inn where I had pro-
posed sleeping; and after taking a hurried supper and a glass of
brandy-and-water, proceeded to my dormitory. That illustrious
official, 'the Boots/ had just retired to bed, and so slippers were
a luxury I had to dispense with; and as it happened, this was a
fortunate incident.

" The supper and grog made me somewhat feverish, and soon
I felt a stupor coming over me, and fell into that kind of sleep
when one is not altogether oblivious of our own sensations. In
this condition I had a most painful dream. It seemed that the
coach by which a large party were travelling was upset, and all
were thrown helter-skelter; but that one of them fell on me
with such force, that it seemed probable, that although my life
had been spared in this accident, that it was my fate to be
smothered by a huge mass of human flesh, which appeared to
press to such a degree, that I felt, if unrelieved, that I must soon
' give up the ghost/ I therefore entreated this torturer to re-
move himself, or he would soon be the death of me, and much
oppressed, my indignation was in a furor, as he seemed to be
laughing at my sufferings. Then I made every effort to throw
him oft', and so great was this effort, that it awoke me.

"You may judge my surprise, that there was, even to my
waking sensations, an actual weight on my chest; and as I
breathed, it seemed also to breathe. In the state of my health,
and the disturbed condition of the mental faculties (owing to the
stimulation of the previous day), it was my veritable belief that
I was dying, or else it was some curious condition of fever, so
certain it was that this pressure was real.

" Then I listened, and tried to ascertain if it were a reality or
a delusion, and had just decided that it must be 'night-mare,'
when, instead of a ' dead weight,' the pressing tormentor slightly
moved its position higher and nearer to my mouth. This actually
terrified me, although it was years before burking had been ren-
dered a practical art. There seemed no time to be lost; so,
arousing all my energies, I bellowed out, in no very pious strain,
' What the d?1 are you V Instantly something bounced off my
body on the floor, which was ponderable evidence that the op-
pression had not been anything illusive, and I came to the conclu-
sion that it must be a cat,?an animal, by the way, that I feared
more than liated. My first plan of operation was to open the
* It may be worth noticing, that when the dreamer's sufferings are so intense,
that the continuance might affect his sanity, he invariably awakes to a state of
more or less perfect consciousness.?Author's Note.

NO. IV.?NEW SERIES. 0 0
550 ON DREAMS AND APPARITIONS.

door, to give the intruder a chance of retreat, and stood with one
of my heavy boots in my hand, armed for an onslaught, when a
big black torn cat rushed forward, but not before my missile was
hurled with such force, that if it did not touch ' Tommy/ it did
the door, with so much noise as to disturb the slumbers of the
occupants in the dormitory along the whole landing. But as I
had gently closed the door, many were the conjectures of the
source of the disturbance; and which the next morning, in
justice to the company, I explained."

There are other forms of dreaming, in which the muscular
system is implicated, either as a cause, or as the servant of the
brain and nervous system. The following instance, narrated to
us by a gentleman of great talent and philosophical tendency, is
now published to elucidate a passive condition of the muscles
without any marked effect of disturbed circulation, as in true
incubus. Its psychical character is similar to hundreds of
others, furnishing another proof of the difficulty of tracing
with any marked accuracy the minutise which form the varied
circumstances of any particular dream. Our friend writes?
" One day I saw two boys in the street, one of them much older
than the other. The elder was teasing the junior, who said, in
a crying tone, ? It's very cruel, Johnny, to treat me in such a
naughty manner; I'll tell father !' I interfered, and chided the
tormentor, telling him that his conduct was cowardly and un-
feeling, and thus for a time saved the little fellow from any fur-
ther persecution ; for I watched their movements, and observed
the elder with his arm placed in an affectionate manner round
his brother's neck.

" That same night these meagre materials furnished all the
incidents of a dream, which has occasioned some curious matter
for reflection to myself and to others to whom the details have
been related. I was musing in a field where a number of boys
were playing, and watched their gambols with extreme pleasure.
But soon two boys near the spot where I stood attracted my
attention, as the younger was blind. The poor little fellow
complained that he was very thirsty, and he asked his elder
brother to take him to the tank on the opposite side of the
meadow. He refused, in a rather angry manner; but although
the colour came into the face of the bereaved little fellow, he
uttered not a word of complaint, only repeated his request in a
most urgent and more importunate manner.^ But his wishes,
were unheeded. As I had seen this tank, which was constantly
filled, being supplied by an under-ground spring, so that the
clear, bright, cold water constantly flowed from its sides, and
being very sorrowful that the blind boy should suffer from
thirst, I proposed to guide him, but could not move. My limbs
were almost instantaneously paralysed. c Poor little fellow/ said
I, 1 what will you do V ' Go myself, sir ; I can find the way/
" And no sooner said than done ; for off he ran towards the
tank of water, and I trembled lest he should fall in and be
drowned. As he took the exact direction to it, without stop-
ping, my anxiety was painful, so that to myself I appeared to be
terror-stricken, as I could not move so as to render him any
assistance. At length, to my great surprise and relief, he stopped
suddenly when within three or four yards from the reservoir.
Then he seemed to listen, as if to judge of its distance by the
gurgling sounds of the water as it rolled over the sides on the
pebbly bed beneath. Having apparently satisfied himself, he
suddenly dropped on his knees, and in that laborious way he
gradually approached the precious beverage; when it was within
his reach, he was bending his head, and drank from the precious
stream, and so greatly moved he seemed to be at the comfort
he derived from the refreshing beverage, that his own tears flowed
copiously, and became so sympathetic, that I awoke.

Our friend said, that he was lying on his back, as easy as pos-
sible. There was not any pressure on the heart, there was not
any cramping of the limbs, and yet he felt the same incapacity
to move his body, as if he had been actually terrified by some
sense of imminent danger, or by some marvellous event. The
effect only continued for a short time, and his normal volition
was restored.

It is certainly a curious case, and we have only one solution
for the phenomenon. Taking our data from what occurs in the
waking state, it may be remarked as a matter of indisputable
experience, that terror tends to paralyse the muscular powers.
And even in states of ordinary fear, they are rendered feeble in
their action, so as to make even a strong man totter. We may,
therefore, assume some little difference in the events narrated,
that is so far as to their order of occurrence; and that in the
first instance our dreamer's caution was excited, and hence in
his dream, it had the same paralysing power as would have been
experienced in the hour of consciousness.

Dugald Stewart thinks, " that in dreaming we are influenced
by the laws of association, as we are in the waking state." " The
mind/' he thinks, " resembles {the poetical power;' the power of
combining and mixing the most heterogeneous circumstances;
and thus fashion the most absurd, grotesque, and monstrous
combinations." We quote from memory. But these are the
views this philosopher propounds.

In our own investigations of the phenomena connected with
dreams, we find that the nocturnal vision, which is influenced
by the laws of association, is only when that dream has any
reference to recent events or occurrences. That these links ot
memory may have been formed by reading or conversation ; and
even then the circumstances reproduced are somewhat modified,
and the dramatis personcB are changed, the principal part
being sustained by the dreamer himself.* Before we cite any
evidence, we must offer a few remarks on those mental powers
which perform a part of the intellectual process principally con-
cerned in reproducing events and scenes which have occurred.
We speak of them as perceptive faculties, and their functions,
although various, are all essential for the appreciation of all
objects of which the external senses can take cognizance. By
these powers we take cognizance of individual entities, note
their forms, proportions, colours, densities, and indicate their
particular functions, their relative numbers, duration, and so
forth. It is important for our purpose even to note thus briefly
their respective functions. For during the dreamy state, these
perceptive powers are often involuntarily excited. That is, they
reproduce past impressions when the original objects are no
longer present; and so vividly they appear, that during the vision
they have all the same influence in producing pleasure or pain
which the things or events in their material reality had done.
But the congruous or incongruous scenes which may be pre-
sented during our nightly visions, will depend on their being
natural and consistent, or disjointed and extravagant, by the
accidental circumstance whether one or many of the perceptive
faculties are associated in these reminiscences. If there are simi-
lar combinations, as in the waking hours, nothing will appear
either incongruous or extravagant. If such is not the case, then,
indeed, the dream is a mere " fancy sketch/' In the mysteries
of our being, we find that in dreams there are often past events
resuscitated, sometimes with a faithful vividness, but at others
commingled and without any definite associations. Yet we
think, as a general view, that these unrefreshed and active
perceptive faculties more frequently take cognizance of recent
scenes. We will cite one of our own from the phenomena
subsequently noticed, being interesting in a physiological point
of view.

Curious Reminiscence distorted.?A friend of the writer,
Mr. C. W. Day (author of " Hints on Etiquette," &c., &c.), on his
return from one of his journeys in Switzerland, published in
one of the monthly magazines a brief account of his perils and
adventures. He particularly described an exciting incident at
the Mer de Glace, in which there is a deep fissure, (the mass of
ice having split on some occasion,) but over this gap the traveller
* This egoism of the dreamer we shall have to refer to as we proceed with our
"subject.

must spring, or suffer the inconvenience of retracing his journey.
And Mr. Day, in his narrative, rendered it highly exciting and
graphic. We could see him, so to speak, standing on one of the
slippery surfaces of this " sea of ice/' and with daring courage
hazarding a leap over the gulph, with all the danger of making
a footing on the opposite slippery resting-place. The account
was very artistic, without being highly coloured, but strictly
" true to nature," although slightly idealized.
After reading the very able article, and conversing with the
author on some of the details, I became so deeply interested,
that on that same night, while in bed, I thought repeatedly of
the exciting adventure, until I fell into a rather sound sleep,
and dreamt that I was travelling in a foreign land, and was on
the confines of an enormous large forest, which seemed to stretch
for many miles, even as far as the eye could reach. The evening
sun had sunk beneath the distant mountains, and all appeared
most beautiful, yet a sense of melancholy oppressed me; for
within the forest could be heard a discordant chorus of wild
beasts, roaring, growling, groaning, and all seemed as if ap-
proaching the spot where I stood; such Avas my unpropitious posi-
tion, so far as retracing my weary steps, the attempt could not be
made without danger; yet before I could gain the open country, it
was necessary to pass a broad, deep ravine,?the waters in it
echoed for some time after a stone was thrown into it?this also
was like a sepulchral voice, announcing its readiness to receive
me as another victim. Over this ravine, with its sunken sea,
there was a rude bridge, constructed of deal planks, dovetailed
together, and it had no hand-rail to protect a passenger. I
have a distinct recollection that in my dream I reasoned thus?
If I remain, there was every probability of being torn to pieces
by some wild beasts; or if an attempt were made to cross the
" bridge of planks," and dizziness overtook me, that death in
that case would also be inevitable ; still the latter seemed most
preferable of the two possible accidents. When I had decided,
and had gained the centre plank, I lost my balance and fell, but
in so doing I made a desperate effort to grasp the bridge, and
succeeded in doing so ; the whole weight of my body depending
on my left arm, the pain of which was so great that I groaned
audibly, and to my great relief my wife awoke me, asking me,
" What is the matter ?" I replied, Thank God, it is but a dream,
but what a fearful one. There were not any symptoms of in-
cubus, as in the latter state volition over the voluntary muscles
is lost, even to the seeming consciousness of the dreamer. But
in this case, there was this phenomenon?I had in my dream
exerted the muscles of my arm, suspended by them alone, and
had evidently used the same amount of effort as if it had been
an actual event, for the left arm ached to such a degree that it
was evident the muscular force, having been directed by a similar
act of volition, would have been sufficient to sustain the whole
weight of my body even, for a brief period. Nor did the painful
sensation cease for two days.

We are also tempted to give a case of muscular lassitude, in-
duced during sleep, by showing that long-sustained muscular
exercise, even in a dream, may bring a similar amount of fatigue,
as when actively performing an equal amount of labour when in
the waking state. This, w7e apprehend, results from the fact,
that the muscular force put into requisition requires a similar
amount of nervous power as if actively exercised, and that there
is a corresponding demand made on the brain and spinal nerves
for this purpose.

Mr. L , a very superior musical artiste, who was an organ-
ist of some celebrity at the , told us an interesting dream
which had occurred to him, and of which, from its effects being
so marvellous, he asked us to explain the phenomena. He
said that he had been practising, with great zeal and labour,
some of Sebastian Bach's most elaborate fugues, until he had
acquired the most facile execution, even with the most elabo-
rate ; and that he continued these exercises, from finding the
highest emotional gratification from them. One night, after
his usual daily occupations of teaching music, he went to bed,
but he did not recollect whether he had felt more than ordi-
narily fatigued. He dreamt that he had to play these fugues
before a very large congregation, but he found, to his horror,
that the pedals would not move, and that it was utterly impos-
sible to give any proper effect to these sublime compositions?
that he tried to do so with great and intense anxiety, and with
the most indomitable perseverance; but the difficulties increased,
and his chagrin and disappointment were great, as he had never
anticipated the possibility of such a complete failure. Hence,
he added, that he made still greater efforts, trying with all his
energy and might to make the pedals act; but with all his
additional labour he could not succeed, and under a sensation
of despair, he awoke. He said that he was quite jaded, and
physically prostrated, particularly his legs and arms, which
were not only tired, but they actually pained him, just in the
same degree as if his dreamy adventure had been an actual
reality.

There is not a doubt that if he had not actually used the
muscles of his arms and feet, that he had expended a similar
amount of nervous power as if the muscles of both the legs and

* We shall have some few further remarks to make on this subject in the
conclusion.

arms had been exercised under similar circumstances, whilst
?under the perfect volition of consciousness.
Every physiologist will at once admit that in the latter
instances there is a marked difference in the condition of the
muscular system in nightmare.

We are tempted to narrate another instance to prove that
precisely a similar class of phenomena were observed?namely,
that the state of the muscles in this dream was similar, or nearly
so, as if the occurrence had been real, and not a vision of the
sleep.

A gentleman who practised as a surgeon told us that he
dreamt that lie was sent for by one of his patients to go and see
?a poor fellow who had broken his leg, and that when he went
into the house the poor creature was groaning from excess of
pain. The limb was much swollen, and red, wThilst a portion of .
' the bone was visible on the surface. Some " village bone-setter"
had tried to reduce the fracture ; but from his great ignorance,
he had only tortured the sufferer. The family were in a state of
great distress; and altogether, he said, that all his higher
motives were urgent to relieve the patient and comfort those
around him. He distinctly recollects that he took his coat off,
and, after great efforts, he succeeded in bringing the bones in
juxtaposition. It was a labour rendered more difficult by the
sensitive state of the injured leg and highly nervous condition of
the invalid ; so that, what with his screaming and groaning and
?occasional movement and resistance, at the same time roaring out,
it was greater torture than he could bear; our surgeon says, he had
a repetition of his efforts, but he felt fatigued and qualmish, which
sensations awoke him. To some questions we put to him, he
?declared that his arms were even more tired than if he had
actually been performing the same operation; and he also
thought that the positive muscular effort he had been making
was similar in its waste of power and consequent exhaustion.
Having entered on this inquiry with the view of unfolding the
phenomena of dreams, and with the hope that the views sub-
mitted would have some practical advantage, we shall proceed
with our subject, and shall next consider the many anomalous
forms which are experienced by the dreamer when under the
influence of narcotics or alcoholic compounds.*

* The 'writer of this Essay lias tried experiments on himself, with the view^ of
ascertaining the specific effects of narcotics (opium, laudanum, morphia, smoking
strong tobacco, &c.), and he has noticed that the dreams^ resulting from them are
?either grave or gay, the perceptive faculties being active, and the sense of the
beautiful or the marvellous acting with them. In other woids, ncircottcs act prin-
cipally on the cerebrum, whilst alcoholic compounds stimulate the cerebellum and
base of the brain, and generally induce animal and prurient associations in these
visions of sleep.?

"We may incidentally remark that NARCOTICS produce a species
of delirium, and then, indeed, the dream may resemble some
form of insanity. The one now to be submitted is, indeed,
curious, the details of which were furnished by the dreamer, who
writes thus:?" During the time of my visit to Scarborough
in 3 827, a course of lectures was delivered on the science of
phrenology, which were illustrated with a great number of
crania. One night, a medical gentleman and a friend of mine,
who, like myself, was a visitor at this beautiful watering-place,
went early to have some conversation with the lecturer, and
whom he asked to give him an account of the personal history of
some of the skulls on the table. He and I were much amused at
the condensed biographies which were given of this motley union
of philosophers, thieves, murderers, philanthropists, &c. ; and
the idea occurred to me that if these skulls could utter an
address, some of them would be indignant with being placed
with so many disreputable associates.

" When the lecture concluded, we proceeded to our hotel; and
feeling much fatigued and jaded by the continued tension of my
mind, I was induced to smoke some strong cigars, to act as a seda-
tive. When I went to bed, I had a vivid perception of the lec-
turer's collection of skulls, and pondered over the important
reflections he had deduced from their respective organizations.
Whilst these ideas still engrossed my attention, I fell asleep. But
the train of thought must have continued ; for it seemed to me
that I was tempted to go and examine them again, and whilst
doing so, the skulls became suddenly animated, and each was
immediately attached to a fleshless skeleton. And then an
extraordinary scene took place. Each seemed to manifest all the
excessive passions which had formerly distinguished them,
except the philosophers, who remained calmly contemplating
these furious beings. A sense of agony came over me ; for
either they mistook me for the lecturer, or else their ire was
roused for my having been such a Paul Pry to have dared
to inquire into their respective histories ; and although it seemed
quite awful to observe this ' dance of death/ yet it excited my
risible faculties. The skeletons then rushed towards me, and in
my extreme terror I awoke : my hands were cold, and my skin
clammy, like when faint from the effects of the nicotine of
tobacco in some states of the stomach."

In this dream the perceptive faculties, with wit, ideality, and
marvellousness, were under simultaneous excitement; whilst
the reasoning powers must have been in the inactive state of
profound sleep. If the latter had not been the case, the ab-
surdity of fleshless skeletons bending their fists, and running and
jumping in such a wild manner, would have been an obvious
impossibility, as they could neither move their arms nor legs
when there did not exist any muscles, but merely the bony frame-
work of these skeletons.

If there are " sermons in stones/' there are moral inferences
to be drawn from dreams. We are tempted to give the follow-
ing, and vouch for the accuracy and correctness of the report. It
is a curious political dream, in which there is detailed the trial,
sentence, and execution of the dreamer.

Before, however, giving the details, we must premise that the
gentleman who narrated it to us, and with whom we are inti-
mately acquainted, had taken an active part in politics, when it
was unsafe and injudicious to express any extreme liberal opi-
nions. It was at the time when Lord Sidmouth and his col-
leagues suspended the Habeas Corpus act, about the period of
the trial of Wooller, the editor of the " Black Dwarf." Our
friend was enamoured with his lengthy and able defence, and
had a particular desire to be himself a political martyr. This
arose from the fact that he had himself a well-stored mind and
a great capacity for public speaking, of which, by the way, he
was most vain. And, although he would have shrunk from the
commission of any crime, yet, influenced by a powerful love oj
approbation, he did not consider the being arraigned for poli-
tical opinions to be a violation of moral rectitude, or any infringe-
ment of his duties as a citizen. He had but the one idea, that
of making a display of his stores of historical facts, and of making
an eloquent appeal on the right of an individual to advocate such
views as in his judgment would tend to elevate the human family.
These thoughts floated in his brain, and whenever he had an
opportunity, in public or private, he would descant on them with
great ardour. The meetings he attended were held at the par-
lours or club-rooms of public-houses, in which clouds of smoke
enveloped the assembly; and although he was not much of a
drinker, he indulged excessively in " the Indian weed," so that
he might be considered always narcotised. We have been forced
to give these j)hases of the mind of our " dreamer," and which
will enable us to trace the train of ideas in his sleeping vision,
and to account for its curious results. He had been for some
hours in a dense fog of tobacco-smoke, when he returned to his
lodgings, tired and stupifled by the poisonous atmosphere, and
quickly retired to his bed. He dreamt that he was arrested for
some speech on his ultra-radical views of government, in which
he had enforced his favourite principle?" that men were not
under any obligation to obey bad laws, any more than that a
child could be considered guilty of disobedience to a father who
might urge him to commit an act of moral turpitude." He says
that he vividly remembers being committed to prison, and that
liis trial took place after many weeks of incarceration, when he
made a most eloquent defence to a crowded court; but the jury-
pronounced a verdict of guilty. He heard a murmur throughout
the court, which was soon sup pressed. Then the judge put on
a black cap, and pronounced the awful sentence?that he must
suffer the penalty of death by hanging, for his treasonable con-
duct. Soon his busy and disturbed mind produced another
exciting scene: he was brought from the gaol, pinioned and
guarded, and had to mount the platform. He says that he dis-
tinctly felt the rope round his neck?heard the bolt withdrawn
?and was conscious that he was at that moment launched
' into eternity! That is, considered himself dead, and seemed
quite aware that he was put into a shell to be buried, and yet
all that he actually experienced was a different state of his feel-
ings, which, even in his dream, was to him a psychological puzzle ;
for he distinctly heard the comments made on his character, and
many eulogiums passed on the very speech for which he had
suffered the penalties of the law. He distinctly heard people
defend the soundness of his principles and the honesty of his
whole life; and he felt a peculiar satisfaction, verifying "the
ruling passion/' in both the waking state and his dreams, was
a strong vanity. He added, that those who carried his coffin
began to move, and that they once stumbled; and a strong
notion affected him that they would let his pent-up house fall,
which he thought would disgrace his corpse ; and this fear awoke
him to a state of mental consciousness, when he found that the
collar of his night-shirt had slipt on one side, and not acted as a
tight ligature to the throat, but that the button pressed on the
jugular vein. The pain of the latter, and the obstruction to the
venous blood, predisposed the whole of the phenomena of his
remarkable dream, in which there was a renewal of many of
the vagaries of his waking thoughts. The dream, however, left
so strong an impression on his mind as to modify his opinions,
and induced him to give his attention to moral science, and to
eschew party politics.

We may incidentally remark, that the egoism of the dreamer
not only insures his individuality, but as a consequence renders
him invariably the hero of every incident, or else the principal
actor. If there is a fight, he is dealing his blows with fearful
effect and deadly consequences to his antagonist. If a lecture is
given on any subject it is by himself, or else he is propounding
its errors or unsoundness. Should he dream of a riot, he sup-
presses it. It was his eloquence which acted '? like oil on the
troubled waters," and stilled the commotion induced by the
passions of the people. Even when there occurs, during the
nightly vision, any great inconsistency, or obvious discrepancy, it
still seems correct, as in the dream it is his own mind which
furnishes every associated circumstance.

It is worthy of a passing notice, that often there is a great
craving among the insane for tobacco or snuff, as if they had an
intuitive perception of their sedative tendencies, and hoped by
their aid to allay their morbid irritability. And yet if these nar-
cotics act on the disordered brain as they generally do on a sane
person, we have the most indubitable evidence, from a vast
number of smokers, that their dreams are not only most vivid,
but often the most painfully distressing, from their apparent
naturalness. Part of which effect, that which is depressing to
the dreamer, may be occasioned by some gastric disturbance, as
few inveterate smokers escape this penalty.

We were somewhat dubious where to place in our collection
the following dream, for it was evidently suggested by the state
of the weather :?

Mr. T , a rich merchant, by birth a German, was rather
out of health, and was recommended by liis physician to spend a
few weeks at Brighton. He was, like most of his countrymen,
a smoker, scarcely being ever without a cigar, unless at his
meals; but whether from this habit, or the constant activity of
his mind, from his extensive mercantile transactions, he was
highly nervous, particularly if the weather was cold, so as to
affect the cutaneous circulation. On the occasion we have to
speak of, the weather was so boisterous, that when he walked
before dinner on the cliff, his hat blew off, but he recovered it.
As he was obliged to remain in his apartments, and being too
listless to read, he puffed away in a more than ordinary degree,
and about ten o'clock went to bed, but not "to sleep;'" at least,
from the wind shaking the house, he was in bodily fear that
the roof would be blown off, or some other casualty. After
tossing about in a restless manner for some time, he fell into a
profound slumber; but the angry gusts still rattling the windows,
which seemed every now and then as if they would be staved
in, he must have partially appreciated. For he dreamt that
he was at a foreign port, and had gone on board of a ship
homeward bound. The weather was stormy, and the wind
rattled the sails in a most fearful manner. Some expressed a
desire to return to shore, but the captain heeded not their
wishes, as it would be incurring danger. The sailors were
shouting and running about the deck, all bustle and confusion,
from the rapid manner they had to attend to their multiform
duties. At length the vessel was fairly out at sea, which ran
mountains high, every now and then coming over their frail bark
like an avalanche, which made the landsmen fancy must sink it.
Our dreamer was at first terrified, but ultimately he conversed
with the crew and the different passengers, and examined the
luggage to ascertain if all his own were right, when he found
that he had left his hat-box, and that to his surprise he had
been all day without any covering to his head !

After some time, the vessel arrived in port. The custom-
house officers overhauled the trunks and bales, when Mr. T
remembered some packets locked up in the captain's cabin, and
among them his hat-case. But strange enough, when he has
the keys given him, he attempts to descend to the cabin, the
motion and rocking of the vessel prevent him; he is angry,
and awakes. When indeed, he says, the storm had so increased,
that he felt his bed shake.

Besides the state of the weather, the hat blown off on the
cliff, and the sea being rougher than usual, were all the materials
to work up the dream. But in this instance, and innumerable
others, the mind fashioned a vessel, created different men?with
their individualities of character?gave them certain ideas in
common with their respective class, (as for instance, the captain,
seamen, passengers, and custom-house officers), and supplied
them not only with thoughts and opinions suitable to each, but
also the very words with which they expressed themselves.
As a contrast to this matter-of-fact subject of a dream, we are
tempted to cite one where the ideality of the dreamer gave
a rather outre train of thought, which had had some positive
data curiously distorted.

It is, indeed, an old and a trite remark, " that very often dreams
are but the continuation of our waking thoughts," which, how-
ever, may be mixed up with confused reminiscences, and so modi-
fied by a want of unity, time, and place, that on comparing
them we have some difficulty of tracing any resemblance between
the waking and the dreamy thoughts. There is, however, a moral
in the one we propose relating. A learned friend of ours writes
thus :?" Some time since I had a visitor, a vain young man, who
talked in a rapid way, and fatigued me as much by his manner
as by the heterogeneous mixture of all kinds of subjects on which
it pleased him to discourse. He touched on one, then changed
to another, with the rapidity of a fly gliding over a fluid ; then
for a time he dwelt with rhapsody on some dish of which he had
partaken, or some scene he had witnessed. Next he speculated
on political and moral science?talked of education, beautiful
women, war, machinery, and murders. Thus he rattled on from
subject to subject without either order, arrangement, or connexion.
Tired with the effort to keep my attention, or to follow him in
this mental race, which was so tortuous, I was glad to avail
myself of the conventional privilege of a convalescent by retiring
to bed, where I soon fell into an uneasy sleep. Then I dreamed
that I stood by a very large transparent reservoir, which was filled
with water or some other clear kind of fluid, the upper part of
which was like a polished crystal. "Wondering what could be the
use of this reservoir, I remained fixedly gazing at it. Soon there
appeared to rise up from the lower portion a vast number of
objects, which floated about with rapid motions until they reached
the surface, when they passed over the sides or the upper end, and
disappeared. ' This/ I exclaimed, 1 is a fluid pandora, a magical
reservoir !' My curiosity was excited, and I continued to observe
the operations with the greatest attention. Sometimes the turbid
matter at the bottom of the vessel became greatly agitated, and
immediately flowers of various shapes and colours floated grace-
fully for a brief time, and then vanished. These flowers were
succeeded by a vast number of animalcules of different sizes and
forms; and they also passed away before my astonished senses.
Various grim and bleeding victims then rose up, showing their
' raw heads and bloody bones/ and after harrowing.my feelings
for a few minutes, disappeared in ? mid air/ followed by frag-
ments of machinery, nondescript animals, portions of pictorial
and graphic art, which all equally mocked my gaze ; and as the
vain attempt was made to endeavour to compare them with what
I had seen, they all exploded into a thin and impalpable mist!
"Such was this magical dream, so full of marvellous legerde-
main, that my very eagerness to comprehend their meaning
awoke me. With my first imperfect consciousness, this vision
seemed ' strange, passing strange/ and seemed to intimate
'that the cloud-capped towers' and all earthly things were about
to dissolve, and not leave a wreck behind ; for from the intense
headache I endured, it had not occurred to my mind the fact
that all this confusion and the different mutations had been
fashioned from the still Babel of subjects passed before my
mind's eye by the compounds of small-talk of my visitor !
" If, therefore, my mind had not been impressed with the
injudiciousness of talking in a lax manner on every subject, this
dream would have pointed a moral, if it could not adorn
a tale; and hence may be useful in any investigation of the
philosophy of dreams."

Our friend afterwards said, that so vivid had been the brain-
conjuring of his dream, that he had some difficulty of disabusing
his mind as to the reality or not of the incidents.
(To le continued.)
