On the Physiological and psychological Phenomena of Dreams and Apparitions
===========================================================================

Art. IV.?
[No. I. of a Series.]

Man is regarded as a living microcosm. The organic machinery
which regulates his bodily and mental functions are of two
kinds:?

Firstly, those which induce the involuntary functions of
animal life, as the heart and other organs associated with the
circulation of the blood, and the lungs, by which its vital quality
is preserved; besides which there are the various organs of
secretion and excretion, by which the body and its different parts
are kept in repair, or which are essential to remove poisonous
matter from the vital fluid itself, which supplies the material for
this renovating process.

Secondly; the voluntary functions, which are essential to con-
serve to the wants of the individual?animal, moral, and intel-
lectual or which conduce to his relaxation, refinement, and ele-
vation,'as the highest in the scale of created beings, and which
conjointly constitute him an organic entity with social, domestic,
responsible, percipient, and reflective powers, and through which
he preserves his relations to both the outer and the inner world.
It is the voluntary powers, or those which are appreciated
by consciousness, that must occupy a few brief remarks, as essen-
tial to comprehend the views to be submitted in this Essay.
Before we can explain the phenomena of dreams, it is im-
portant to understand what is the final cause of sleep. We may
premise, that the machinery of our complicated body is worked
by a certain stimulus, which we call, for practical purposes,
nervous fluid, or vis nervosa, and which, from evidence to be sub-
mitted, seems to depend on the brain for its elaboration.
This fluid, in a healthy person, is supplied to all the organs
essential to digestion, assimilation, locomotion, and so forth. And
when the body and mind are in a normal condition, the distri-
bution of this vital principle will be in the due proportion to the
requisite wants of every organ essential for the functions indi-
cated.

Yet it is a matter of experience, that the nervous fluid may
be exhausted by too great mental occupation, in which case the
digestion is enfeebled, and the organic functions seriously de-
ranged ; or if this important stimulus is appropriated in too
great proportion by the muscular system, as in excessive exercise;
that in either case exhaustion is induced, and nature has rendered
the sense of fatigue, consequent on such conditions, to be followed
by a desire for repose.

Let us trace the obvious and salutary results. During the
absolute rest of the organs of volition, and the nervous centres
by which all actions are performed, there is what is called
profound sleep. The brain ceases for a time to be the instrument
of thought or emotion, although, as a great galvanic battery,
it seems to be elaborating a fresh supply of the vital power
(nervous fluid), and, by means of its continuous conductors?the
nerves?distributing it to every organ of the body. And thus,
when the sleeper awakes, he is refreshed and invigorated.
But if the sleep is imperfect and partial, these results do not
follow, and there is experienced a sense of lassitude and discom-
fort. It is in such unsound sleep that dreams occur.

That there is nothing speculative in these opinions as to the
actual condition of the brain, in sound and in partial sleep, we
cite a case quoted by Dr M'Nish in his " Philosophy of Sleep,"
as furnishing conclusive evidence on these interesting pheno-
mena :?
" Dr Perquin, a French physician, records the fact now quoted. It
fell under his notice in one of the hospitals of Montpelier, in the year
1821. A female of the age of twenty-six had lost part of her scalp,
skull-hone, and dura-mater, under a malignant disease (syphilis), which
had been neglected. In consequence of these injuries, a portion of
the brain had been exposed, and admitted of being inspected.

" When she was in a dreamless sleep, her brain was motionless, and
lay within the cranium. When her sleep was imperfect, and she was
agitated by dreams, her brain moved and protruded within the
cranium forming a cerebral hernia. In vivid dreams, reported as such
by herself the protrusion was considerable. And when she was per-
fectly awake, especially if engaged in active thought or sprightly con-
versation, it was still greater. Nor did the protrusion occur in jerks,
alternating with recessions, as if caused by the impulse of arteria
blood. It remained steady while conversation lasted "*
This fact, and other similar ones, prove that during profound
sleep the active condition of the mental functions ceases ?
although it is most probable that the base of the brain may con'
tinue to supply nervous energy to the heart and lungs But
during the dreaming state, some of the mental powers ^indicate
their activity by motions in the cerebral organs on which tliev
depend for their manifestations.

This knowledge furnishes some data for our subsequent
opinions on the philosophy of dreams and ghosts, and which if
rejected, leave these subjects more curious than of any practical
advantage to comprehend a true philosophy of mind; for, with-
out such information, there is a liability to form the most
discrepant theories, as may be verified by examining the
attempted explanations of these phenomena by many previous
writers.

Thus Addison regards " dreams as the soul's relaxation after
she is dismembered of her machinery, and that she is then the
theatre, the actor, and the beholder."
And Dryden furnishes not any better solution when he says.
" Dreams are the interludes which fancy makes;
When Monarch Reason sleeps, this mimic wakes ;
Compounds a medley of disjointed things?
A mob of cobblers, and a court of kings.
Light fumes are merry, grosser fumes are sad,
Both are the reasonable soul run mad;
And many monstrous forms in sleep we see,
That never were, nor are, nor e'er can be."
Dugald Stewart s theory of dreaming is, that in sleep we have
lost, or nearly so, all volition over the bodily organs; but that
those mental powers which are directly important for our volition
may retain a certain degree of activity.

* We may incidentally remark, that if there were but this one solitary instance
on record, its importance in connexion with the subject under consideration is as
valuable to the student of the philosophy of dreams, as the accident narrated by
Dr Beaumont, of America, (cited by Dr Andrew Combe, in his work on Digestion,)
has proved in reference to gastric phenomena. In both instances there is furnished
important demonstrations of the respective functions of the brain and stomach ? and
the means of confirming or correcting the speculations of physiologists who had
previously written on both subjects.

The writer of the Article Breams in the " Encyclopaedia
Britannica," asks?
" "What parts of the human being are active, and what dormant,
when he dreams ? "Why does not he always dream when asleep ?
Or why dreams he at all ? Do any circumstances in our constitu-
tion, situation, and peculiar character determine the nature of our
dreams ?"*

Abercrombie speaks of four varieties of the dream : 1st. Wrong
associations of new events. 2nd. Trains of thought from bodily
associations. 3rd. Revival of associations. 4th. Casual fulfilment
of a dream. We do not essentially differ from these divisions,
but do not recognise the last. Nor does this author give any
lucid elucidation of the predisposing causes for these various
phases of dreaming. And if we look for more definite notions
among ancient writers, including Plato, we shall be greatly dis-
appointed. Certainly the latter has treated on these phenomena,
and speaks of many kinds of dreaming, from the imagination
half asleep, to those more painful kinds which he terms ephialtes
(night-mare). And an anonymous writer says of dreams:?

" These nocturnal phantasmata, which disturb the soft embraces
of Morpheus with their playful and visionary forms, are suggested
often by pain, by sounds, and various bodily sensations, in the same
manner as are trains of waking thoughts."

The apparent solution to what seems otherwise a mass of am-
biguities, can only be found in a number of well-observed cases,
based on the clear and lucid difference of physiological and
psychological phenomena; and this result can only be ensured
when we are guided by a sound system of mental philosophy in
harmony with man's organization. And the first essential for
the absolute comprehension of our subject is to admit the ra-
tionality of Gall's theory of the brain,?that it is not a single
organ, but that its different portions are the instruments by
which are manifested feelings, emotions, perceptions, and so
forth.

If, on the contrary, we retain the earlier views of physiologists,
and deem the whole brain essential for every sentiment or intel-
lectual operation, we have not any definite data to aid us in our
investigation, or to comprehend the various phases of temper,
and disposition, and mental capacity which exist in different
individuals, and mark them so perfectly during the waking state,
and which preserve many of their specialities in dreams. And,
without an admission of the compound nature of the mental
* We shall, in the course of this essay, answer these questions; or, in other
?words, our solution to these mental riddles, will, in a measure, reply to these
queries.

machinery, little could be practically done in the treatment of
many forms of insanity, which are proved to result from abnormal
states of the brain.

It is, therefore, important for our purpose to offer certain
presumptive evidence in favour of Gall's theory, as furnishing
preliminary data for analysing the -phenomena of dreams, and
the examples which will be subsequently submitted as illus-
trations.

We need not cite the mass of indubitable evidence of "stub-
born facts," which have led to the inductive inference that the
brain is a compound organ,?that its various functions act purely
in obedience to physiological laws, and yet there is nothing in
these views which are opposed to our intuitive notions of a soul.
All that is affirmed, then, by these views is simply that so long
as there exists a connexion between the body and the soul in this
life, the attributes of the latter must be manifested through
the organization. Or, in other words, that the- soul uses the
brain for mental purposes, just in the same way that it uses the
eyes to see with, and the muscles for volition. And finally, that
its unity is not implicated because we speak of various feelings,
sentiments, perceptions, and so forth, any more than is that of
the body because its operations are compound, and the results
diversified.

There is, however, additional evidence that the brain and its-
parts perform different and distinct functions, from its anato-
mical structure and great complexity in man. This complexity
may be demonstrated by a comparison with the brains of other-
animals, which are less so, in different degrees, in a descending
scale ; or if we commence with the simplest form of the nervous
system, and ascend in a regular series. Thus, the worm has not
a nervous centre (a brain), and we perceive that its functions are
purely automatic. And as we rise in the scale of being, even
when but few instincts are manifested with volition, there is found
a simple brain, and the cerebral mass increases in complexity
more and more, in the ratio of the number of the mental functions
each class of beings have to perform, until in man this complexity
is the greatest, and his superiority is commensurate.

The mental faculties of man are divided into four genera?
] st. The animal propensities essential to man's terrestrial wants.
2nd. The moral attributes, which are of an elevating and refining
tendency, and control any overt acts of selfishness. 3rd. The
external senses. 4th. The intellectual faculties.

The senses are regarded as the media between the world
without, and inner or spiritual world within, whilst the mind
alone gives us consciousness of our actual existence.

There is also an anatomical fact in reference to the brain*
which is too important to be unheeded, as it is essential to com-
prehend some of the mental phenomena Ave shall have to
refer to in explaining certain peculiarities in the dreaming
state, and in ghost-seeing?that the brain is double, and like
the nerves of sense, possesses an important purpose. The final
cause may be, that if one set of organs are fatigued, the other
may exercise their respective functions. And in injuries from
accident or disease in one hemisphere, the mental operations
may be carried on by the healthy one ; in the same manner as
when an eye is destroyed by some casualty, the other may con-
tinue the function of vision.

With these preliminary considerations, we may proceed to
discuss the views to be submitted in this essay. And, assuming
that we have made it evident, that when the external senses and
the brain are in a state of that comparative negation which we
designate by a condition of perfect rest, sleep the most profound
is the certain consequence. But if only parts of the brain rest,
and the external senses are easily excited by their respective
stimuli, then dreams are almost a certain result. And their
coherence or incoherence will depend on the number, more or
'less, of those faculties which are, in the waking condition, essen-
tial for obtaining clear perceptions, independently of any acci-
dental association.

" Lulled in the countless chambers of the brain,
Our thoughts are linked, by many a hidden chain,
Awake but one, and lo! what myriads rise,
Each stamps its image, as the other flies."
That these views are in accordance with accurate observation,
we may confirm by noticing the effect of an over vigilance of
the mental faculties, that in such cases sleep is banished, and
the converse phenomena take place of those which occur from
a normal result of certain healthy exercises. The vigilant con-
dition is thus graphically described in Henry the Fourth's beauti-
ful soliloquy on Sleep.

" 0 gentle sleep !
Nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more will weigh my eyelids down,
And steep my senses in forgetfulness."

The predisposing causes of dreams may be various, but they
are all invariably referrible to some conditions of the body?its
position, irregular or excessive circulation; or to some conditions
of the brain, or the external nerves.

* Although we refer dreams to cerebral phenomena, yet we think with an anony-
mous writer that this doctrine does not invalidate the proof of the prophetic
use God may have formerly made of them ; for Omnipotence may excite material
organs in a definite manner, so as to convey true prophecies. The phantoms them*
Wolfius and Forney supposed that dreams never arise in the
mind, except in consequence of some of the organs of sensation
having been previously excited. But these views are only part
of the truth, unless by a latitude of speech, the cerebral organs
are included.

We shall consider the subject of dreaming under four heads?
1st. When the primary impression is made on the sense of
sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing, as the first division of what
we may term suggestive causes.

2nd. Physical sensations, as cold, heat, currents of air, et cetera,
as inducing a second form of suggestive causes.
3rd. When the mental faculties are some of them in a state of
activity, from some abnormal condition of health.
4th. When a similar, or aggravated condition exists, from
narcotics, or stimulants, with an active temperament.
And, lastly, we shall indicate some curious conditions of the
muscles, either as inducing dreams, or as resulting from some
circumstance connected with them.

We have collected a number of interesting instances which
clearly prove that when the mind is in the transition state
between sleeping and wakefulness, that during this period of im-
perfect consciousness, if any strong impression is made on the
organs of the external senses, such impression is a suggestive source
of some form of dreaming. But then there must be some suscep-
tibility to be easily influenced by the respective stimuli, as in
profound sleep the " senses," like the brain, are steeped in
forgetfulness. A few examples will better explain our meaning
than any mere theoretic views.

Blind Man of Barnsley.?Mr. , a retired tradesman,
at whose house the writer resided for a brief period, was totally
blind, except being sensible of the difference of a light or a
dark apartment. He had lost his sight for some years, but it
was after his children had, most of them, grown up to be young
men and women. During the previous portion of his life, he
had been in the habit of taking active exercise?hunting two or
three times a week. When at his house at the time now men-
tioned, he was doomed to remain within doors, or sit, during
fine weather, in the garden. The circumstance to be related
occurred on a beautiful morning in October. He had had a chair
placed for him with his face in a southern aspect, the bright
sun shining on him. And there he sat in deep thought, smoking
his pipe, musing o'er his past existence. He, however, soon fell
selves may be referrible to motions of the organs of the brain, like ocular spectra in
the retina or the imaginary sounds and noises that some nervous people hear. Rut
the coincidences between the dream and the event which it seemed to predict, con-
stitute the astonishing part, and render them miraculous.

into a sound sleep, just as we entered the garden. He continued
so for some time, and moved himself, whilst his expression then
became more pleasing than usual, and it was manifest that he
was dreaming, and we watched with great interest the varying
changes of his well-formed features. Instead of his ordinary
appearance of discontent, or a merely blankless expression, he
appeared to be agreeably excited. At length we observed tears
flowed from his sightless eyes, and trickled down his face, and he
soon awoke to all the reality of his situation. He sighed like one
who^ experienced great mental agony. " You have been dream-
ing, we said. " Yes, sir, and I felt more happy than I have done
for years, for I thought my sight was restored; and that I once
more beheld the faces of my dear wife and family." He paused,
and then continued, "Would that this sleep had continued, for
now the contrast of my painful condition makes me most
miserable I" And the poor old gentleman cried in a most
piteous manner.

It is evident that the bright rays, with their genial warmth,
had suggested the dream we have narrated. If, however, he
had been altogether incapable of being affected by the stimulus
of light, this could not have occurred; and whilst it confirms a
physiological law, it induces certain reflections on psychological
phenomena, inasmuch as he had a perfect consciousness of a
condition of mind he could not realise from any memoretic effort.
On the sense OF smell, as a suggestive cause, we cite the
following, from many in our note-book. It was furnished by the
dreamer. " On one occasion, during my residence at Birming-
ham, I had to attend many patients at Coventry, and for their
accommodation I visited that place one day in every week. My
temporary residence was at a druggist's shop in the market-
place. Having on one occasion, now to be mentioned, a more
than usual number of engagements, I was obliged to remain
over night, and a bed was procured for me at the residence of a
cheesemonger in the same locality. This house was very old,
the rooms very low, and the street very narrow. It was summer
time, and during the day the cheesemonger had unpacked a box
or barrel of strong, old American cheese. The very street was
impregnated with their odour. At night, jaded with my profes-
sional labours, I went to my dormitory, which seemed filled with
a strong cheesy atmosphere, which affected my stomach greatly,
and quite disturbed the biliary secretions. I tried to produce a
more agreeable atmosphere to my olfactory sense by smoking
cigars, but did not succeed. At length, worn out by fatigue, I
tried to sleep, and should have succeeded, but for a time another
source of annoyance prevented my doing so?for in the old wall
behind my head, against which my ancient bedstead stood, there
were numerous rats gnawing away in real earnest. The crunching
they made was, indeed, terrific; and I resisted the drowsy god
from a dread that these voracious animals would make a forcible
entrance, and might take personal liberties with my flesh !
" But at length ' tired nature' ultimately so overpowered me,
that I slept in a sort of fever. I was still breathing the cheesy
atmosphere, and this, associated with the marauding rats, had
so powerfully affected my imagination, that a most horrid dream
was the consequence. I fancied myself in some -barbarous
country, where, being charged with a political offence, I was
doomed to be incarcerated in a large cheese. And although
this curious prison-house seemed most oppressive, it formed but
part of my sufferings. For scarcely had I become reconciled to
my miserable fate, than, to my horror, an army of rats attacked
the monster cheese, and soon they seemed to have effected an
entrance, and began to fix themselves in numbers on my naked
body. The agony I endured was increased by the seeming im-
possibility to drive them away, and fortunately for my sanity, I
awoke; but with a hot head and throbbing temples, and a sense
of nausea from the increasingly strong odour of the cheese/''
It is worthy of a passing reflection, that although the whole
dream adventure was altogether improbable, yet it must be re-
membered that all the auxiliaries were present to the waking
thoughts of the dreamer, and hence the exaggerated and painful
associations were induced, in all probability from the odour and
gnawing being still appreciated in some degree in the feverish
and partial sleep.

That the sense of hearing may be also suggestive of a dream
we have many examples, but shall merely quote one instance.
The celebrated sculptor, Mr. P H once related to us an
amusing instance: " His brother dreamt, just before rising in the
morning, that he had to see a Mr. Jones, and that, in order to
do so, he walked up a flight of steps leading to a very large
house, intending to inquire for him, but as soon as he asked the
servant if his friend resided there, a little pert, dwarf-like figure
suddenly started up on one side of him, and asked, in a shrill,
squeaking voice,'What Jones? What Jones?' Vexed at this
impertinent intrusion, the dreamer determined to be more
cautious, and going up to the next house, he repeated his question
in a lower tone, when the same rude, ugly dwarf, repeated his
questions, 'What Jones? What Jones?' And instead of noticing
this officious fellow, he turned away in anger, and awoke I
when he heard some one passing under his window, calling out
* Hot rolls! hot rolls i' And his partially awaked faculties having
caught these sounds, he had in a brief period produced the inci-
dents of the dream just related."

We could narrate many curious dreams induced by some un-
pleasant effect on the SENSE OF touch, and as an example, by
way of illustration, select the following. A gentleman, of a
nervo-bilious temperament, was much out of health from too
much mental employment, and was ordered by his physician to
take a pill, and in attempting to swallow it he did not succeed,
but lodged it on the rim of the pharynx, and caused him great
annoyance. He tried to dislodge it by putting his fingers down
his throat, but he could not succeed. So, after repeatedly
coughing, until he was tired out, he fell asleep. Soon after he had
done so he had a most painful dream. We shall relate it in his
own words: "It appeared to me that I was in some large town
on the Continent, and a perfect stranger to every one; that I
had strolled out from the inn, although the night was dark and
the streets ill-lighted; and when I attempted to retrace my steps
and return, the farther the inn seemed from me. At length,
hearing footsteps, I followed, hoping to gain some information
or assistance. And, to my horror, I found myself in a narrow
court, without any thoroughfare. After calling to the invisible
being, he seemed to stop, and before I could ask a question, he
seized me by the throat, and produced a sensation of pain. I
attempted to speak, when the inhuman wretch thrust his hand
in my mouth, and nearly choked me; but in the agony of my
situation I made a desperate effort to bite this fleshy plug,
and made the cowardly wretch scream out as he felt the dental
incision, and this scream awoke me. The pill remaining in its
position, the irritation of which and my own previous experiment
to dislodge it, had induced the painful train of thought of my
short and feverish dream, which could not have lasted more than
a few minutes.
That the sense of taste is suggestive of dreams might be
proved by many examples. But we may merely remark that
this, like those already examined, acts as a predisposing cause,
or as suggestive of dreaming. For instance, if a person goes to
bed hungry, there is a craving for food, and the probability is
that he will dream of feasting. And most likely the repast will
consist just of such viands or drinks as are most agreeable to the
palate of the individual during his perfect consciousness. And
by a reflex action of the cerebral organs actively exercised, the
sense of taste will be affected with similar perceptions of flavours
as are in reality experienced during the process of mastication
and deglutition. A friend of ours, who was particularly fond of
soups, went to bed hungry, and dreamt he was eating some rich
preparation of meat, the smell of which induced him to eat it
rather quickly; when he dreamt that some of it went " the wrong
way," as it is called, and almost choked him; and he awoke,
actually coughing. The latter spasmodic effort, with his feeling
a want of food, induced the kind of dream; but which confirm
the previous observations incidentally made, that he still fancied,
though only for a brief time, that he smelt the savoury stew or
soup, Avhich in his dream he had so much enjoyed.

We cannot conclude this section without observing that none
of the latter forms of dreaming must be confounded with ephi-
altes or incubus, as we shall, when speaking of the latter, prove
that there are so many phenomena connected with the incubus,
as clearly distinguish it from those trains of thought induced
by those partially disturbing influences which result from some
of the external senses being affected by their respective stimuli.
In order to preserve some connexion in the subject under con-
sideration, we shall offer a few brief observations on the second
section?viz., that the physical sensations of cold and heat are
suggestive of dreaming; and although we have more interesting
phenomena to explain in the course of this essay, yet as external
agents which affect the circulation of the blood, we could not
reject them, and hence this is the fitting place to fairly discuss
them.

It is obvious, on the slightest reflection, that if cold or heat
sensibly affect the body, their effects must be cognized by the
mental faculties. For in many abnormal states of the brain,
insane persons have had portions of the feet burnt off without
any apparent consciousness of pain.* But if the mind retains
its ordinary functions, whatever affects the body will suggest
trains of thought, even in partial sleep, and which dreams will
be fashioned and connected with the physical agent which was
the suggestive cause. We must premise that neither the heat or
cold must be experienced in any extreme degree, or else it may
produce a sedative effect on the brain, and there may be great
danger, without any consciousness of it.

There are many cases on record of heat and cold inducing
dreams, mentioned by writers as early as Macrobius; and some
of our modern physiologists have made observations of a similar
kind. A literary man, who had a most sensitive organization,
related a rather amusing instance of the effects of cold, in sug-
gesting a most annoying adventure to one of his thin-skinned
tendency. He thus describes it: " The other morning my wife
rose very early, and being unwell, I decided to take another turn,
and soon fell asleep, but so imperfectly, that a succession of
dreams haunted my imagination. One of them I submit to you
* One instance is so remarkable that we cannot resist mentioning the circum-
stance It occurred in Bedlam, some years since. A man laid his feet on the fire,
and kept them there until they were perfectly carbonized, without apparently
suffering any inconvenience during the ignition.

as an interpreter of these phantasmata. Methought that the
butcher had sent a joint different from the one we required, and
that I determined to go back with it myself, when, to my horror,
a number of persons followed me, and seemed discussing the
point whether or not I was demented. ' Surely/ said one, c he
must be so, to go out without stockings this bitterly cold, frosty
morning !' e Has he been drinking V said another; ' for a more
robust man than he is could not be guilty of such an act with
impunity/ Great was the sense of shame which oppressed me,
and I hurried on, not daring to face my censors, and thought to
escape them, when I heard some little girls and great girls titter,
and then laugh most heartily as they exclaimed, ' What in-
delicacy, et cetera.' This second adventure pained me so much,
that I awoke, and found the bed-clothes off my legs, which were
almost painfully cold, having a tingling sensation from suppressed
circulation." In this instance, and others we could cite, the pre-
disposing cause was the cold, worked up into an adventure by
the half-waking mental faculties.

A gentleman whom we knew told us that he had had a long
walk, and had eaten a hearty supper. The night was cold, in con-
sequence of which he had a number of blankets put on the bed;
and which rendered him heated and feverish. These physical
conditions gave rise to the following curious dream. He said that
he fancied that he was walking on a summer evening, and felt a
sense of suffocation, as there was not a breath of air; that the
clouds had gathered in dense masses, and that whilst suffering
from the oppressive heat, some large brown " cockroaches" flew
against him with such force, as to induce severe pain wherever
they touched. To avoid them he hurried to bed, but even there
these tormentors pursued him, and at length they swarmed in
such quantities, as literally to cover the pillows. In a state of
terror and disgust he awoke. He was lying on his side, in an
unnatural heated condition. This, he remarks, suggested the
phenomena in reference to the weather, in which all unities were
kept up, but highly exaggerated. The " cockroaches," however,
puzzled him, until he recollected that, prior to his going to bed,
one of his daughters read out a portion of the Memoirs of Ben-
venuto Cellini, in which he had described his journey from
France, that he and his party were overtaken in a storm, in
which the hail-stones were the size of lemons! His mind had
retained the marvellous account, and in his dream he had
changed the gigantic hail-stones into the unnatural-sized " cock-
roaches," as more in harmony with his sensations.
We may allude to physical agencies again, in the section on
vivid reminiscences in dreams.
(To be continued.)
Jh
