Industrial Psychology
=====================

NOTES AND COMMENT
----------------

"Industrial Psychology" is the title of a book by Morris S.
Viteles, Associate Editor of The Psychological Clinic, which was published September 22nd, by* W. W. Norton Co., New York. A
review of this book will appear in our next issue.
Other books received for review are as follows:

An Elementary Psychology of the Abnormal. By W. B. Pillsbury. New York: McGraw-Hill Co.
The Practical Medicine Series, Series 1931. Neurology, Edited
by Peter Bassoe, M.D.; Psychiatry, Edited by Franklin G. Ebaugh,
M.D. Chicago: The Year Book Publishers, Inc.
The Nature of Human Conflicts. By A. R. Luria, Translated
by W. Horsley Gaunt. New York: Liveright.
The Wild Boy of Aveyron. By Gaspard Itard, Translated by
George and Muriel Humphrey. New York: Century Co.
Economy and Technique in Learning. By William F. Book.
New York: D. C. Heath and Co.

Prospecting for Heaven. By Edwin R. Embree. New York:

Vildng Press.
--------------

Reviews of these books will appear in future issues.
The first number of "Personality: A Quarterly for Psychodiagnostic and Allied Studies" has appeared. It is published in this
country by the Duke University Press, Durham, N. C. A British
edition will be published simultaneously in London and a German
edition in Berlin. The editor is Robert Saudek of London, and
there is a large editorial and collaborative staff. The yearly subscription price is $2.00; single copies, 50 cents.
We have also received "Twenty-Five Years," a memorial volume commemorating the twenty-fifth, anniversary of the Yineland
Laboratory at The Training School, Yineland, New Jersey. This
laboratory was founded in 1906 by Henry H. Goddard to whom
the present volume is dedicated. "We will take review notice of some
of the contributions to this volume in a later issue.
