The Nature of Human Conflicts
=============================

:Author:  A. R. Luria, Professor of
Psychology, State Institute of Experimental Psychology, Moscow. Translated by W. Horsley Gannt. New York: Liveright.
1932.

The author presents here the results of a series of objective experiments
conducted by him at the State Institute of Experimental Psychology, Moscow,
during the years 1923-30, and devised to investigate certain aspects of the
disorganization of behavior during emotional stress. Luria rejects the postulates of Pavlov and other conditioned reflex adherents and aligns himself with
that group represented by Child, Lashley, Kohler, et al.

Convinced that "... only a system of active behavior . . . appears
capable of manifesting an actual structure, changing under the influence of
the affective behavior . . . ," the author abandoned the use of reactions of
the involuntary type?reflexes, bioelectrical changes, chemical reactions?and
employed throughout a voluntary reactive pattern in which a simple motor
act was incorporated into the complex receptor-effector process called out by
the experiment. The subject sitting before the apparatus places his right
hand on a pneumatic key, his left on a weight. These are connected to
tambours attached in the usual way for kymograpliic recording. With the
several processes involved in the situations a pressure by the right hand is
incorporated, the left hand remaining at rest. Under normal conditions with
normal adult subjects the motor act proceeds as an integral part of the
process with?so far as the practical purposes of the investigation require?
the regularity of a reflex. Furthermore, emotional disturbances, however
slight, are immediately reflected in the disorganization of the pattern. The
records permit of both qualitative and quantitative interpretations.

Beginning with investigations of the mass affect in normal individuals
and in criminals, Luria experimented with complexes, conflicts and neuroses
artificially produced by hypnosis in normal individuals, and also with conflicts
in true apliasiacs. Using neurotic subjects, he then attempted to determine
the levels of complexity at which disorganization might occur. The levels of
complexity from the genetic point of view were studied in children. The
nature of the functional barrier between the receptor and the motor phases
of behavior was then made the object of experimentation. Finally, an investigation of the factors underlying control of behavior completed the picture.
Although statistical analyses are frequently included, the clinical method of
presentation predominates.

For the investigation of mass affect, the author took advantage of an
examination conducted in the USSR in 1924 to eliminate from the universities all but the most adequate (and soviet minded) students. Since the
examination would result in either the continuance or abrupt termination of
studies and ambitions, the situation was one arousing intense emotional
tension. The subjects were taken directly from the line awaiting examination.
Some were retested immediately after the examination. The experiment consisted of a controlled association test after Jung in which the subject gave a
pressure with his right hand at the moment of the response. In the group
of words were included some considered critical because of their reference to
the situation. The records show both the diffuse affect and its particular
concentration on the critical words. Disturbances occurred both with reference to time and the qualitative nature of the curves. Controls were used
and statistical as well as clinical treatment included. The experiment was
repeated upon students just before an ordinary examination.

The affect in criminals was investigated on murderers tested immediately
upon arrest, frequently before questioning, and in some cases at various times
during the course of the trial. As with the first group, the evidences of
diffused and concentrated foci of affect are clearly shown in the motor records.
The author points to the possibility of using the method of critical words on
suspects immediately after arrest for the purpose of diagnosis of guilt. Since
only the guilty party would?under those circumstances?be acquainted with
the details, the non-guilty suspect, although showing the effects of the diffused
affect connected with the arrest, would not show the concentrated foci of
affect connected with the critical words.

Artificial complexes were induced by hypnosis. A course of action opposed to the personality of the individual was suggested as accepted. When
the suggestion itself had been accepted, the subject was awakened with posthypnotic amnesia and given both the controlled association test with critical
words, and also a free association test?experimental psychoanalysis. The
results are most interesting and merit particular study.

By hypnotically suggesting the desire to think of names of particular
objects and later using free association, he created artificial compulsions.
Inhibited compulsions with conflict were produced by hypnotically suggesting
the desire to repeat certain words with the further suggestion of inability
to do so.

With neurotic subjects Luria then endeavored to determine the levels of
the conflicting processes by employing reaction patterns graded in complexity.
These, beginning with the simplest, were (1) simple rhythmical pressures, (2)
simple reactions to a signal, (3) slow motor reaction, (4) controlled association, (o) simple judgments on the presentation of words, followed by a series
in which the definitions were to be absurd. Interesting cases are presented
in which the disorganization occurred at different levels with different individuals.
The author next considers the genetic aspect of the organization and
disintegration of the reactive process, employing with children of various
ages the experiments of rhythmical reactions, reactions to a signal, experiments with slow movements, and reactions of choice (using a special apparatus
designed to give a quantitative record), together with drawings having a
neutral and emotional content. The records included give evidence of fairly
definite levels of organization and control arid of corresponding levels at which
disorganization of the pattern occurs in the genetic series.

In dealing with the nature of the functional barrier, Luria devised experiments covering the condition where the excitation aroused is excessive,
where the functional barrier is weak due to congenital deficiency, where the
barrier is weak per accidens in normal individuals, and where there has been
injury of the higher mental processes. The first was demonstrated with
neurotics, the second with the mentally retarded, the third with normal individuals fatigued by the day's work, and the last by aphasiacs. The weakening
of the functional barrier and the consequent immediate reflection in the motor
system of the excitation are clearly shown in the records.

Despite the title, the investigations deal not so much with the nature of
the conflict as with the nature of the disorganization produced by the conflict.
Disorganization is seen in the disappearance of the reaction pattern and the
transformation of the excitation into a process of diffused character due to
the fact that the motor setting has a tendency to be directly realized. This
immediate passage of excitation from receptor to motor process is the result
of the inadequacy of what the author terms the functional barrier. The
condition of inadequacy of the barrier arises when an excessive amount of
excitation is aroused (particularly seen in neurotics), or where the barrier
itself is weak, due to lack of development (in very young children and the
mentally retarded), or to the normal weakening in fatigue, or to organic
destruction (as in aphasia).

Concerning the nature of the functional barrier, Luria points to the
higher mental processes, particularly internal speech.

Although Luria has by no means solved the chief problems of abnormal
psychology, his work is an exceedingly welcome relief from the usual writings
in this field where the imaginative hypotheses of the authors are paralleled
only by those of the patients. His experiments are ingenious and, appearing
particularly at a moment when attempts to use other laboratory instruments
in the analysis and diagnosis of emotional states have proven inadequate,
should be particularly stimulating to psychologists working in the abnormal
field. Of special interest is his work dealing with experimental psychoanalysis
and the methods suggested will undoubtedly be used by investigators to
examine the validity of the analysts' claims. The book is in no sense popularized and will find few readers outside the field of professional psychologists.
Thomas J. Snee
University of Pennsylvania
