Twenty-Four Cases of Acute Epidemic Encephalitis
=================================================

:Author: Dorothy Kern Hallowell, A.M.,

Child Study Department, Children's Aid Society, Philadelphia
While at the Philadelphia General Hospital in the capacity of
psychologist, I had occasion to examine a considerable number of
children in various stages of acute and post epidemic encephalitis
who were under study and treatment in the Neuropsychiatry
Clinic. Dr Franklin G. Ebaugh has published a psychiatric and
neurological study of seventeen of these cases, fourteen of which I
am including in this study. The other ten cases have not to my
knowledge been reported.

Since many of these children presented acute social problems,
not only to the school, but also to their own families, it seems worth
while to report the results of the study made of their reactions and
mental ability as shown in complete psychological examinations.
We would almost expect what is presumably a germ disease, directly affecting the central nervous system, to produce some
changes, temporary or permanent, in the behavior of the afflicted,
and this study was made in the attempt to ascertain whether the
psychological examinations would throw any light on any of the
behavior disorders; also to discover whether there is any similiarity
of reaction patterns, and especially whether the encephalitis permanently lessens the mentality of the child.

Acute Symptoms
----------------

Considerable study of epidemic encephalitis has been made,
and the findings have scientifically and unscientifically been reported in various articles, so many already are familiar with the
outstanding symptoms of this disease. But for those whose knowledge may be vague or confused, I will outline briefly the principal
signs of which the physician recognizes and makes his diagnosis of
acute epidemic encephalitis.

Many times the acute stages are so mild that the disease passes
by unrecognized, and only when the grave after effects are noticed,
is a very careful history obtained, and the diagnosis of epidemic
encephalitis made. In other cases, the acute symptoms are very
marked and the residual practically negative. During the acute
period, in various combinations occur the symptoms of headaches,
fever, dizziness, and lethargy of from one day to several weeks.
This lethargic period is followed by insomnia which may be marked
for a year or more afterward. Visual disturbances, as diplopia
and ptosis, choreiform movements, facial and other twitchings,
delirium, hallucinations, delusions, convulsions, and oversalivation
are other cardinal symptoms associated directly with the nervous
system. Frequently encephalitis is associated with influenza. As
to the neurological sequel?, we find persisting for as long as three
or four years, choreiform movements, twitchings in the sleep, paralysis agitans, partial paralysis of the limbs, internal strabismus,
irregular pupils and over salivation.

Behavior Sequelae
------------------

To the psychologist, because his aid is so often sought in explanation of non-conformed responses, the behavior sequelae are
perhaps most important and interesting. Therefore I will attempt
to put before the reader in some detail, the malbehavior of these
children, and later discuss the actual test findings. Following the
acute period, appear, sometimes suddenly, nocturnal restlessness,
hysterical tendencies, epileptoid attacks, overactivity, impulsiveness, over affectionateness, obscenity, and general incorrigibility.
In other cases there are no behavior abnormalities resulting.
The decided change frequently noted in reaction patterns is a
rather unique phenomenon. From well behaved acceptable children to those whom the regular school class excludes and the parents are helpless to control, is not an uncommon story. "We find
this especially marked in cases No. 9, 10, 12. Nathan (case No.
12), had a record of normal behavior at school and at home previous
to his attack when eight years old, which altho the acute symptoms
were severe enough to be readily recalled by the mother, were undiagnosed by the family physician and the residual hysterical attacks treated as epilepsy. After the illness there was a total change
in the boy's disposition and character. He became noisy, abusive,
impulsive and destructive. Many times was he untruthful. He
begged for money on the streets altho the parents were well to do
and supplied liberal spending money. In addition to hysterical
attacks which generally were brought on as an avoiding reaction
when any disagreeable duties were at hand, the boy once tried to
jump from a rapidly moving automobile, and once attempted selfstrangulation, altho he denied wanting to die.
Charles (case No. 9), who came from a stable, lower middle
class home, illustrates this same total change in disposition. School
progress had been normal, the sixth grade reached by 11 years, and
there was no report of conduct disorder. After the epidemic
encephalitis, the boy showed marked emotional instability, fought
on the least provocation, told many queer tales, and was unable to
concentrate on his lessons. So unmanageable was he in the regular
classroom that the principal transferred him to a disciplinary
school.

Thomas (case No. 10), was another boy whose conduct after the
attack forced the authorities to transfer him to a disciplinary
school. Deceitfulness and fighting, and what the mother described
as "just deviltry," were the outstanding difficulties.

In none of these three cases were there any environmental influences found which were at all accountable for the new difficulties,
although very careful social investigations were made in each instance. Neither did the psychiatric or social studies explain why
the disorders took the form they did.

With some of the other children, delinquent tendencies or
obvious temperamental difficulties had existed previous to the epidemic encephalitis, but the disease seemed to aggravate the predispositions. Anna (case No. 3), was always quick tempered, high
strung and difficult to discipline. However, after her attack in
1918 when eleven years old, she became much more unmanageable,
both at home and at school, and as was the case with many of the
children whom we observed, became sexually precocious. Her delinquency was so marked that she finally reached the district Probation Officer.
lone (case No. 7), probably always had neurotic traits, but
following influenza with two weeks lethargic period, which seemed
to warrant the diagnosis of epidemic encephalitis, the child showed
a marked domineering, selfish disposition, was very whiny, did not
get along with her brothers and sisters, and was extremely destructive with her toys.
Victor (case No. 14), came from a congested Italian home,
with very little if any, intelligent disciplinary training. Probably
"naughtiness" would be an expected result of such an environment.
After the attack of encephalitis at the age of 7, however, the boy's
tendencies to incorrigibility showed a decided increase; they took
a more violent turn and developed along the lines of sexual precocity. Aside from extreme overactivity and quarrelsomeness,
which was probably more noticeable because the home was so small,
the parents, after Victor had attempted to stab several members of
his family with a carving knife, were terrified as to what mood
would next be given vent to. The little boy would run up to
strange girls on the street, throw his arms around them and try to
kiss them. On one occasion he attempted intercourse. Another
abnormal display of this precocity was sexual misuse of a cat which
resulted in the animal's death.

George (case No. 15), was another youngster whom the social
investigation seemed to show had neurotic traits from an early
age, and whose mother was "easy prey" for gratification of his
various whims and desires. But the encephalitis seemed to greatly
aggravate undesirable patterns. He showed streaks of marked
cruelty, tried to stab another boy; was very unpopular with his
playmates because of extreme "bossiness." Not infrequently
George had periods of marked excitement, which took the form of
yelling, or attempting to jump from the window, or psychical blindness or deafness. The psychical deafness was truly hysterical in
character, occuring when something unpleasant or undesirable,
often corrective discipline, was trying to be effected. After patient
struggling, the school was finally forced to place him in a disciplinary class.
In order not to give the impression that most of the encephalitic aftermath is marked behavior disorder, let me mention some
cases where this is not true. Hazel (case No. 1), a colored girl
whose encephalitis occurred when 7 years old and whom we saw 6
years later, never presented a behavior problem, and only sought
medical aid because of various nervous complaints. Warren (case
No. 17), was examined over a year after his attack, and had developed no behavior irregularities. His residual complaints were
restricted to neurological symptoms. Carl (case No. 21), who
probably had one of the most severe attacks of any of the children
in the group of 24 studied, had very marked neurological after
effects, but not the slightest abberanee along behavior lines. John
(case No. 23), a little colored boy of 8, had during the acute period,
serious abnormalities which necessitated committing him to the
Psychopathic Ward of the hospital, but after several weeks care
he seemed to return to his former normal behavior, and now, after
a period of over one year has elapsed, still presents no conduct
problem.

The records of these boys and girls, although not by any means
covering all varieties of post-encephalitic behavior, do help us, I
think, to isolate certain types of non-conformity as possible ensephalitic disorders, which should be referred to clinics where complete psychiatric and social studies will be made.
Psychological Studies?Method

The ages of the twenty-four cases ranged, at time of examination, from 2 to 19 years. The examinations were made from 6 years
to 3 months after the onset of the disease.
6 years after onset 1 ease
5 years after onset 1 ease
4 years after onset 2 cases
3 years after onset 6 cases
2 years after onset 3 cases
1-2 years after onset 3 cases
less 1 year after onset 8 cases
In all cases except the two babies, Doris (case No. 20) and
Isadore (case No. 6) a complete examination was given, including
a series of performance tests selected as the case seemed to demand
from the Witmer formboard, Witmer cylinders, Healy A, Healy
Gwyn triangles, Dearborn formboard, Porteus mazes or Young's
slot maze A, memory span (audito-vocal and visual audito-vocal for
digits forward, and audito-vocal for digits reversed, and auditovocal for syllables), and supplemented by the abbreviated Stanford Revision of the Binet tests. With the two babies the Kuhlmann tests were the basis of estimate. Each examination was conducted in a quiet room, with only the child, and sometimes his
mother, and the writer (as examiner) present. The usual time per
examination was one hour. The topical tables give the names of the
eases, the date of the examination, the date of and age at onset of
the disease, acute symptoms, psychiatric and neurological sequelae
at the time the psychological examinations were made. It seemed
interesting and most important to compare, if possible, the mentality before and after the encephalitic attack. There was, however,
no accurate way to obtain information of mental ability previous to
illness, so the varied statements as given by parents and schools had
to be accepted for what they were worth, and hence nothing more
than a rough estimate could be made.

The psychological diagnoses attempt to summarize the entire
findings and give an understanding of the child's complex of
abilities. The outstanding reactions are noted. The latest progress
reports on the cases, obtained from the psychiatrist as recently as
December 1924, were based on his personal observations after following the children from their initial clinic visit. Unfortunately
some children did not continue under care, so their progress cannot be reported. I have tried by means of the tables to give not
only a picture of each case, but also to put the material in form so
that any one case can readily be compared with another and with
the whole group. The tables probably give sufficient data for the
majority of cases so the detailed histories and psychological findings of only 7 cases which are considered typical and especially interesting will be given.
Special Case Studies
Edith (case No. 4), was 5 years and 8 months at time of examination, and the onset of the encephalitis had been at 2 years,
with influenza followed by delirium and 5 days of lethargy. I believe that we can trust the report of the mother, who was unusually dependable and intelligent, that mental development until
2 years had been absolutely normal. This opinion was the result of
experience with a number of older brothers and sisters who had all
grown up and progressed well in school. Following the period of
illness, the child was very restless, easily agitated, and the usual
disciplinary measures had little effect. Regular and steady training had brought almost no improvement. In a kindergarten class
she could not adjust to the other children, and accomplished nothing of the regular work. During the psychological examination
at the Clinic Edith was distractible to the extreme. With constant urging to persistence and with some help three trials of the
Witmer formboard were accomplished, but discrimination of the
various shape blocks was poor, and more at the level at which most
ZV2 to 3 years olds fall. The circle was easily placed in its hole,
but with star, triangles and cross, poor muscular control and coordination were especially marked. After the formboard test, the
child cried and resisted all efforts to obtain further performance.
The mother reported that this lack of persistence and the instability were the type behavior she had been trying to cope with for
the past three years.

The entire picture presented was that of a development not
uiore than low grade, or probably idio-imbecile. Since there has
been no improvement in mental development or emotional balance
during a period of over four years, the psychiatrist gives little hope
a favorable prognosis.

Jessie (case No. 5), was 10 years 4 months old when examined
4 years after her attack. The symptoms of fever, delirium, three
Weeks lethargy and visual disturbances unquestionably warranted
the diagnosis of epidemic encephalitis. Ever since the child has
been restless, overactive and very difficult to manage. Her display
?f affection was out of all proportion?she would throw her arms
around and kiss people whom she had just met. While in the hospital for a period of study, the youngster upset the whole ward by
her boistrous and uncontrolled behavior. The mother was Italian,
most faithful and willing to follow all the physician's suggestions,
but not very intelligent in planning possible methods of securing
better behavior.

If the mother's judgment can be relied upon, Jessie's school
Work of one term had been entirely satisfactory before the encephalitis. Since then attendance has been very irregular, and this
Undoubtedly affected the results of the Binet tests, where the mental
age and upper limit was 9 years, and the I.Q. 87. The reading test
at the 10 year level was a complete failure, and the vocabulary was
just passed at the 8 year level. The Italian environment may have
contributed to the difficulty along language lines. The time results with the performance tests were somewhat variable, ranging
from lower 10 to upper 75 percentile, but as to quality, there was
Uothing unusual. Attention factors were good thruout, the work
Was planfully attacked, altho somewhat slowly executed. Memory
sPan in all its aspects, visual and auditory for digits forward,
digits reversed and syllable span, was well up to age median. As a
whole the tests results showed nothing unusual as to quality, and
on the quantitative side the diagnosis is probably lower average,
which seems to have been her level before the encephalitis.
Jessie had the good fortune in 1923 to be admitted to the school
class at Episcopal Hospital, of which more will be said later.
Under the steady, even regime and discipline, there was great improvement. Her school work was of about 3B quality, age IIV2
years. She was usually slow and the teacher felt not more than dull
normal. Emotional instability is still very evident to anyone who
sees the child over any length of time. Little things irritate and
upset her, and the tears come easily. But the marked overaffectionateness which was so noticeable, has either disappeared or been
suppressed, and her behavior is more normal and tractable. Since
returning home, however, after the Episcopal Hospital experiment
ceased, she again was such a problem to the family that they have
asked the Juvenile Court for placement.

Isadore (case No. 6), was 3!/2 years when referred to the Clinic
by a social agency. The family are Polish, and have standards as
good as most of their social group in South Philadelphia. Eleven
siblings all seemed normal mentally. During the middle part of
pregnancy, the mother had a rather severe attack of influenza,
otherwise the prenatal history was negative, and the birth was full
time and normal. Following birth the baby slept continually for
eight days, only being awake during feedings. This apparent
lethargy was followed by 11 weeks insomnia with almost continual
crying. The baby had, at time of examination, never learned to
walk nor talk. He showed signs of recognizing his mother and the
one sister who had considerable part in his care. This recognition
of two members of the family was about the only evidence of any
mental development. Stolid, indifferent, unalert was Isadore and
by the Kuhlmann standards he did not reach the 12 months level,
and seemed to present a picture of typical idiocy. Altho the
diagnosis of epidemic encephalitis cannot certainly be made, when
presented at a large pediatric clinic, the diagnosis was not refuted.
It seems that either in utero or, immediately after birth, the disease attacked the central nervous system, leaving its permanent
mark.

Nicholas (case No. 11), was 19 years old when examined and
had for the past three years been suffering from the after effects
of epidemic encephalitis. The boy came from a congested home in
the Italian district. On the charges of truancy, vagrancy and
using dope, he had been committed to a reform school. While
there the pronounced symptoms noted in the table appeared. Of
all the cases observed in this group, the neurological sequelae are
most pronounced. There is a typical Parkinsonian or paralysis
agitans syndrome, with the mask like facial expression and tremor
?f the hands. In addition, lachrymation is very apparent. The
hoy's demeanor is that of extreme slowness and laziness. With the
Performance tests the tremor was very evident and naturally prevented good control and coordination so that the time results were
considerably below median. However the quality of the work was
quite fair and the Dearborn formboard showed especially good
comprehension and grasp of the problem. The score of the Porteus
maze test was 11 y2 years, lack of foresight seemed to prevent better
score. Memory span for digits forward and reverse was not above
the 10 year median. With the Binet tests the I.Q. was 64. The
10 year tests were all passed, but at the 12 year level the only success was the picture interpretation. It is evident that the boy has
a definite handicap with language and abstract concepts, but it is
very probable that intellectually he has always been slow. The
encephalitis in this case does not seem to have lessened the general
intelligence level, but has slowed down all the motor responses,
thus lessening efficiency in the direction where he probably had the
greatest competency. The prognosis after long hospital treatment,
seems so poor that an application is on file at the Home for
Incurables.

The actual test findings seemed to warrant considering him a
doubtful or borderline case, and while there does not seem to be
any chance, because of the neurological sequelae that social competency can be hoped for, still as far as the actual mental ability
goes, Nicholas would very probably have met the problems of a
simple rather routine existence fairly well.

Nathan (case No. 12), from the behavior angle was extremely
interesting. At time of examination in April 1922 he was 10 years
and 8 months old. The onset of the encephalitis had been just two
years before, with acute delirium, facial twitchings, diplopia, and
later insomnia. Earlier in this paper, the boy s serious behavior
changes, which so distracted his family and school, are described.
Previous to April 1922, Nathan had an excellent school record and
was promoted every term. When he first came to the Clinic it was
for consultation advice regarding "epilepsy," which had developed
since the encephalitis, and had not responded to a regular course of
treatment. Altho the boy's attacks did have resemblance to petit
mal, careful description and finally observance of a "spell,"
changed the diagnosis to hysteria, an occasional residual of encephalitis. Leon (case No. 8), presented a similar history of
hysterical attacks.

A typical hysterical attack was brought on during the psychological examination. Nathan was first given the Witmer formboard. Altho done a little slowly, qualitatively the performance
was good. When presented with the cylinder board, it seemed as if
the boy realized a real problem was before him, and for some reason
did not want to exert himself, so as an avoiding reaction, gradually
developed an hysterical condition to see if Examiner or his mother,
who was in the room, would let him stop work. He first complained
that his hands were getting stiff, which made replacing the blocks
difficult. The Examiner paid no further attention to his complaints than to urge continuance. With such motivation we are
not surprised that the first trial of the cylinders was not solved
alone. In 3 minutes, all the blocks were placed but only three correct. Teaching was required. The second trial was completed in
145 seconds and the third in 117 seconds both of which are quite
poor for age. The solution was entirely planless.

Healy A was not completed in 5 minutes, so the solution was
shown. The second trial was done in 14 seconds, which indicates
good imageability. Healy B was fair?time 120 seconds; Gwyn
triangles 185 seconds or lower 10 percentile. Numerous times while
working with these games, Nathan repeated his complaint of stiff
hands. When he did not receive sufficient consideration, he apparently planned a more radical onslaught. A severe headache
was developed and he began rapid puffing movements and rolling
his tongue. This was during the Porteus maze tests, where years
5, 6, 7, and 8 were failures. Technically the Examiner should not
have proceeded, but feeling sure that failure was due to emotional
causes only, the higher levels were given with years 9, 10 and 11
passed on second trial each. The 12 and 14 year tests were failures. Having so often witnessed such attacks and the physician
having recently explained their real nature, the mother lost her
Patience, upbraided poor Nathan, and left the room. Like a flash
the spell was gone and not another abnormal symptom was shown
while the tests were being completed. Memory span, audito vocal
and visual for digits was 7, and reverse span 4, which is entirely
UP to average.

With the Binet tests, a good rating was made, basal age 10
years, upper limit 12, mental age 11 years and 8 months, and I.Q.
109. An especially good grasp was shown for school work and life
situations. There seemed to be little doubt that the youngster has
ability at least up to average and probably above. It would have
been very interesting to retest him under more normal conditions,
but the opportunity did not present itself.

In this case we seem to have ample proof that the encephalitis
has not lessened the boy's real ability or intelligence, but the resulting emotional instability has been so marked that proper
functioning is far from being approached. The parents are intelligent Jews and have tried to follow the recommendations given by
the Clinic. Hospital residence of about a month, with the regular
treatment of spinal drainage and serum, seemed to effect no
Permanent improvement. He is impossible in the school room and
tormenting at home. The family were finally advised to try placement in a reform school or a strict military institution to see if
strenuous disciplinary training would clear up some of this behavior, but they have been unwilling to carry out this plan. It is
lnipossible to give a prognosis as to eventual adjustment.
Dora (case No. 16), is a very grave after problem of encephalitis with outlook for recovery very doubtful. At time of examJUation she was 11 years old, the onset having been 15 months
earlier. The home conditions were very unsatisfactory. The
Mother, being forced to work, Dora, when not in school, had to
spend her time in a day nursery. The father had deserted 9 years
Previously. From a social agency who had known the family, it
appears that he had a violent temper, a peculiar disposition, was a
trouble maker" and a generally unsatisfactory workman. The
Mother as a girl had been incorrigible and placed in a reform
school, where she did make a good record. Her oldest child is said
t? be illegitimate, and it is doubtful if she was ever formally marked to Dora's father. When we knew Dora, a rather elderly man
was living with the mother, apparently as a paramour. This record
of instability on the part of the parents might very possibly have
contributed to the child's inherent instability.

Following an acute illness with 16 days lethargic period, she
became extremely overactive, and generally incorrigible. Altho
she had always been a nervously active child with delinquent
tendencies, and two years before the encephalitis had had intercourse with two boys and was a masturbator, after the attack these
proclivities increased. She masturbated to excess and tried to teach
the habit to the other nursery children. She was domineering, resented any restraint, and the day nursery could not correct any of
her bad sex habits, nor could she respond to any form of training.
As an aid to understanding the child better, the nursery referred
her to the Child Study Department of the Children's Aid Society?
and she was examined there June 1921 by Miss Eleanor Bremer,
assistant psychologist. The results of this examination were consistently poor,?Sequin formboard was lower 20 percentile, Healy
A not completed which is 0 percentile, and the Porteus mazes results were but 6 years. The Binet tests showed a wide scattering,
which is often noted with psychopathic cases. The basal age was 5
years, upper limit 10, mental age 6 years and 8 months, and I.Q66. From the actual test results, her mentality seemed of doubtful
level, but the way the problems were approached was also very significant. Dora reacted against practically all suggestions that were
made to her. Whenever questions became at all difficult, she would
say, "I don't know," or "I won't," and if the matter was pressed
she would begin to cry. She had no perseverance, would give up
immediately, and it was almost impossible to hold her to any test
which required attention over a fairly long period of time. Great
impulsiveness was displayed during the interview, and she would
rush ahead before directions could be completed.

Before illness the child's conduct in school had been satisfactory, altho her work was of poor quality, at 10 years of age she
had only progressed to 2B grade. But after the encephalitis, the
school was forced to transfer her to a special class. It was just
about this time, when 11 years old, that a re-examination was made
at the Neuropsychiatric Clinic. There was a marked improvement
in stability over the earlier examination at the Children's Aid
Society, and some little improvement in ability. The Witmer
formboard performance was lower 25 percentile. The first trial of
the Witmer cylinders was 76 seconds with 11 errors. After being
taught, the next trial was 139 seconds with no final errors, and the
third trial was 69 seconds, which last result is about median for 8
years or lower 25 percentile for age. Healy A was not completed.
The attempt was planless, impossible moves were tried and repeated. Gwyn triangles were median for age. Porteus maze test
received a score of 8y2 years,?it entirely lacked plan and foresight. Memory span for digits on auditory presentation was 5,
with 6 on 4 repetitions. Visual span was the same, and reverse
digit span only 3, all of which memory span results are subnormal.
"With the Binet tests the basal age was 7 years, upper limit 12,
mental age 7 years, 10 months, and I.Q. 71. Dora seemed still of
doubtful or borderline mentality. Quantitatively and qualitatively
her work was inferior. There was plenty of initiative shown during
the examination, but very little persistence of attention. Restlessness and planlessness were outstanding. The Episcopal Hospital
can add another chapter to this story, with very little change in
conduct report. Dora was placed with them in the summer of
1923. Her behavior at times was hyperactive to say the least,?she
broke windows and tore the nurse's uniform off twice. The inciting
cause for these outbreaks seemed obscure. Following such periods,
which are genuinely maniacal in character, are depressed moods,
thus forming the usual cycle. The school has done less for this
child than any in their group. Apparently little progress had been
made along academic lines, for the teacher does not feel her real
proficiency was above 2 A grade. The opinion that the only eventual outcome would have to be a mental hospital has been fulfilled
and Dora is now a committed patient in Philadelphia Hospital for
Cental Diseases. As far as our history can help us, Dora's acute
Period was no more severe than that of many of the other 23 children whom we observed. One wonders whether the girl inherited
such an unstable makeup that her nervous system was unable to
withstand the additional stain of the epidemic encephalitis. The
disease did not seem to have lowered her general mental ability,
hut has disordered its functioning and given a most unbalanced
emotional condition.

A very unusual case was Carl (No. 21). He was examined 7
months after onset of encephalitis, and was 11 years and 9 months
?ld. The acute period had been severe with muscular twitchings
and choreiform movements, diplopia, and delirium lasting 3 weeks,
and several times he spoke of suicide. When brought home from
the hospital, the boy apparently did not recognize his parents, or at
least he could not call them by name. Everything in his home
seemed strange, he had to be told what a chair was, etc. No longer
could be read and write, altho before his illness he was in 4 B
grade, and very bright in all studies. He showed a distinct aphasia
for everything preceding the encephalitis. Physical improvement
was gradual. There were no twitchings of any kind. His behavior
was normal, and he showed ability to talk and reason about things
as an 11 year child should. He remembered everything after the
attack, and if he heard a new thing once could remember it a second time. There were no over nervous or abnormal signs.
With a history of such a wide spread memory wipeout, it was
intensely interesting to see what the psychological examination
would show. The Witmer formboard was done slowly, but with no
errors. The cylinders were median for time and qualitatively
good. The best trial was 44 seconds. Healy A results were 34
seconds, which is upper 60 percentile. The first trial of the Dearborn formboard was 130 seconds, second 42. This showed quite
excellent grasp of the problem, and was above median for 11 years.
Memory span for digits auditorily was 7, 8 on 4 repetitions; visual
span 8; and reverse 4, which is a normal span.

The design blocks indicated excellent visual imagery. The
Binet results did not show the boy's potential ability, but were interesting because of the handicaps which were revealed. The basal
age was 9 years. At the 10 year level, vocabulary score was 32.
We could not find out whether knowledge of these words was retained or relearned. Absurdities were passed and also social comprehensions. Only 57 words were named in 3 minutes, showing the
boy's characteristic slowness in language responses. The reading test
was not given here, as the abbreviated Binet form was used, but
when tested Carl knew the alphabet which he had relearned, but
he knew no words. He quite pathetically said, ''I can't read
although they say I used to read." This reading disability of
course caused failure with the dissected sentences. At the 12 year
level the fables were well interpreted, and pictures were described,
but no other successes. Twelve years was the upper limit. This
gave a mental age of 10 years, 5 months, and an I.Q. of 88.
Attention factors were normal. Excellent method was used in
solving the performance tests, and no defect in visual or auditory
memory was noted. Abstract reasoning and judgment were quite
normal. In making an analytical diagnosis, the only factor below
average was speed of execution, which held for motor movements.
but was more noticeable in language work where there appeared to
be a definite blockage in association. The transient memory wipeout seemed to be an aphasic thing. The non-recognition of his parents was most likely an aphasia symptom, but it could also have
been a temporary destruction in the visual psychic area. It is
probable that the difficulty was all of one kind, a break in the association pathways between the visual psychic area in the occipital
lobe and the motor language area or Broca's area in the preRolandic region. The opinion is that the loss of memory was produced by the encephalitis being accompanied by an inflammatory
condition with edema, which struck a restricted brain area, and
that the brain, if brought to autopsy, would probably show some
definite pathology.

The boy's mind was so keen that he could quite possibly have
built up very rapidly new association tracks, or it is also possible
that the old pathways were brought again into function. The latest
report is that Carl is back in his regular grade, has his former
facility in speaking English, can speak Swedish again, and there
are absolutely no after effects. The excellent home conditions may
have helped the rapid recovery.

General Psychological Findings

Let us now summarize the findings and see what common
features the 24 cases present. As to the epidemic encephalitis
Permanently lessening the mentality of the child, what did we find ?
Three cases, or 121/2%, were definitely diagnosed as feebleminded,
attributed to the encephalitis, with no chance for normality being
attained. Edith (case No. 4), is an idio-imbecile; Isadore (case
No. 6), is an idiot; and Doris (case No. 20), is also an idiot. In
these three cases the disease occurred in either the first or second
year. Hence it would seem to appear that if epidemic encephalitis
occurs during the first two years of infancy, feeblemindedness is
aPt to result. The central nervous system still seems to be too
sensitive to withstand the attack of the encephalitic germ. The
other 21 children, with onset at 3 to 16 years, as far as our earlier
reports form a reliable comparative basis for diagnosis, seemed to
suffer no change in degree of mentality.

As to similiarities of reaction patterns shown during the psychological examinations which denoted some emotional imbalance,
or other unusual condition, we found hyperkinesis in some cases,
and extreme slowness in others. In 11 cases (Nos. 2, 3, 4, 9, 12, 13,
15, 16, 18, 19, 22), or almost 50% overactivity or restlessness were
apparent. This sometimes took the form of motor fidgetiness.
George (case No. 19), was almost continually playing with his
necktie. Ernest (case No. 22), was twisting locks of hair or picking his fingers. Other children squirmed unduly in their chairs.
Then again the restlessness seemed not to show in particular overt
movements, but in lack of concentration of attention or distractibility. Charles (case No. 18), showed this trait?his general ability
was quite up to average, but at. times during the Binet tests, his
mind would wander. This was especially true between questions.
It seemed as if he had no ability to put himself at ease or relax, but
rather as if something within kept him continually active. Edith
(case No. 4), was an extreme case of distractibility and overactivity?we could not even put thru a complete test, I remember another child, Sophie (case No. 12 in Dr Ebaugh's study), who was
so disturbed on her visit to the Clinic that a single glance convinced
one that it was futile even to attempt formal tests. Opportunity
did not present itself for further examination, but she was one of
the children seen at Episcopal Hospital. A marked improvement
had taken place, her behavior was quite acceptable, school progress
was fair, and the physician has returned her to a regular class
where she is adjusting quite well.

In three cases or 121/2 per cent (Nos. 11, 17, 21), unusual slowness was evident which seemed traceable to the epidemic encephalitis, because the neurological sequel? indicated motor difficulty.
Several other children showed slowness of movements, but there was
nothing in the general condition to make us feel that the encephalitis was contributory, it seemed that the lack of normal speed was
simply an innate characteristic.

In 7 cases (Nos. 1, 5, 8, 10, 14, 23, 24), or 29 per cent, no abnormalities were noted during the mental tests. Hazel (case No.
1), and John (case No. 23), at the time of examination presented
no psychiatric symptoms, altho at times Hazel gave evidence of
neurological symptoms by choreiform movements. But from their
general conditions we should have been surprised to note any
qualitative abnormalities. The other five, Jessie (case No. 5), Leon
(case No. 8), Thomas (case No. 10), Victor (case No. 14), and Emol
(case No. 24) did present real behavior problems, but apparently
they had emotional stability over longer periods of time than those
eleven cases where hyperactivity was noticeable during the psychological examinations.
Thus according to this study, the psychological examination in
71 per cent of epidemic encephalitis cases would seem to reveal
some abnormality, either feeblemindedness, hyperkinesis, or abnormal slowness. It would be necessary to make a much wider
study of encephalitic after effects to determine if this generally
holds. It is quite possible that many individuals in the community
make perfect recoveries and consequently do not seek the aid of
clinics such as the Neuropsychiatric Clinic at the Philadelphia
General Hospital, so that our proportion of emotional disturbances
and other disorders may be entirely too high.

Treatment

After learning of the disorders resulting from epidemic
encephalitis, we naturally ask, what can be done to cure them ?
It is chiefly within the province of medical science to carry
on the investigations which will make it possible to answer this
question. The syndrome of the disease is so new, the actual germ,
if epidemic encephalitis is indeed a germ infection, has not been
isolated, and hence little has been definitely accomplished. Meanwhile supplementing medical treatment are to be recommended the
nsual measures of hygiene,?rest, good food, regular living habits,
steady and even disciplinary training, and non-exciting environmental conditions. These recommendations are indeed no different
than those which any unstable child showing neurotic or abnormal
niental functioning needs.

An effort to grapple with the problem of treatment, institutionally, was recently undertaken in Philadelphia at the Episcopal
Hospital, where they attempted to bring together the best medical
and educational service along with careful, routinized living conditions. Through the courtesy of Dr Gladys Gr. Ide, Director of
Special Education, Philadelphia Public Schools, I was privileged to
visit this combined hospital and school. In the summer of 1923 the
plans matured, and gradually eleven children were accepted. Five
?f these are girls and six boys, all of pre-adolescent age, the oldest
being 12. The children lived at the hospital in a special building
assigned to them. A regular routine existence was lead and the
best physical care given. All had complete eye studies, and some
minor operations like tonsilectomy and circumcision. Most were
subjected to a course of serum treatments. Added to this physical
care was educational treatment. A regular public school teacher
was assigned to the group, and in a fitted up class room, regular
sessions were held. A visit to the class showed a little group of
children, who over a period of an hour and a half, showed reactions
no different than a normal group. A description of the early beginnings of the class with continual fighting among themselves,
window breaking, and such restlessness that the group could not all
sit still while the teacher counted to five, could hardly be believed a
few months later. The school treatment, patiently conducted, with
much individual help, was largely academic, with the attempt to
cover regular grade work in as far as each child was able. Nearly
every child improved tremendously, and several were able to return
to regular classes. Unfortunately the experiment, because of financial reasons, could not continue, but complete information of this
type study which is shortly to be published by the psychiatrist
and the psychologist in charge, should be very valuable in the
future treatment of epidemic encephalitis.

Bibliography
---------------

Ebaugh, Franklin G., M.D. Neuropsychiatry Sequelae of Acute Epidemic
Encephalitis in Children. Amer. Journal
Diseases of Children, Vol. 25, Feb. 1923, pp.
89-97.
Humtstone, Henry J. Some Aspects of the Memory Span Test?A
study in Associability. Psychological Clinic
Press, 1917.
Leaming, Rebecca Tests and Norms for Vocational Guidance at
the 15-year-old level, Psychological Clinic, Vol.
14, No. 7, Dec. 1922, pp. 193-220.
Paschal, Franklin C. Witmer Cylinder Test. Hershey Press, 1918.
Pintner and Patterson A Scale of Performance Tests. Appleton & Co.
1917.
Porteus, S.D. Porteus Tests, The Vineland Revision, Published Training School at Vineland, N.J. No.
16, 1919.
Starr, Anna Spiesman The Diagnostic Value of the Audito-Vocal
Digit Memory Span. Psychological Clinic,
Vol. 15, Nos. 3, 4, May, June 1923, pp. 61-84.
ACUTE EPIDEMIC ENCEPHALITIS 185
Terman, Lewis M. The Measurement of Intelligence. Houghton,
Mifflin Co. 1916.
Young, Herman H. The Witmer Formboard. Psychol. Clinic, Vol.
10, No. 4, June 1916, pp. 93-111.
Young, Herman H. Slot Maze A. Psychological Clinic. Vol. 14,
Nos. 3, 4, May, June 1922, pp. 73-82.
186 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Tabulated Findings on Twenty-our Cases of Acute Epidemic Encephalitis
Name
Age at
Examination
Date onset
and
Age onset
Acute Symptoms
Psychiatric Sequelae
at time of Psychological Examination
Neurological Sequelae at time of
Psychological
Examination
Previous Mentality as stated
by parent, school,
examination.
Psychological
Reactions
during
Examination
Date
of
Examination
Latest
Report
Hazel
(1)
William
(2)
1916
(7 yrs.)
1918
(6 yrs.)
Anna
(3)
15s
10-1918
(11 yrs.)
Diplopia, followed
by choreiform movements of right arm
& leg. Thick, heavy
speech disturbance.
Influenza, followed
by diplopia, dizziness, headaches, insomnia. At night
saw ghosts and
devils. Depression.
Tried to jump out
of window.
Influenza, followed
by 1 wk. lethargy.
Diplopia, dizziness,
headaches, short
period of visual hallucinations (saw
ghosts & dead
mother). Over
salivation. Illness
lasted 1 month.
Nervous complaints.
Change in behavior,
nervous, fidgety.
Never quiet, at
times talks like
"crazy person"
Sometimes awake
all night.
Always quick tempered, high strung,
slightly incorrigible
tendencies. Increased incorrigibility, sexual precocity. Unmanageable at home &
school. Apprehension, insomnia. Spells
of depression & elation. Over active,
capricious, irritable,
defiant.
Choreiform
movements.
Slight left facial
weakness. Weakness external
recti muscle.
Always had
slight internal
strabismus both
eyes.
Sister states
normal.
Parents say normal.
Apparently normal. School
progress average
Average intelligence,
slow reactions I.Q. 96
Average intelligence, slight
language
handicap, due
to Italian environment.
I.Q. 91
Dull normal.
Intellectually
slow. I.Q. 88
Performance
tests somewhat below
median
Normal behavior
Slight over activity. Very
alert.
3-28-22
1-29-23
Fidgetiness
Planfulness
& foresight
not good.
10-16-22
Same condition.
Placed in country. Quieter,
more manageable. Has
corrected
some of bad
habits.
Did not return to Clinic.
ACTJTE EPIDEMIC ENCEPHALITIS 187
Edith*
(4)
Jessie*
(5)
5* I 1-1919 j Influenza, followed j Imbecility. Agitated, j Twitchings dur- j Mother states j Low grade Im- j Distractlbility
Isadore*
(6)
lone
(7)
Leon
(8)
10'
125
(2 yrs.)
2-1919
(6 yrs.)
2-1919
(at birth)
1919
(3 yrs.)
Summer
1919
(9 yre.)
by delirium. 5 days
lethargy.
Fever, acute delirium, lethargy 3
wks. Visual disturbances.
Normal birth. Slept
continually for 8
days, followed by
inability to sleep for
11 wks. crying continually. Mother
had influenza in
middle pregnancy.
Influenza, followed
by 2 wks. lethargy.
Diplopia. Later insomnia.
Restless, overactive.
Incorrigible, sexually precocious.
Practically no mental
development. Unable to walk or
talk.
Domineering, selfish.
Cries a lot, destructive. School refused
to accept second
term. Probably always neurotic.
Restless, disobedient
at home and
school.
ing sleep.
Choreiform
movements.
Endocrine disturbance of hypopituitary
type.
Typical idiocy.
None.
Attacks resembling petit mal
brought on at
will. Twitching
shoulder for 1
yr. following
onset. Internal
strabismus, nystagmoid movements.
normal development until onset at 2 years.
School work had
been satisfactory.
Mother states
was always
slower than
siblings.
School progress
slow, but probably because
of E n g 1 i s h
handicap; Armenian spoken
in homes.
becile. Impossible to
complete Binet tests.
Lower av.I.Q.
87 Intellectually retarded, probably because
of irregular
schooling
since onset.
Idiot.
Normal mentality. Fairly
even performance. I.Q.
97
Normal intelligence.
Language,
handicap.I.Q.
80. Excellent
work with
performance
tests.
marked. No
form discrimination. Motor control
poor.
Movements
elow. Attention factors
good.
Stolid, unalert.
Slow reactions. Persistence good.
Distributance
attention below normal.
Attention factors good.
No behavior abnormalities
noted.
10-3-22
8-1922
11-20-22
11-20-22
188 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Tabulated Findings on Twenty-four Cases of Acute Epidemic Encephalitis
Name
Age at
Examination
Date onset
and
Age onset
Acute Symptoms
Psychiatric Sequelae
at time of Psychological Examination
Neurological Sequelae at time of
Psychological
Examination
Previous Mentality as stated
by parent, school,
examination.
Psychological
Reactions
during
Examination
Date
of
Examination
Latest
Report
Charles
(9)
3-1920
(7 yrs.)
Thomas
(10)
15>
4-1920
(12 yrs.)
Nicholas
(11)
4-1920
(16 yrs.)
Heard voices. Apprehension. Oversalivation.
Sleeping, vomiting
for 10 days. Oversalivation. Later insomnia .Hand twitchings. Apprehension,
?something after
him.
Diplopia, oversal ivation, eyes moist.
One month later
left arm stiff. Then
became slow, lazy,
somnolent, sleeping
most of day & night.
No pain. Few
months after onset,
Parkinsonian syndrome. Shoulders
sti?f. Face rigid,
coarse irregular tremor, first in legs, then
arms. Movements
stow, d\5&c\Aty \u
Transferred to disciplinary school, constantly fighting.
Complete change in
behavior 3-20. Hyperkinetic, marked
emotional instability, tells queer
tales. Unable to
concentrate in school,
no progress since
onset.
Change in behavior,
sent to diciplinary
school. Also in House
of Detention because of behavior.
Tantalizing, deceitful, fighting.
Previously vagrant,
truant, dope user.
Had been sent to
Reform School.
Slow, lazy. No
other behavior abnormalities.
Irregular pupils.
Some evidence
of paralysis
agitans.
None.
Fixed expression
Increased reflexes. Lachrymation. Parkinsonian syndrone. (paralysis agitans)
School progress
had been normal, reaching 6th grade
at 11 yrs.
Repeated grades
a number of
times.
Probablyalways
slow intellectually.
Dull normal
I.Q. 81. Performance
tests about
lower 20 %
Lower average
I.Q. 87. Performance tests
median.
Borderline
mentality. I.
Q. 64. Fair intelligence
with performance tests.
Poor in abstract concepts. Italian language
handicap may
prevent higher
I.Q.
Some confusion. Poor
mental conSlow in grasping abstract
situations.
1-16-23
No behavior
abnormalities.
1-11-23
No speed.
Marked tremor of
hands.
Lack of foresight.
10-25-22
Improving a
little. Now
working,
but irregularly.
Condi ti o n
about the
same. Working irregularly.
No change,
Applieation
in for Home
for IncurV V
ACUTE EPIDEMIC ENCEPHALITIS 189
Nathan* / 10s / 4-1920 / Acute delirium, dip- / Total change in dia- / Irregular respira- / flat/ been re- / Upper aver- / Slight hysterl- / 4-6-22 / Little lm(12) / I (8 yrs.) / lopia, facial twitch-\ position & ciarac- / t ory movements. Internal
George* 6! 11-1920
(13) (4 yrs.)
Victor* 8s 1-1921
(14) (7 yrs.)
George* 10?
(16)
2-1921
(9 yrs.)
ings, insomnia. / ter, noisy, abusive,
destructive, impulsive, untruthful,
hysterical attacks,
threatened suicide.
Odd behavior (begs
on street), tics
many fears.
Fever, jaundice, delirium, lethargy,
twitchings.
Headaches, diplopia,
delirium, prolonged
lethargic period.
Headaches, convulsions, delirium, diplopia, lethargy.
Extreme overactivity
especially nocturnal
with insomnia. Became obscene, destructive, unmanIncorrigibility before illness showed
marked increase.
Over active, quarrel
some, antagonistic.
Attempted to kill
brothers & sisters.
Impulsive, kisses
girls on street. Vagrant. Sexual precocity leading to
Court commitment.
Periods of excitement, attempted to
jump from window.
Streaks of cruelty,
tried to stab another boy. Bossy,
domineering, increased hysterical
attacks.
strabismus.
Over salvation
Internal strabismus.
None.
Oversalivation,
Irregular pupils.
ported every / age intelliterm in school.
Family say average.
Reported by
school to be
very bright before attack. Examiner questions this.
Mother states
he was normal
before illness,
but repeated
several grades
because of various illnesses.
gence. I.Q.
109. Work
with performance tests
poor, but not
consideredindicative because done
during hysterical attack.
Average intelligence. I.
Q. 100. Perf o r ma nee
tests median.
Borderline
mentality. I.
Q. 65. Performance tests
variable, but
most fall at
about lower
25%. Memory span not
above 4 yr.
level.
Average intelligence. I.
Q. 96. Performance tests
median.
during early
part of examination.
cal attack / / provement.
Concentration
of attention
not good.
Restless,bites
fingers, plays
with tie.
No behavior
abnormalities.
Poor analytic
discriminattion. Persistence good.
Overactivity.
Seemed upset by tests.
10-26-22
5-16-22
10-25-21
Running wild.
School finds
him impossible problem.
Improving,but
restless and
difficult in
school. Insomnia at
times.
Normal behavior under
hospital regime. Uncontrollable at
home where
conditions
are bad.
Improving
under steady
routine environment.
No change; still
has hysterical attacks.
Transferred
to Special
school.
190 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Tabulated Findings on Twenty-four Cases of Acute Epidemic Encephalitis
Name
Age at
Examination
Date onset
and
Age onset
Acute Symptoms
Psychiatric Sequelae
at time of Psychological Examination
Neurological Sequelae at time of
Psychological
Examination
Previous Mentality as stated
by parent, school,
examination.
Psychological
Diagnosis
Reactions
during
Examination
Date
of
Examination
Latest
Report
Dora*
(16)
11
Warren*
(17)
Charles*
(18)
George"
(19)
14?
710
2-1921
(10 yrs.)
6-1921
(7 yrs.)
2-1922
(13 yrs.)
3-1922
(7 yrs.)
\ \
Acute illness followed by lethargic
condition-16 days.
Headaches, diplopia,
delirium, shooting
pains in arms & legs,
twitchings, choreiform movements.
Headaches, dizziness,
radiculitis diplopia,
maeseter tenderness.
Nocturnal restlessPtosls, diplopia. Delirium, insomnia.
Numerous behavoir
abnormalities.
Marked hyperkinesis leading to general incorrigibility.
Precocious sex characteristics. Vagrancy .
Transferred to Special class 6-1922.
No behavior abnormalties.
Threatened suicide
because of "heavy
heartedness." Insomnia. Frequent
masturbation.
Odd antics at night,
fights with pillows
for prolonged intervals. Sleeps till
noon. Overactive.
None.
Choreo-athetoid
movements of
left arm. Typical chorea of
left arm & leg.
Oversalivaticn.
Left side facial
weakness, mask
like expression,
rigidity left
side of body.
Frequent headaches.
Irregular pupils,
left Internal
strabismus Occasional choreiform moveAlways slow in
school, but behavior satisfactory. Examination 3
mos. after onset, I.Q. 66cried,work
Hadrepeatedlst
& 2nd grades
before attack,
but got along
well in social
relationships.
School progress
about average,
repeated only
1 grade.
Family thought
normal.
Borderline
mentality. I.
Q. 71. Performance tests
about lower
20%. Memory span restricted.
Lower average
intelligence.
I.Q. 92. Performance tests
median.
Average intelligence. I.
Q. 97 Performance tests
slightly above
median.
Dull normal,
I.Q. 82. Immature performance.
Concrete testa
Restless, playful. Lacks
persistence.
All reactions
very slow.
Attention factors normal.
At times lack
ofconcentration very evident. No
other abnormalities noted.
Very playful.
Poor concentration and
persistence.
Little seli5-23-22
8-17-22
8-19-22
12-12-22
No improvement. Hypomanic.
Committed
to Mental
Hospital.
Not seen since
discharge
from Hospital. Relative reports
improvement.
meivta. ? * \o-wot *2.^% ? \ tg\Va.nce.
Working regularly.
Improving,
but still agitated at times
& suffering
insomnia.
ACUTE EPIDEMIC ENCEPHALITIS 191
(20)
Carl
(21)
Ernest*
(22)
John*
(23)
11?
14>
Doris' I 2 I 4-1922 /icufe illness charac- I Overactive, irritable, I Strabismus, I Family report / Idiot-profound / Appears to be
(11/2 yrs.) I teriied by
crossing & total
absence of mental
development since.
4-1922
(11 yrs.)
5-1922
(13 yrs)
6-1922
(8 yrs.)
Persistent coughing.
2 days later diplopia. Few muscular
twitchings of legs.
Later choreiforms
like rowing boat.
Insomnia. Delirious
3 wks. Spoke of suicide. Transient
memory wipeout for
language & recognition of people &
objects.
Marked abdominal
pain, headache.
Lethargy 1 wk.
Convulsion, fever,
twitchings, insomnia, nocturnal restlessness. Spinal fluid
findings positive.
Caused much disturbance in Psychopathic Ward.
fussy, whiny. Typical picture of idiot.
No behavior abnormalities. Slow in
talking. Gradually
releaming. Ability
to reason not impaired.
Became silly, obscene, masturbated
in public. Vagrant,
many fears. Apathetic about school
work.
No behavior abnormalities after acute
illness cleared up.
choreiform
movements of
both arms.
Movement of
Aphasia like condition.
Mild optic neuroretinitis.
Bilateral twitching of temporal
muscle. Oversalivation.
normal baby
until attack.
Good work in
studies.
School progress
had been average.
Considered average by family.
Normal mentality. I.Q.
88. Excellent
work with
performance
tests, about
upper 60%.
Memory span
median.
Average intelligence. I.
Q. 95. Performance tests
variable mostly about median.
Dull normal.
Binet not
given. Perfor mance
tests about
lower 20%.
M e m 0 r y
span median.
deaf & blind.
No response
of any kind
elicited. Like
a mass of
Attention factors average.
Slow reactions with
lan g ua g e
work amounting to some
definite inhibition.
marked. Always fingering something.
Slow reactions. No
abnormalities
10-26-22
11-7-22
i0-3-22
9-20-22
192 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
Tabulated Findings on Twenty-four Cases of Acute Epidemic Encephalitis
Name
Emol
(24)
Age at
Examination
10>
Date onset
and
Age onset
11-1922
(9yrs.)
Acute Symptoms
Twitchings in arms
& legs. Diplopia,
o versalivation.
Burning sensation in
stomach & neck. Insomnia. Apprehension at night.
Said world going
upside down. Idea
of big black thing
in his neck & neck
getting smaller &
smaller.
Psychiatric Sequelae
at time of Psychological Examination
Troublesome behavior.
Neurological Sequelae at time of
Psychological
Examination
Lateral nystagmus. Right facial weakness.
Previous Mentality as stated
by parent, school,
examination.
Left down once
in school before illness but
as whole got
along well.
Psychological
Diagnosis
Dull normal.
I.Q. 88. Language handicap, probably due to
Italian spoken
in home. Performance tests
variable 2080%. Memory span below median.
Reactions
during
Examination
No behavior
abnormalities.
Date
of Latest
Examina- Report
tion
2-6-23 Improved.
' INDICATES CASES ALSO REPORTED BY DR. F. G. EBAUGH IN ARTICLE REFERRED TO.
