by Dymphna
============

A personal view of the social work scene
I have, from time to time, in these pages mentioned
the problems of the local authority Social Services
Departments following the Seebohm re-organisation.
I hasten to reiterate that these problems were not
solely due to reorganization: had they arisen from a
mere amalgamation of existing services we should all
have been seeing daylight long ago.

What made matters so difficult was, firstly, the
simultaneous flow of other legislation, notably the
Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act and
certain sections of the Children and Young Persons
Act 1969; secondly, the very sharp rise in public
demand for service, due to several different factors;
and thirdly, a confusion amongst social workers as to
their proper role in a changing society. This confusion was arising in the late 'sixties and has turned
into something of a crisis under social and legislative
pressure.

Well, the combination of all these factors has been
very difficult to cope with and I would be less than
honest if I did not record that some local authority
Departments are still flat on their backs and that in
many areas morale is low and confusion high. It does
not help matters to know that some of the remedies?
notably an increase in social worker staff?will take
years to produce because of the problems of setting
up increased training facilities.

However, I would also be less than honest if I did
not record that many other authorities are now
beginning to see daylight. Reorganisation itself is
complete, the structures have been erected, the senior
posts filled, their occupants have made their plans.

Numerous problems remain to be overcome but at
least the problems have been defined. Where the road
of social work became considerably pot-holed?
notably by the loss of experienced front-line workers
to senior and managerial posts?new materials have
been rushed up, patching has taken place and the
traffic is beginning to flow again.

Some individual services are already definitely
better than they were even a year ago, and I would
particularly select the service for physically handicapped people. Others remain diluted: the child
care service, for instance. It has been suggested that
the mental health service has deteriorated, but I am
not sure that this is so: I suspect that here professional expectation has risen faster than professional
performance.

As I have said, however, as certain issues are
resolved, so certain problems emerge for definition
and examination. Social workers who a year ago were
obsessed with 'structure' are now obsessed with their
personal roles within the structure. The problem
which I would like to take up is not, however, particularly connected with reorganisation. It is almost
a perennial problem. It is one which worries me very
much. It is, simply put, the problem of residential
service.

I have to state it rather crudely. The development
of preventive or community-based social work
services means that clients who, twenty years ago,
would have been removed to an asylum of some sort
are now helped to keep going in their own homes.
Often this is successful.

Extra care
-----------
When, however, the client does ultimately break
down and has to accept residential care he is often in a
much more parlous state than he would once have
been. This means that he needs extra care in a residential setting. This means extra staff and a higher
calibre of staff: it means in certain situations placing
on the residential staff burdens which flesh and blood
simply cannot stand. It means very high costs.
Budgets are limited. Every new Home which is
opened inevitably means that a thousand pounds a
week is taken out of the resources which might
otherwise have gone to the preventive service.

This sort of pattern, which looks at first like a
vicious circle, exists in various sectors of the social
services. It exists in child care; it exists in the mental
health field; it exists most dramatically in the field of
geriatric care. In the course of one decade, the average
age of residents in old people's homes has soared to
the middle eighties and inevitably the proportion of
those residents who are mentally confused has risen
from something negligible to somewhere around 30%.
Staff of geriatric wards' in general hospitals could
tell a similar story. All residential staff are faced with
an increasingly difficult and dispiriting task. Can we
really ask colleagues to carry on with it? Do we not
unthinkingly condemn them to drudgery? Can we
lighten their load by pouring resources into community nursing and such services as meals, laundry,
night-sitting?

I do not know what sort of balance ought to be
struck. Maybe social workers should be less reluctant
to offer asylum to people who have not deteriorated
too far. Maybe expensive residential accommodation
ought to be offered to people who do not really need
it as individuals, but who can make a positive
contribution to the residents as a group. Maybe a
complete halt should be called to the development of
community services, which seem to be doing more
harm than good.

But there is one flaw in this argument which my
readers will by now have spotted. I have argued on an
either/or basis: either full support in the community
or full residential care. Surely there is an extremely
strong case for development down the middle: for a
massive extension of day care? In terms of the dignity
of the client; in terms of community participation; in
terms of ease of staffing; in terms of the concentration of supportive and rehabilitative services;
there seem to be overwhelming advantages. And
apart from these arguments, can we really assess the
total need for residential accommodation until we
have pushed day care to its limits ?

If this argument is accepted, is it not the more
reprehensible that the Government should have
announced that no funds will be made available for
day centres and that local authority building programmes will be limited to residential establishments?
This sort of decision does no good at all. It spreads
experienced and devoted residential staff ever more
thinly; it means reducing the resources available to
the community-based services; it perpetuates the
concept of the 'last refuge', under-staffed and demoralised; and, by obscuring real needs under the
threatening clouds of the either/or dilemma, it makes
proper planning impossible.
