Ncuis Reuieui
==============

Hardships of going it alone
Having been asked to submit evidence to the Finer Committee on
One-Parent Families, the Council for
Children's Welfare decided to obtain
its information at grass-roots level.

They wrote to 33 local papers
across the country inviting parents
who were coping single-handed to
write in to them. Their main request
was for information on how working
parents coped with looking after
their children, but comments on
other problems were invited.

The first 100 letters received were
analysed in detail and the findings
have now been published, together
with selections from the letters, in
The Plight of One-Parent Families.*
From the evidence of these parents,
it's pretty obvious they're still not
getting a fair deal?nor, of course,
are their children.

The outstanding problem, and one
which brings other problems in its
wake, is poverty ? 85% of the
parents mentioned money problems
at great length. Going out to work
can be difficult given the high cost
of child-minding and the present tax
system. Being forced to stay at home
with small children during the day
and unable to afford baby-sitters in
the evenings the often already
severe feelings of isolation are
aggravated.

Irregular maintenance payments
and the difficulty of enforcing them
means further poverty, and no
money for sweets, 'treats' or even
adequate clothing swiftly isolates
the children from their friends. It's
easy to see how isolation and consequent loneliness spirals.

Clearly some radical social and
economic changes must be made if
the plight of these parents ? and
their children ? is not to get even
worse. A fatherless child allowance,
state guarantee of maintenance payments, better day care provisions for
children ? these are just some of
the suggestions to alleviate what is
threatening to become a major
social problem in view of the increasing number of divorces.

* Available from the Council for
Children's Welfare, 183-189 Finchley Road, London N.W.3. at 25p
per copy.

Ambitious work of reference
In February, Search Press published
the first of a unique three-volume
'Encyclopedia of Psychology'* ?
unique because this is the first
extended reference book of psychology ever published.

The encyclopedia, which is being
published in seven European languages, has over 300 authors from 21
different countries. The three editors
are all professors of psychology:
Hans J. Eysenck, of the University of
London, Wilhelm Arnold, of Wurzburg University in West Germany
and Richard Meili, of Berne University, Switzerland.

Atthough the core of the book
obviously deals with psychology,
many terms have been included
from fields which border closely on
psychology such as psychiatry,
sociology and education.

The encyclopedia will have the
two-fold purpose of standardising
terminology and information on
modern psychology and of drawing
attention to work being done in other
countries.

* Encyclopedia of Psychology; ed.
by H. J. Eysenck, W. Arnold and
R. Meili; Search Press, London.
Vol. I, ?8.00.
(Volume II will appear in May and
Volume III in August.)
Fighting fit?
The well-worn theory that depression
and suicide rates fall dramatically in
times of war, has been given a fresh
boost by a recent report in the
British Medical Journal from Dr H.
A. Lyons, a consultant psychiatrist
at Purdysburn Hospital, Belfast.

Dr Lyons found the greatest decrease in depressive, illness in
Belfast was among the lower social
groupings in areas where there had
been the worst rioting. This confirms
the theory that opportunities for
overt expression of aggressive feelings prevent the build-up of frustration which can lead to depression
and sometimes, ultimately, suicide.

In inner West Belfast, scene of
the most violent rioting, cases of
depression which, in men under 40,
had averaged 16 annually in the
pre-riot years of 1964-8, in 1970 fell
to 6 ? a decrease of over 60%.
These figures were reflected over
the whole of Belfast. In 1970 the
number of men suffering from depression fell from 177 to 119 ? a
decrease of over 30% ? figures
which compare interestingly with the
overall statistics for the United
Kingdom where depressive illness
has increased by 75% over the last
eight years.

Unfortunately other statistics are
not as encouraging. As might be
expected, the incidence of violent
crime and homicide in Northern
Ireland rose sharply after 1968 when
serious rioting began. 1964-8 there
were only three cases of homicide,
in 1970 this had risen to 19, or 43
including 'injuries resulting from
operations of war' and 'legal intervention'.

Design service for the handicapped
CEH, the Centre on Environment for
the Handicapped has been growing
steadily since its modest beginnings
in 1969. Financed by grants from the
Department of Health and Social
Security, the King Edward's Fund
and the Spastics Society, it is now
operating from the Hospital Centre
at 24 Nutford Place, W1H 6AN.

CEH aims to give information and
advice on the design of the full
range of facilities needed by the
handicapped throughout their lives
? regional and city planning, buildings and their interiors.

Initially they are concentrating on
mental handicap, although they later
hope to extend this to the mentally
ill, the physically handicapped and
the blind, deaf and elderly.

In practical terms they are offering
a range of services to people working in many disciplines?architects,
administrators, teachers, doctors,
nurses and so on.

A reference library is available for
study at the Centre, consultation on
specific problems is offered and
visits can be made to existing facilities to advise on improvement. They
also hold meetings, seminars and
conferences and publish reports.

Wide use has already been made
of the CEH in its first year's service
and they are hoping to expand their
activities even more in 1972.
Don't panic?hold your nose!
If the sight of a spider sends you
scuttling into the opposite corner try
curing your fright by holding your
nose. A recent report by Dr Arnold
Orwin in the British Journal of Psychiatry describes how Dr Orwin's
behaviour research unit at Hollymoor Hospital in Birmingham discovered that some people could be
cured of their phobias by holding
their noses.

The theory behind this is that
people instinctively become worried
when something initially makes
breathing difficult. By linking this
constriction of breathing with
irrational fears the research unit discovered that easing people's breathing, eased the fear at the same time.

Treatment involves holding the
patient's nose and closing his mouth
for a few seconds at a time. As the
patient struggles for breath he is
shown either photos or real-life
examples of his phobia, and these
images are removed when he is
allowed to breathe again.

It all sounds too good to be true
but the report says that four spiderhaters actually touched spiders after
undergoing the hold-your-nose treatment.

Decent clothes and
self-respect
Birmingham Regional Hospital
Board has just completed a two-year
study which could brighten the lives
of its long-stay patients ? many of
them in hospitals for the mentally ill
and handicapped. The Board has
suggested a new clothing policy
which would put an end to the
present 'quartermaster's store'
method and the 'institutional'
appearance of the clothing issued to
patients.

Under the new system, about 20
hospital stores would be set up in
main centres of the Hospital Board's
area where long-stay patients are
treated. These shops, each run by a
manager, would be supplied from a
central warehouse and stocks would
be replenished about every three
weeks. In charge overall would be
a specialist buyer with (presumably)
up-to-the-minute knowledge of
fashion trends. The patients' requirements would be assessed at ward
level.

This method would have considerable economic advantages. At the
moment buying is done on a hospital
group basis which is obviously more
expensive since the quantities of
clothing required are smaller and a
less rapid turnover means that
stocks cannot possibly keep up with
changing fashions.

Copies of the survey have been
sent to the other 14 Hospital Boards
and hopefully they will follow Birmingham's forward-looking policy.

Freedom to believe
Various newspaper reports and
correspondence last summer reflected concern at what appears to be a
growing misuse of psychiatry in
some countries of- the world.
Although opinions differ as to what
constitutes 'mental health', everyone
would agree that each man should
have freedom of opinion, to think
according to his conscience and to
form his own moral values.

It is clear that some countries are
abusing psychiatric practice by forcing people to receive 'treatment' and
confining them to psychiatric hospitals simply because their opinions
are critical of the society in which
they live.

At last November's annual meeting of the World Federation for
Mental Health in Hong Kong this
question was discussed at great
length by the Executive Board and a
statement was issued to the effect
that 'the World . Federation for
Mental Health resolutely opposed
any such abuse of psychiatric procedures and calls on its Member
Associations throughout the world
promptly to investigate all such
allegations, and to defend the individual's freedom of opinion where it
appears to be threatened.'

Delegates to the Hong Kong meeting have now discussed this with the
UK and Eire Committee of the World
Federation and representatives of
the member bodies are now discussing this in their own organisations.

When the long night
becomes unbearable
In January this year the first 'Nightliners' national conference was held,
attended by representatives of 22
universities. 'Nightlines' are student
centres manned nightly by 2 or 3
volunteers.

They do not claim professional
expertise ? although most centres
have a preparation course for volunteers with lectures on social, psychological and sexual problems. The
aim is rather to provide friendship
and support wherever it is needed.
They fall somewhere between
friends, who may at times be unreliable, unavailable or non-existent,
and the student health services with
their more formal approach of
appointments, desks and so on.
Some callers are seeking practical advice such as how and where
an abortion can be obtained, or
where they can get treatment for
VD. Other calls may entail the
student on duty having to talk someone down from a bad LSD trip.

Sometimes the student may be
referred for professional psychiatric
advice and treatment, but often the
caller wants to talk about one of the
problems frequently encountered in
university, and particularly campus
life ? a broken romance (where the
confines of a campus make avoidance of the ex-partner difficult),
exam nerves or general worry about
'keeping up' academically.

Student health officers reckon that
as many as 25 per cent of all
students will at one time or another
need some help with personal problems of one kind or another. To
quote Dr Nicholas Malleson, president of the British Student Health
Association, 'The occupational diseases of students are in the head,
just as those of miners are in the
lungs'.

Hope for London's problem
children
Children with learning and behaviour problems in four Inner
London areas are to receive muchneeded help. At the end of January
the Inner London Education Authority announced that it was spending
?150,000 on four pilot projects to be
based in North Kensington, North
Islington, Brixton and Peckham.

The plan is to have one teacher
seconded full-time to each area to
assess the best ways of helping the
children. He or she will have strong
local support in the form of help
from teachers and members of the
probation, medical and welfare services.

The seconded teachers will assess
the children not only in their schools
but in the context of their homes and
general environment. This decision
to examine the child's whole environment is particularly important in
view of the fact that the ILEA is now
proposing to send only children with
very severe problems to its special
schools.

It has been increasingly clear for
some time that children in areas like
the four selected for the pilots are
not being adequately catered for by
special schools or even child guidance units. Waiting time to see a
child psychiatrist can be up to three
months and for a place in a special
school a year or more.

Better staff/pupil ratios are improving the situation but obviously
more is needed than this. Other
ideas include 'nurture groups' where
deprived children are provided with
a family-type situation, language
centres for immigrant children and
better child guidance facilities for
those with acute behaviour problems.
