Letter
========

Dear Sir,

In your Winter 1971 issue of
Mind' you published an apologia
for the Social Services Departments
under the psuedonym 'Dymphna'
*n which it is stated that the
departments are going to get a bad
Press during the next year or two
because 'there are a large number
of MP's who are already baying
away like sonorous bloodhounds
about shortcomings in the Social
Services'. In defence of her establishment Dymphna writes of the
superhuman task which has been
lrnposed, the terrific costs, both
financial and emotional, and the
vast amounts of time, money and
energy which are necessarily being
dissipated.

This, of course, may not come as
any surprise to those-who greeted
*he Seebohm Report of 1968 with
some reservation. Then we were
being told by proponents of the
proposals that the creation of one
super-department would cut out so
much duplication of effort that
efficiency would be immediately
enhanced. True new responsibilities have been added, but have we
not had several years' warning and
reasonable time to prepare ourselves?

Dymphna gives an impressive
list of the statutory duties for
which the Department is now
responsible and herein lies my
chief criticism of her case. She goes
on to say, 'Finally, as if all this was
not enough, the Government have
decided virtually to resuscitate the
Mental Health Act of 1959'. The
implication in this statement that
the provisions of this Act have
remained in suspension of animation since 1959 is a gross misrepresentation of the facts and
reveals an appalling ignorance of
the progress in community psychiatric services which has been made.

I have been in the practice of
psychiatry for 20 years, I have seen
the enormous changes which have
unfolded. For the last 8 years I
have, in addition to my own area
clinical responsibilities, borne the
ultimate responsibility for the
nature and scope of the psychiatric
treatment services for over a third
of a million people. I dare lay claim
to know something about the
'scene'. To convey the impression,
as Dymphna does, that it is all
going to begin now is a piece of
monumental arrogance.

What I and my colleagues are
rather more concerned about is
our suspicion that since April 1st,
1971 there has been some deterioration in the service built up
slowly and painfully in the years
before, and in Dymphna's own
words, 'From the client's point of
view, nothing is performed better
now than it was before amalgamation.'

We sincerely hope that this is
but a temporary state of affairs.
Yours faithfully.
Dr A. G. Fullerton
Consultant Psychiatrist and
Medical Director.

Barnsley Hall Hospital,
Bromsgrove, Worcs.
