Photographs: Tony Othen
========================

:Author: John Payne

Without the ability to earn a living and be independent any 'recovery' from
mental illness is bound to remain almost meaningless. For patients who have
become 'institutionalised' after long stays in hospital the outlook for a return
to independent life would be even bleaker but for the kind of lead being given
by the unit described here.

When someone has been ill we are only prepared to
accept that he has fully recovered when he resumes
work?if he is 'better', but not back at work yet, then
there is still room for doubt, the recovery is only
partial. We see real fitness in terms of being fit enough
to work?there are no shades of grey, it is essentially a
black or white issue.

To help people get back to work after a period of
illness the state has established elaborate 'rehabilitation services', physiotherapy, occupational therapy,
social work support, retraining schemes, sheltered
workshops, industrial resettlement units and all.
The dictionary definition of 'rehabilitation' is 'the
act of restoring to forfeited rights and privileges' from
the Latin rehabilitare (to have again). How, then, do
the mentally ill fit into the state's plan for the restoration of rights and privileges ? The simple answer is
'Not at all neatly' and a lack of neatness is not something easily tolerated by officials responsible for
drawing up plans of state.

There are two distinct groups of mentally ill people.
One group, the short-stay patients who need only a
period of weeks in hospital before being processed
?comparatively smoothly?through the rehabilitation services, cause few problems. The second group,
the long stay, 'chronic' patients who lose touch with
the changing ways of the world and become 'institutionalised' (apathetic, docile, resigned and incapable of self-help after years of reliance on the
hospital regime) pose enormous problems of rehabilitation?problems which, in many cases, still seem to
be insuperable.

St. Wulstan's Hospital, Malvern, a psychiatric
rehabilitation hospital which covers five counties
A young member of the team manufacturing clothes
hangers adds the finishing touches to the job with a hand
press.

(Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Staffordshire, Shropshire and Herefordshire), handles the 'insuperable'
problems.

St. Wulstan's is laid out in the geometric, austere
pattern of an army camp?long low buildings, lots of
right angles, with covered walk-ways linking the
buildings. It was built in 1942-43 for the treatment of
American forces' psychiatric casualties during the war.
In the 1950s it was used as a tuberculosis sanatorium
and re-opened as a psychiatric rehabilitation unit in
late 1961.

It takes the 'failures' from the workshops and industrial therapy units of the 12 mental hospitals in the
Region. The only requirements for admission are that
the patients must be under 55 years old, have been in
hospital for two years already and be fit for 'informal'
status. In fact, the average length of stay in the
'parent' hospital before patients come to St. Wulstan's
is 12 years which puts all new arrivals firmly into the
'chronic' category.

The philosophy of the treatment at St. Wulstan's is
to make life inside hospital as much like life outside as
possible, to make work compulsory and leave recreation to the initiative of the patients, to tie all work
to training, to pay patients fairly according to output
rather than effort and to get every patient fit enough to
become independent of hospital care, no matter how
long that may take. It is emphatically not an aim to
help patients 'settle down' into a static environment.

Although there is a tacit atmosphere of tolerance
and perseverance at St. Wulstan's, it is not the equivalent of a large sheltered workshop. The staff have
simulated real working conditions for the 210 inpatients and the 90 who now live out but come into
the Hospital every day to work.

After a 3',-week assessment period in the Intake
Unit, patients start straight into a 36 J -hour working
week, Monday-Friday. During their assessment
period, apart from having physical, psychological and
psychiatric examinations and being interviewed by a
social worker about their family situation, patients are
given a variety of work to do?industrial, domestic,
outdoor, clerical, etc.?so that their aptitudes, handicaps and attitudes can be identified.

The patients' attitudes are particularly important.
The will to work, the desire to become independent
?what Dr Roger Morgan, Director of Rehabilitation,
calls 'stickability'?is crucial because it is this quality

A man in the carpentry shop checks the joints on a picture
frame.
that St. Wulstan's has to nurture and develop if a
patient is to hold down a job outside the Hospital.
In order to help foster a positive attitude towards
working, a sense of involvement and 'belonging', the
Hospital is divided up into four 'personnel units'.
There are 12 wards and four workshops with patients
and staff from each group of three wards going to
make up the work force and supervisory staff of one
workshop. So, going to work means literally crossing
the road with your mates and taking up where you left
off the day before as members of a team each with a
well-defined job to do.

The four workshops?Grey, Red, Blue and Gold?
are structured to allow for progress from one to another as the patients' performance and output improve. 'Grey' is the admission and assessment workshop although this does not mean that patients with
very limited ability and poor potential may not stay in
it for a couple of years while the staff persist in looking
for signs of improvement or hoping to find the right
niche eventually.

No targets are set and the work-rate is governed by
the workers. Obviously, in a team-work situation, a
worker with enthusiasm and aspirations to earn as
much as possible sets a standard for the rest and
'tows' them along in his wake. So schizophrenic
patients try to withdraw from their workmates whereas a couple of mentally handicapped patients in a team
(on the coat-hanger making team, for example) inject
it with energy and bustle. There are about 25
mentally handicapped patients at St. Wulstan's?the
Hospital was asked to introduce them as an experiment and discovered that they acted as very good
catalysts in the work situation.

Both 'Red' and 'Blue' workshops are fitted with
modern, sophisticated conveyor belt systems for the
assembly and packaging of soft packs of medical
dressings which St. Wulstan's produces for use in
other hospitals throughout the Region. Each patient
manning the belt adds only one unit to the pack and
the packaging team at the end of the belt are each
responsible for one operation in the closing, sealing
Preparing materials in the stores for delivery to one of the workshops. The driver of the fork-lift truck is a patient himself.

SiliiW WiiI

and labelling sequence. The supervisory skill in these
two workshops is in the business of 'balancing' the
belt i.e. allocating the various jobs so that a steady
pace is maintained and no 'bottle necks' develop.
Last year these workshops produced 41 million packs
worth ?80,000.

That is a pretty staggering amount of money and
paradoxically, the very success of St. Wulstan's in
terms of its constantly improving productivity has
been causing some embarrassment over the last year.
Since money is inextricably bound up with the
whole concept and purpose of work, it is also one of
the major factors governing the effectiveness of
St. Wulstan's rehabilitation programme. Ten years
ago, the Ministry of Health (as it then was) set an
earnings limit of ?2 per week on all people either in
hospitals or workshops or otherwise in receipt of
social security benefits. Earning more than that
meant accepting a sliding scale reduction of benefit.
This earnings rule has acted as a disincentive in
industrial rehabilitation ever since until, in October
this year, the earnings limit was raised to ?4.50.
At St. Wulstan's an earnings-related 'Hospital tax'
system was devised which used to mean that a
patient had to earn ?3.20 before getting the ?2
limit in his pay packet. Now a patient has to earn ?8
before getting the ?4.50.

The 'tax' system now works on the basis of the
first ?1 earned being tax free with all subsequent
earnings up to ?8 taxed at 50%. Earnings over ?8
are taxed at 100%.

As payment is related to output, it is not unusual
for a patient to notch up ?12 per week?and occasionally top ?20 per week?on paper. All the cash
that he is allowed to receive is the ?4.50 limit but he
has the satisfaction of knowing that he earned perhaps
three or four times that sum?the kind of wage on
which he could support himself when out in the
community as long as he maintained the same sort of
performance consistently.

What then happens to the rest of the money that
St. Wulstan's patients earn? Industrial turnover at
the Hospital rose 20? ? last year on the previous year
to over ?102,000?almost all on contract and subcontract work.

The 'Hospital tax' that St. Wulstan's is obliged to
deduct from patients' earnings goes into a pool
known as the Industrial Fund and, up to now, the
majority of it has been 'ploughed back' into the
workshops?those conveyor belts, heat-sealing machinery, a fork-lift truck, a delivery lorry with two
interchangable bodies (which cut the lorry's turnround time to almost nil).

There is a sick pay scheme (two-thirds of the
patient's average earnings over the previous three
weeks), a holiday savings scheme which is subsidised
by the Industrial Fund, a supplementary payments
scheme for patients earning less than 8op in any one
week?all from the Industrial Fund.

Over the past year or two there have been no
immediate needs for the workshops?they are as
well equipped as they can be?and the Industrial
Fund has begun to be used for amenities for the
Hospital. Two new projectors in the assembly hall,
carpeting for four day rooms in the wards and for
three television rooms, a colour television has been
bought for the patients. Rather than join the queue
and request finance to replace or improve amenities
from the administrative authorities of the Hospitals
Group of which St. Wulstan's is a member, it has
drawn on the Industrial Fund and been able to say
to the patients 'You provided this improvement
yourselves, your efforts and abilities made this
possible'.
Despite the practical value of the ways in which the
Industrial Fund is used and the enormous psychoPatients at work in St. Wulstan's clerical office which
handles all the paperwork for the production workshops.
logical value in terms of the patients knowing that
their money?which they were unable to see in
? and p. in their hands?was used to buy that heatsealing machine to make their job easier or for
installing 'piped music' into the workshops, Keith
Parsons, Hospital Secretary at St. Wulstan's, is now
finding that it is not quite as simple as that. He is
finding that the very success of St. Wulstan's is
creating some procedural problems over the central
and regional financing system of the Hospital, there
is now some suggestion that the surplus in the
Industrial Fund should be returned to the general
Exchequer rather than being used to increase the
efficiency of the St. Wulstan's rehabilitation
programme.

'Gold' workshop at St. Wulstan's is the one which
simulates real factory conditions in the most detail.
In this workshop the heavier engineering contracts
are handled. Geoffrey Jones, the Hospital's Industrial Manager (also a qualified psychiatric nurse),
goes all over the Midlands and beyond getting
industrial contract work for St. Wulstan's. Currently
he has contracts for assembling the power take-off
units for the Massey-Ferguson tractor, lock hinges for
the Land-Rover, paint rollers for a decorating company and many others.

Time keeping penalties are in force in 'Gold'
workshop?a man is allowed 10 minutes 'lateness
leeway' a week, any more than that and his pay is
reduced by 20%. Men working in 'Gold' are responsible for getting the supplies they need for their
job from the stores personally. The stores themselves
are staffed by patients, the man who drives the fork
lift truck is a patient.

Apart from the four workshops, St. Wulstan's runs
a concrete casting unit for men who are better suited
to fairly heavy outdoor work. The Hospital has 89
acres of grounds but only a small proportion is
tended by patients and then only as a specific form of
training for men who can subsequently earn their
living as gardeners and nurserymen. There is also a
laundry and a domestic training unit in which women
are retrained to be able to live independently within
the community. A clerical section is attached to the
workshop administration office and patients handle all
typing, stencilling, duplicating and recording work.

Bill Staples, another psychiatric nurse but who
acts as personnel officer at St. Wulstan's, has built
up a lot of contacts in the Midlands (together with
Geoffrey Jones) for patients who are ready to take on
a full-time job away from the Hospital. Many of
these are in the catering trades, recently the head
kitchen porter at the Midlands' newest luxury hotel
(who is an ex-St. Wulstan's man himself) rang up to
say he had vacancies for two other kitchen porters
and would Mr. Staples care to fill them for him.
There are also contacts in the immediate area of
Malvern wanting casual domestic and gardening
work done by St. Wulstan patients. Each job opportunity outside the Hospital is looked on as a
valuable training ground for a number of patients in
succession.

Over the years a network of lodgings for day
patients at St. Wulstan's has gradually been established to the extent that there are now 90 patients
coming into the Hospital each day to work who live
in houses offering full board and lodging in Malvern.
So many patients have now taken this important
step to independence that a day patient co-ordinator
has had to be appointed to look after their interests
and liase between the Hospital and the lodgings. The
Hospital gives all landladies an unconditional
guarantee to take back any tenants who prove to be a
problem.

One such lodging house was started this year by a
young couple, Susan and David Carpenter. They
moved from Kent to Malvern and many of their
friends were incredulous about their decision to offer
their house to a group of St. Wulstan's patients. But
Susan Carpenter's 10 tenants are quiet, friendly and
glad of the chance to share in a home atmosphere.
The rent is paid out of Social Security Benefit
(?6.50 per head) so, all in all, St. Wulstan patients
make model tenants.

The intensive, business-like programme of treatment which St. Wulstan's provides is remarkably
successful especially considering that all patients are
already long-stay and are all some other hospital's
failures. In statistical terms one in every three
patients who have passed through St. Wulstan's in its
first 10 years have achieved successful resettlement
within the community, i.e. 257 out of 803. Dr.
Morgan counts the one in five that have had to be
returned to their parent hospitals (168) as St. Wulstan's 'complete failures'.

Since rehabilitation of long-stay patients takes a
long time, about one third of the 10 year intake are
still at various stages of the 'pipeline' and it is not
possible to determine the outcome for them yet.
To really take advantage of the ground gained by a
resettlement programme like that at St. Wulstan's,
Dr Morgan would like to be able to pay patients the
full amounts that they earn and then make realistic
charges for the services provided by the Hospital.
Plans are being made to try this kind of system in a
factory to be set up in Malvern for 30 day patients?
if the factory was separated off entirely from the
Health Service by becoming a limited company it
would be possible to pay what is earned and charge
patients for lodgings direct. This would also bring
budgeting and social independence into the resettlement programme.

He dismisses the present requirement for industry
to make 3% of its jobs available to the disabled as 'no
use in the context of the mentally ill' and the quota
system is open to abuse anyway with the whole
question of registering as 'disabled' being doubleedged.

While welcoming the raising of the earnings limit
to ?4.50, Dr Morgan is inclined to reserve judgement over whether this increase is enough (or
whether it is based on the right rehabilitative premises) to stimulate incentive among patients and
make them whole-heartedly want to relearn the habit
of working for a living. Another cause for concern is
the extent to which labour-intensive job opportunities
for which the ex-mentally ill are often admirably
suited are being constantly decreased as machines
take over so creating more and more 'twilight people'.
At present, he estimates that 50 or 60 people in
St. Wulstan's are only there because they are unemployed and are just 'marking time in a siding'.
As far as sheltered employment as interpreted by
the Department of Employment is concerned, the
only way to progress beyond it is 'feet first'. Speaking
of the philosophy of St. Wulstan's Dr Morgan makes
it clear that 'the whole of this place depends on the
spirit engendered by the people working here, if we
took the attitude that all patients were a "shower"
and there was no hope for them then that would be a
self-fulfilling prophecy'.

As it is at St. Wulstan's, in human terms, in the
space of 10 years, 257 people who had been 'written
off' before they arrived have changed from being
long-stay patients (with all that that implies) into
independent working citizens again.

A team of patients at work on one of the conveyor belts on which 'soft packs' of medical dressings are assembled. Last year
the workshop produced million of these packs worth ?80,000.
