Living with Schizophrenia
=========================

The impact of schizophrenia on an
ordinary family is just as shattering as
any natural disaster?extreme reactions from members of the family
are to be expected. To talk of coexisting with the illness is an
'obscenity' yet proper social provision
is still totally lacking.

Relatives seldom have the chance to share what little
they may have learnt with professional workers. Still
less, of course, are they in a position to make their
voices heard by the central policy-makers and
administrators of the health and social services. They
are unorganised, shy of publicity and some are rather
broken by their experiences.

In the past year, during which I have had contact
of some sort with over 300 families of schizophrenics,
it has been depressing to find how many able and
knowledgeable relatives there are - some in influential
positions - who shrink away from any public involvement with the condition.

It is not that they reject their schizophrenic relative.
They will make ample provision and they may
contribute generously to a research fund. But they
cannot bear the thought of the condition itself, the
intolerable fact. So far as social action is concerned,
they would rather 'leave things to the professionals'.

But this is not really enough if, as I believe, there is a
specific contribution to the common stock of knowledge about the management of schizophrenia, and
social arrangements for dealing with it, which
relatives are qualified to make.

Social progress, as we know, is not always a
straight-line advance. Usually some penalty has to be
paid for every step, and the question (often pushed
under the carpet until dragged out by later historians)
is who, at any given time, is paying the penalty. The
new drugs and attitudes towards treating mental
illnesses which came in during the fifties have been
amply and rightly praised. But the penalty?

Well, I suggest that the penalty for the mass
discharges of chronic schizophrenics from mental
hospitals which began to show in the statistics from
1954 onwards - those deceptively pleasing statistics has been paid mainly by inadequate and overworked
Based on a paper delivered at the MIND/NAMH conference 'Focus on schizophrenia' at the Middlesex Hospital,
September 21st, 1971

Trying to contain a schizophrenic member within the
family home is so disruptive of normal life that it is almost
like demolishing the home from the inside.

local authority services, and - above all - by the
relatives.
With hindsight it is easy to see that no adequate
steps were taken to expand community services step
by step with mental hospital run-down, and that it
really was not sufficient hopefully to get some patients
on to a stabilising dosage and then turn them loose
on unhelped relatives or on nobody and nothing, as
happened in many areas and still happens.

The more ruthless policies for removing what was
called 'the silt' from hospitals were not humane nor
even rational. But they were believed in, with the
force of a general idea, and they saved the Treasury
money. We have it on the authority of Professor J. K.
Wing that somebody highly-placed even advised the
Minister that schizophrenics were not really 'handicapped', nor 'disabled', just 'ill'.* So the GPs, or the
relatives, or somebody, could cope.

And what, on a national scale, was done to enable
the relatives to cope? I think you know the answer to
that, and why the slogan 'community care' has come
to have, for many families, the sound simply of a con
trick.

The chips on my shoulder will now be apparent.
But the weariness and bitterness of the relatives is
touched with an awareness that many professional
workers are also having to cope with impossible
burdens. The difference between us, of course, is that
the families are 'emotionally involved' as the dreadful
jargon puts it, and cannot escape from their involvement.

Watching someone fragment
-------------------------
At one level of this involvement there is nothing to
be said about schizophrenia except that it is an
obscenity, and that to talk of'living' with it, of having
to watch someone one loves fragment, and to know
that, although the pieces may never be put together in
this world, none the less one must devise means for
putting a bright, optimistic, forward-looking face on
things is also an obscenity.

At the infinitely lower level of comprehension from
the relatives' point of view - that of intellect - there
are the puzzles of causation, what is 'schizophrenia',
how does it come about? The analysis and dissection
of schizophrenics has the status of a growth industry.

I hope I personally retain an open mind about
causation. If disturbed parental personalities are to
blame, or faulty intra-familial patterns of communications, oedipal rivalries, mystifications of sexual or
personal identity, if only for triggering something
which could otherwise have stayed dormant, for
* Address in Mental Health Week 1970
heaven's sake let's have it proved, and the sooner the
better.

But I do note that most studies of families are inevitably - made after the event. The observer was
not there when the catastrophe struck or before. He
did not observe the family before the diagnosis was
made, nor during the period - perhaps of years - in
which the condition was presumably incubating. His
evidence about this period is always indirect and often
hearsay. So I have some scepticism about the validity
of working backwards and deducing from the family
pattern, as observed at point B in time, what the
pattern was like at point A, and then going on to
discover in the hypothetical point A pattern explanations for the schizophrenia.

Ludicrous inferences
-------------------
As a no-doubt crude simile, some of these generalisations read to me as though a party of sociologists,
on visiting a town devastated by an earthquake, were
to conclude from watching the dazed survivors that a
state of apathy, confusion, indecision and feeble
bickering was quite ordinary, that this was their
normal social pattern, and that this, in turn, had been
primarily responsible for the earthquake. I hope this
is not too much of a parody but some of the inferences
drawn from post facto case studies seem almost as
ludicrous.

A lot of very clever people, it seems to me, are
constantly overlooking the obvious: that the impact of
schizophrenia on the most ordinary family can be as
shattering as that of a natural cataclysm, and that
many extreme reactions are probably normal and even
to be expected. In the schizophrenias of slow onset
particularly, families may be 'living with schizophrenia' in the words of my title and making innumerable adaptations to it - good or bad, but all modifying any ordinary family pattern - before they or
anybody else knows that they are, in fact, 'living with
schizophrenia'.

I can hear some of you thinking, 'But he is begging
the question, what is a "normal" family'. Very well,
may I briefly outline what could happen if the blow
struck any of you? (May I add that I have received
several letters from psychiatrists with schizophrenic
children and I cannot say that in tone or account of
experiences these letters are markedly different from
the others.) Would you try please - though I know it
is impossible - to put out of your minds anything that
you know professionally. Imagine yourselves to be
butchers, bakers, candlestick-makers, politicians,
priests - anything you like - knowing no more about
mental illness than what you have gathered from a
chance newspaper article or from some TV programme.

One of your adolescent children begins to behave
oddly. At first he just moons about. But many
adolescents moon about. He or she takes to lying on
the bed, presumably day-dreaming. He or she
becomes moody, bad-tempered, slovenly, 'difficult'.
But many adolescents day-dream and are moody or
difficult.

To you, as a sensible parent, such behaviour is well
within the limits of the normal growing-up process
and no attention is paid to it. He or she will 'grow out
of it', you say. But time goes on and he or she does not
grow out of it. A crisis occurs when some wild display
of aggression, truancy, or merely bizarre behaviour,
drives you to seek expert help.

Blessed are you if at this point you get a firm
diagnosis: twice blessed (one is almost tempted to say)
if there is an acute and unmistakeable schizophrenic
episode and rapid hospitalisation.

But often you will get no firm opnion about your
son or daughter and a period of months or years
begins - mercifully you have no pre-vision of it punctuated by spells in and out of hospital, hopes
raised and dashed, vague reports that he or she is
suffering from 'neurosis', a 'severe depression of
adolescence', or that she is 'a seriously disturbed
girl' - as though you cannot see that for yourself.
Is anyone being honest with you? Do they know,
and are not aying? Or does nobody know? And
within the fog of uncertainty, disputes in the family
grow and fester. Grandpa says the boy must be got
away from home; he needs work in the open airthere is a cousin in Canada who might take him. Or
perhaps you have a brother-in-law who presses on
you somebody in Zurich - or was it Vienna? - who
did wonders for that nephew of a friend of his.

Meanwhile your home, in an atmosphere of
simulated normality, a determined show of ordinary
living, is rapidly becoming preoccupied by the sick
member: the ups and downs of his moods, his
unpredictable vagaries of behaviour.

Reactions of brothers and sisters may differ widely
and their resentment may be deep if the sick one is
not handled according to the ideas of each: affectionate concern; or alternatively, jealousy over the
attention he is getting; irritation at the sufferer's
'laziness' or 'selfishness'; rejection; guilt for past
teasing or bullying (shadowing the omnipresent and
inescapable parental guilts); refusal to accept that he
is ill at all, but only 'being himself', 'doing his own
thing', that it is not he or she but 'society' which is
'all wrong' - 'What he needs is to get away from those
damned hospitals and live among normal people'.

About the last reaction, what else can one expect?
After all, they - the brothers and sisters - you - the
butcher or baker - and I - are all exposed to the total
climate of our time in which the individual's madness
has become a paradigm for a mad society and in which
to many it is a perfectly valid question whether the
fantasy world of schizophrenia is not less insane than
the so-called real world of Vietnam, race hatreds, and
the hydrogen bomb (or the images of these, and all the
rest of the phantasmagoria projected by the mass
media on the individual's consciousness).

Opposite pressures, reflecting the ambivalencies of
your situation, will be exerted on you by the fears of
social embarrassment and 'stigma', both in the post
diagnosis stage and earlier.

There are the material anxieties: how is the disabled
one to be given a livelihood? None of these fears is
irrational or imaginary. Try finding a sympathetic
employer for your schizophrenic. Try getting digs
where the landlady will not quickly make some
excuse for getting rid of him. Try just listening in the
background as he or she is floundering in front of
some social security clerk who suspects he is work-shy
or fiddling his 'benefit'.

Protests from neighbours
------------------------
As regards stigma, your family has to live ir the
world as it is - a world in which the popular press
and TV 'image' of a schizophrenic is mostly of a rapist
or child-murderer, in which a hostel cannot be
established in a 'better class' district without protests
from the neighbours that their wives and daughters
won't be safe. (Useless for families of schizophrenics
to reflect that their poor, frightened lad wouldn't hurt
a fly.)

The recurrent little social dilemmas. 'What nice
children you have, Mrs. So-and-So. And what does
your other daughter do? She is a great deal at home,
isn't she?' And the swift calculation whether to evade,
or whether the questioner is sufficiently intelligent
and sympathetic to be told the truth or part of the
truth.

Do not be surprised, therefore, if your family, with
the abnormalities of its home-life, shrinks from
introducing too many fresh outsiders into the home.
(To be thereupon typecast by the investigator with
the clipboard as: 'introverted family which finds
social contacts difficult'.)

Some members of your family may never accept the
diagnosis and will quarrel with the parent who tries to
implement it. You then have a divided and part
alienated family on your hands, if you haven't one
already - to say nothing of the cases where once
happily married parents are themselves driven apart
because one rejects or partially rejects, which the
other cannot forgive.

The sheer disruptive power of schizophrenia over
a family is fully intelligible only to those who have
been through it. But a few of the worst effects, could,
I think, be avoided if the medical problem of communicating with the family were tackled at an earlier
stage, and firmly. And not only with the parents, but
with all the family who matter, collectively. I do not
know how this is to be done, only that it ought to be
done.

As it is, I am sometimes tempted to think, from my
own experience and that of others, that the mystifications in hospital communications (medical and
administrative) might almost have been deliberately
devised for creating dread, uncertainty and discrimination among relatives.

Too many of us, in what begins as a search for the
facts and clear guidance, have found ourselves in a
Kafka-like world where even the hospital corridors
seem to whisper, 'don't ask', where nobody knows or
perhaps everyone knows but nobody will say: passed
on from one shadowy functionary to another and back
again - 'Didn't you ask the doctor that?', or 'Mental
breakdown is only a label, you know', looking at you
with a bright stare or a glance from behind half-open
lids to see how you are taking it, how disturbed you
are; the strange platitudes - 'treat her as normally as
possible' or 'we shall have to see how things go, won't
Job done sketchily

Must it be like this? I can understand the doctor
who says, 'I can't spare the time from my clinical
work. I must leave someone else to put the families in
the picture.' I can understand consultants deputing
the job to others. But I cannot understand the job
being done sketchily or the impression being conveyed, subtly or crudely, that almost everything the
families really want answers to, including vital
questions of management, are something for some
inferior kitchen-and-scullery end of the hospital in
which the doctors are not much interested - and then
not even keeping these, in practice essential, departments properly informed.

I am not greatly impressed by the 'lack of time'
excuse when to put the relatives fully in the picture
may be important for the patient's chances of not
occupying a bed in that hospital again. But my
concern here is only to suggest that mystification may
begin not in the home but in hospitals, and is inflicted
not by the relatives on each other but by hospital
doctors and officers on the relatives.

I feel that far more research ought to be done on the
psychology of communication with the relatives of the
mentally ill. Are all the obfuscations, ambiguities and
lilp
wonder how many schizophrenics are walking the streets
at this moment with screwed-up bits of buff paper in their
pockets?or how many have been thrown away?
communications from town halls, hospitals, Government
departments and soon.'

evasions really necessary? And what is the motivation
behind them? I know it is said that many people
would 'rather not know' what their relative in the
mental hospital is suffering from, and that only a
small minority in the middle class and educated
working class can be expected to understand full
explanations or would profit from them if they did. I
wish we had hard evidence about all this. I suspect
defence mechanisms are at work.

Dr Lawton Tonge suggests in his book, The
Mending of Minds*, that 'the psychiatrist needs to
* Published by Darwen Finlayson at ?1.75
protect himself from his own feelings', that he shies
away from communicating a diagnosis of schizophrenia as a physician does from one of cancer. Dr.
Tonge admits that if he is not careful, 'the patient,
the family and the psychiatrist... are all involved in a
system of which the keynotes are inconsistency,
confusion and evasion', but he is not clear himself why,
as he puts it, the psychiatrist is 'tempted to play the
same game'.

A quite different form of non-communication is, I
fear, practised on relatives by doctors and social
workers alike, indeed by town halls, ministries,
official bodies - the lot. They may tell the schizophrenic something but they omit to inform the
relatives. Some .of them may assume (why?) that he
himself will tell his relatives.

Bits of buff paper
------------------
I wonder how many schizophrenics are walking the
streets at this moment with screwed-up bits of buff
paper in their pockets (or how many have been thrown
away) - communications from town halls, hospitals,
Government departments and so on, or with some
oral message which is supposed to have entered their
heads, on matters important to their well-being, of
which parents, wives, brothers know nothing.

This has little connection with problems of a
'divided service'. It is wrapped up with basic attitudes
to schizophrenia and schizophrenics, deriving from a
mixture of the legal position and professional codes,
neither wholly appropriate to the case. Either (the
general fiction goes) the person is ill enough to be
under a compulsory order, or he is a fully responsible
adult with whom we, the authorities, can deal
directly, not needing to inform anyone else.

In reality and in common sense, he is neither, but a
mentally-handicapped person in need of care and
protection, probably by a team. But if the team is to
include the relatives, and especially if some relative is
in practice the 'long-stop' guardian, they should surely
be kept in the picture at every point. I can scarcely
over-emphasise the importance of this, or the muddles
and confusions caused by neglecting it.

May I in conclusion mention two practical improvements the need for which to me stand out in this vast
field. The first might cost little new Treasury money:
the second, I fear, a great deal.

First, there is the need for a really adequate
counselling service for relatives at all stages of their
confrontation with the condition, integrating every
aspect: psychiatric, familial, social.

Second (and this takes me back to where I started),
there is the making good of the most glaring deficiency in the post-1950 arrangements. Starting with the
fifties, the accent has been on rehabilitation and
'living in the community'. Plans, as I said earlier, were
geared (and largely still are geared) to the belief that
de-institutionalising the chronic schizophrenic would
in itself have such a therapeutic effect, in conjunction
with hostels and day-hospitals, that long-term care
would hardly be necessary. This assumption has
proved to be unfounded.

Under the carpet
---------------
I would have thought the evidence is now overwhelming that a hard core of chronics require, and
will go on requiring, long-stay sheltered environments. Which do not exist - not even on paper. Most
hospital doctors, and every warden of a transitional
hostel, can speak of cases which they are forced to
discharge but which they know are almost bound to
deteriorate without some permanent shelter. Here is a
problem that cannot indefinitely be pushed under the
carpet - or back on the family.

For what is 'the family' in this connection? Chiefly,
I have suggested, an administrative fiction enabling
legislators and administrators to pretend - or even
believe - that the burdens their policies lay on
individuals are being carried by wider shoulders than
is in fact the case. But the administrative fiction is
also a nostalgic folk memory of the former extended
family, which is the 'ghost in the machine'.

When I hear somebody complaining irritably in
the press that hospitals get cluttered up with people
having their babies in them, or dying in a protracted
way, I reflect that the speaker is not really living in
1972. He is lost in a folk memory of rambling farmhouses in Thomas Hardy country replete with
uncles, aunts, cousins and chimney corners for the
aged or disabled. He is not looking at the 1972 reality
of a nuclear family occupying a 'semi', or a boxy little
flat, in some industrial conurbation, with the fit
members out all day.

And it is through the same romantic haze that
Whitehall, when it suits its book, can discover the
remarkable virtues of 'the family' for the long-term
care of schizophrenics who present problems which
can only be met in a group environment.

In the end 'the family' usually comes down to one
elderly widow, herself increasingly incapable. The
other children grow away and cannot or will not cope.
Their once affectionate concern gets calloused with
the years. They marry and their husbands or wives
will not accept indefinitely roles as nurses, guardians
or almoners, or allow them to accept them. What else
can one expect?

Unrealistic policy
------------------
Perhaps because the study of schizophrenia has
been case-oriented, hospital-oriented from the start,
the other members of a schizophrenic's family are
seldom fully perceived, still less accepted, as persons
in their own right, with their own need for fulfilment,
their own lives to lead. But there it is, and a social
policy is just not realistic which relies on a continuous
supply of saints or of elderly widows who live for ever.

In many of the terrible accounts by elderly mothers
in my possession there is no evidence of rejection, of a
casting out of the schizophrenic member, only of
immense weariness, a sense of a loved one deteriorating, and a great fear of the future.

The failure to provide even the bare minimum of
shelter and security for permanently handicapped
schizophrenics is, I suggest, the biggest current
scandal in our social provision.
