The Sociology of Mental Disorder
================================

:Author: Roger Bastide
Routledge and Kegan Paul, ?3.00

Aimez-vous Brahms? Aimez-vous le
structuralisme? The half-jibing stereotype of the Frenchman as the
great lover is as true in the intellectual sphere as any other and
perhaps even more so. After the
long affair with existentialism, now
the almost obsessional concern with
structuralism. But this is a brave
book, an honest, uneasy and unassuming book.

There are three clearly defined
sections. The middle section deals
with major sociological variables?
such as social class, mobility,
religion, ethnicity, family and kinship?and consists of an encyclopaedic review of all the major
empirical work in these fields. The
author writes as a sociologist of
course and is extremely hesitant
about interpretation of results?and
so he ought to be for, in all these
fields, there are contradictory findings among the various researchers.
But Bastide rarely ducks out, and
he persists in the attempt to relate
fieldwork to meaningful theory.

That is the real delight of the book
?his refusal to dodge issues, his
refusal to stay safely inside some
ivory tower of abstract speculation,
his grinding concern with the
meaning of fieldwork reports. The
research review is exhaustive though
'middle-aged' if not actually 'elderly'
?the book was published in 1965
and, inevitably, it has a pretty well
exclusively Franco-American bias.
The early part of the book is a
laborious outline, in the familiar
European style, of the relationship
between mental illness theories and
various social philosophies (notably
those of Comte and Durkheim) and
the ponderousness is quite offputting?not so much of the Gallic
esprit, more of the Teutonic solemnity, not to say incomprehensibility.
Perhaps the translation is unsympathetic.

His final section is an intellectual
tour de force?scholarly and wideranging. Sociologists will love this
book for it does something to vindicate their discipline. Psychiatrists
will, I expect, find it a hard slog and
in the end will wonder if the effort
was worthwhile. The author's treatment of psychiatrists is unfailingly
gentle and generous, but the process by which he arrives?uncompromisingly?at the popularisation
of psychiatry must arouse misgivings
among its practitioners.

Robert Ferguson
