Towards Self-Discovery
========================

:Author: Jill Rynvend

A woman who attends a hospital which specialises in group therapy shares her
feelings about this form of treatment and the value it has for her and explores
the circumstances which have led to her becoming deeply involved in the
group therapy process.

I have always lived my life, outwardly, the way I
thought others wanted me to. Mostly I failed?or
made myself ill?probably because I misunderstood
what they did want me to be. During my childhood I
tried hard to be an imitation of the child I thought my
parents preferred. At school, the average nonentity on
the one hand and the star-prize getter on the other. In
my marriage, to be the 'perfect wife' without knowing
at all what that meant to my husband. To my
daughter, a 'good mother' without stopping to wonder
whether she might prefer a real person. After an
abundance of anxiety-making experiences, all coming
on top of each other, I started having attacks of panic
or 'phobic anxiety'. In certain circumstances I would
feel an overpowering need to escape.

At first I thought it was some physical thing (I had
just had a major operation) but soon began to fear the
attacks themselves so much that I avoided places and
situations in which I thought they might occur.
Eventually it took a tremendous amount of will and
energy to get out of the house at all, (and then only of
necessity as my daughter was still a child). My doctor
suggested I should work at home at least to reduce my
anxiety about my daughter's well-being.

For several years I worked at home, dressmaking, so
avoiding many of the panic-making situations. But I
felt driven to produce couture type clothes, and fretted
a good deal about getting things ready in time for
fittings. The panic and anxiety stayed and, at the same
time, I became quite physically ill. Repeated visits to
my GP and hospital X-rays resulted on my being put
on a diet. I kept to a diet for nearly two years until I
was very thin and still full of phobias?but now had a
respectable excuse for not going out to meals. Other
physical troubles resulted in my having to have a
hysterectomy about this time. I finally got so desperate
and depressed about the state I was in, that I persuaded my GP to try and get me some treatment at the
Tavistock Clinic.

After a strange interview with a psychiatrist there, I
was sent a letter offering help 'when needed' as they
thought my GP was coping well with a 'difficult
situation'. I immediately wrote back to ask for help at
once, in a state of great anxiety that they might not
accept me as a patient as they were so busy.

So started a long series of weekly individual therapy
sessions, which did some good?though not nearly
enough. After a while I felt that I had so many
material problems that I had to cope with myself that
I stopped the sessions and after a long and fruitless
wait from the Employment Exchange, I found myself
a job through my local paper. The ordeal of long
journeys to work coupled with my dietary problems
eventaully overcame me. I was unable to find alternative work nearer home and visited my psychiatrist in
an increasing state of desperation. Eventually he suggested that I should go to a clinic for group therapy.
My reaction to the idea was of pure horror . . . rooms
full of strangers . . . journeys . . . public revelations of
private fears and guilts. NO! Never . . . absolutely
not.

I went back to my GP hoping that he would back
my refusal, but he, quite reasonably, suggested that I
should 'give it a try'?what had I got to lose? True.
By chance I heard of the appointment for an 'admission group'?how nearly I might have missed the
opportunity.

The admission group, in itself, was an ordeal,
mainly because I didn't know what to expect. It was in
a seemingly very small room filled with strange faces.
Some were staff and some patients, no one tells you
the difference, and it is most unreassuringly unapparent. That room does not seem nearly so small
now.

Asked whether I thought they could help me, I
answered truthfully that I had no idea; asked to
explain my problems, I found myself floundering in
the inanities and everything which had seemed so overwhelmingly difficult suddenly sounded trivial.
After about a week at the clinic, during which time
I had been having awful stomach pains, I got too
scared to eat, even at home. I visited my long-suffering
GP who prescribed some stomach mixture and antipanic pills. Feeling that I couldn't concentrate in the
groups, this medication seemed a good idea. Pain and
panic don't help me to talk?quite the opposite.
Mental pain makes me talk, but then only when I
cannot bottle up my feelings any longer. At least I was
putting myself into a situation repeatedly?daily?
which, by choice, I would have avoided.

Large groups of people still make me feel uncomfortable, but I can take part in what is going on to a
limited degree; I have some sort of chance to find out
why I am afraid. The tension and anxiety are often
still there; but, in spite of the thumping heart, dry
throat and wet hands, I can sometimes make myself
feel easier talking about what might have been bothering me. There is sometimes a physical relief in doing
this, just as there is a great amount of physical
distress when emotions are not expressed verbally.
Some people show their discomfort or tension in
groups?especially in large groups?by walking out,
frequently fetching cups of coffee and so on. I
can only feel tied to my chair. I have occasionally tried
reading during a group as a way of shutting myself off
from whatever is happening, but it does not help at
all.

There are days when to open one's mouth to talk
about what one is feeling results in torrents of tears.
Once that has happened to me, I am almost unable to
stop the flow and feel quite incoherent. My usual
pattern, when feeling so bothered that even my
thoughts make me cry, was to stay at home.
Lately I have been going to the Clinic even when I
feel really bad, which is what it's all about after all. I
can't say that there is a blinding flash of revelation,
when your problems are solved with a few words.
Usually what happens is a disappointing lack of
response.

It was quite out of character for me to weep publicly and I still have a lot of times when, at home alone, I
almost drown myself in tears from my own thoughts.
As a child my feelings were put strictly under control, for showing them meant either rejection or
punishment. Most of my adult life has been spent in
hiding strong feelings, either good or bad. To me, to
rationalise was the way out of difficult emotional
situations. I could nearly always see the other person's
point of view in a better light than my own, and felt
'in the wrong' about almost everything.

I think it has something to do with the way I look. I
appear calm and efficient and rather ugly. People
resent the 'poise' (which is false and worn through
habit) and lose patience with the dreary-looking
woman who would so dearly like to be liked.
Not respected?liked. There is a big difference.
Truthfully, I couldn't care less about being respected;
after all, what is there to respect except achievement?
I do care about being liked and I'm sure that if only
I could make people forget how I look, and try to
show them how I feel it would make a tremendous
difference.

Beautiful people have one advantage to start with
whatever they are like inside. People want to get to
know them. They can be kind or cruel, stupid or intelligent, good or bad. It doesn't matter, because everyone is all those things inside. It's what's outside that
matters to start with.

Group therapy has made me realise that I am never
given that tiny 'benefit of the doubt' that beautiful
women always get. So, I have to work harder at being
all the good things and try to keep the bad things to
myself. Of course, this is quite impossible; that's
another reason why group therapy is such a probing
and lasting treatment.

Making others understand what you really mean, is
perhaps the most difficult and yet the most necessary
function of speech. I often seem to be misunderstood;
perhaps because of the tone of my voice, or choice of
words. This is even more pronounced in group therapy
situations.

The main difference, however, between the 'therapy' situation and one in life outside the Clinic is that,
in the group, people are (one hopes) reacting emotionally, without false pretensions or opinions, which
would be quickly spotted by other members of the
group. One has the chance to argue and try to explain
one's meaning; and it can be very satisfying when
misunderstandings are cleared up. It brings the group
closer in some way, and some trust is felt which can be
kept in spite of future differences or arguments. This
does not happen nearly often enough and because I
feel particularly vulnerable, I would like that feeling
to be there all the time!
A particular example of what I have just said occurs
to me. I had been very annoyed and upset because an
old and trusted friend of the family had made a pass
at me. It wasn't that I objected to it in itself, but this
was the impression I gave the group, whose reaction
was that he was 'only human' and why should I make
such a fuss. I had obviously explained the incident and
circumstances badly and when I later had the opportunity in the group to explain that he had visited me
with the sole purpose of asking me some very personal questions, which I answered honestly and had
32
asked him not to repeat my confidences to anyone
else, the picture began to look different. His unheralded and unwanted pass had seemed to me to be the
direct result of what I had been discussing, especially
as he must now have thought that I was in no
position to complain. I felt emotionally blackmailed,
in fact.

The group saw the whole thing in another light,
partly as a result of my explanation and partly because
they were not involved in the situation. The removal
of their implied antagonism now enabled me to see the
whole thing in perspective. It would be very unusual
circumstances that allowed such complicated and deep
exploration of feelings, reactions and motives?
outside of a group therapy situation, that is. It made
me more aware of the importance of trying to make
my feelings clear outside the Clinic. I know I still fail
in this pretty often, but I do know it.

I believe we mostly operate on the assumption that
other people can fill in gaps of unsaid words accurately and are hurt or dismayed when they cannot.
Someone might ask a question of another group
member which could be extremely probing. In answering, previously held opinions or feelings have to be
carefully examined.

In spite of all this, if the group is functioning well,
what is talked about and how it is expressed become
more spontaneous. In some way I could not attempt to
explain, it becomes easier to make oneself understood.
This sounds a bit idealistic; perhaps it is, because
new members are constantly coming into the groups,
and so misunderstandings can really occur at any
time. It's just that I feel better able to put over what
I am feeling.

Obviously, the change is in me. Fighting the spontaneity is still the feeling in the back of your mind
that it is so important not to give the wrong impression. If I constantly give the wrong impression to a
group of people who see me day after day over a
long period of time, then there must be something
wrong in the way I express myself.

Equating with this is something else we have to
remember; and this is even more important and difficult. It is that the reactions of some of the others in the
group could be?in themselves?neurotic and that
my original intention was perfectly valid. It is here
that patients have to try and learn discrimination
and to make their own judgements.

At first I assumed that everything I said must be
open to question; that, if any doubt arose, the one at
fault must be me. I am just beginning to feel that
perhaps sometimes my opinions or version of an event
might be perfectly reasonable and that the other
person's reaction is at fault.

I am also beginning to try out some of the things
felt in groups, outside them. This has not been a
conscious effort but, in writing this, I have come to
realise it. It can be difficult, as speaking plainly is
often resented. For example it is very hard indeed for
me to refuse demands made on my time or sympathy.
To realise that such demands?made, for instance, in
the middle of the night by someone who I could help
much better when wide awake?might reasonably be
refused without feelings of guilt. It is worth trying to
foster this approach because, in my experience, to give
out a sense of duty often results simply in resentment
on the part of the giver. I still feel scared to give
freely, or too freely, just in case I should then be asked
for more than I can or want to give. I'm working on
this.

Groups discuss many topics. Some are trivial to
start with, such as the mention of a TV programme
watched the previous night. However, one can soon
predict with some accuracy what the contribution of
each person is likely to be. Political 'bias', sourgrapes, personal animosity and general attitude to
everyday things will influence people's reactions of
course. We surprise each other from time to time by
reacting in an unexpected way! Although the subject
discussed started out by being trivial, it can develop
into a 'group' with the members strongly indentifying
one with the other although the original experience
related was apparently unique to the person relating
to it.

I once mentioned a programme about 'Liquid
Theatre' and tried to convey to the group what it had
meant to me. I had thought that the idea of using all
our senses instead of only sight and hearing would be
a valuable experience. Immediately they reacted by
reminding themselves of the 'DO NOT TOUCH'
notices everywhere and similar admonitions from
parents. Soon we all began to feel that, to allow touch
to be used freely, there would have to be a lot of trust.
We asked each other if we had this trust. Some did,
some did not. All were feeling emotion about the idea.
Later, these feelings would no doubt be explored
personally and people question their reactions.

Group therapy in such situations is also of great
value because to know that your feelings are shared by
others, whose actual past experiences may be quite
different, makes you see things more in perspective. In
others' faulty adjustment is mirrored in your own.
After many months, I have got as far as being able,
sometimes, to feel and not to reason; to react and not
to rationalise. I am trying to find out from among all
those people I was, just who I am?good, bad or
indifferent.

It is, for me, just the beginning.

