Golieaguesm He
=================

We seldom think of the policeman as a counsellor and unofficial social worker
yet much of his day-to-day work can only be described in this way. Many of
the problems of his job are social and ethical as well being legal, but police
training is very limited on the subject and other social agencies seem reluctant
to co-operate.

Dr David Abrahamson was breaking new ground in a
recent talk to Metropolitan Police First Aid instructors about psychiatric 'first aid'. This new departure is
a sign that, at last, policing is being recognised for
what it is, a social service of which law enforcement is
only part.

We may yet see a 'togetherness' of social workers
under the umbrella of 'social defence', a term coined
by the United Nations for one of its agencies and useful in emphasising that, however desperate their work,
all those engaged in building and maintaining healthy,
happy, fear-free communities are serving a common
cause.

Police and the medical profession have been held
apart in the past by the priorities given by doctors to
individual patients and the police priority which goes
to the community. The two are in fact reconcilable,
the antipathy is misplaced. Community well-being is a
precise reflection of individual well-being.
Policing in democratic societies is not always well
understood. The subjective bias in favour of individual
freedom is frequently at odds with the objective concept of freedom within society. Police represent the
idea that society, as a whole, has the right to make laws
which all should obey for the benefit of society as a
whole.

There is a dilemma here which can only be resolved
by the sacrifice of a modicum of individualism in order
to preserve the larger part of freedom for the greatest
number, especially freedom to live without fear of
attack on person or property.

Francis Bacon resolved the dilemma, for himself at
least, when he wrote 'Better it is to live where nothing
is lawful than where all things are lawful'. Anarchists
take the extreme opposite view whilst democracy
steers between the two. Police in a democracy are thus
necessarily linked with the status quo. Their task is to
preserve the position of compromise adopted by their
masters (the large majority of the population). Paradoxically, the order attained as a result provides the
best prospect for non-violent change.

Naturally, because we are all unique, humanly
imperfect, we all break the law at some time or
another; for the most part our sins are venial and we
are illogical enough to blame the enforcement
agency if we are discovered and prosecution follows.
Income Tax Inspectors, Customs Officers, Factory
Inspectors and Vehicle Examiners all experience the
wrath which may follow from an 'innocent' offender.

Most lawbreakers arc thus ordinary people, as
'normal' as reader or writer. A sizable proportion of
offenders, including many of the worst criminals, are
Sgt. George Dixon, as portrayed by Jack Warner in the
BBC 1 television series 'Dixon of Dock Green', is the outstanding well-known example of the sort of policeman
who knows his local community inside out and to whom
people turn when they want almost any kind of help. He
often seems to spend as much time as a counsellor and
confidante as he does fighting crime.

frank Elmes
'abnormal' at least in the sense that they reject the
norms of society in favour of individual desires. It is in
this field that police have most need of pychology
and psychiatry.

All good police officers aquire some knowledge of
people; they simply have to adapt themselves to circumstances and individuals as they find them. The
same officer may use the rough side of his tongue in
one situation, excessive politeness in another. If occasionally he misjudges and uses the wrong tactic he may
find himself the subject of complaint.

Thus, in the daily confrontations which make up
police work, the officer either learns or fails to survive.

This is the 'psychological' side of police work which
some observers condemn. They regard it as wrong that
police officers should be other than routinely polite on
all occasions. No police officer worthy of his calling is
gratuitously unkind or rude but there are often situations in which swift, forcible action or words are
imperative.

Law
---
Standard training of police officers is confined to the
law and essential operational techniques. There is
little space in an already crowded curriculum for the
study of mental disorders as such. Room has to be
found for civics and for sociological background training to help comprehension of the behaviour of immigrant groups and dissenting minorities. This is
necessarily limited to basics and it is doubtful if
initial training could possibly include even elementary
instruction relating to mental disorders.

Training might more conveniently be arranged at a
later stage when experience can be related to theories;
possibly a Principal Nursing Officer from a mental
hospital might be able to give more immediately useful, practical advice than a psychiatrist. There remains
the risk that the novice policeman may clash with a
severely deranged person on his first tour of unaccompanied duty. Fortunately today he can make contact
with more experienced officers by personal radio but
the hazard to both officer and deranged person is
obvious enough.

Here the law is not of much help. The law says a
Constable may arrest and take 'to a place of safety'.
No doubt legal draftsmen spent some hours in their
choice of language defining police powers; the officer
has to act decisively one way or the other (it might be
wiser to run away!) in the space of seconds.

This kind of explosive situation apart, police must
know of the law concerning absconders from mental
hospitals, and that dealing with warrants to remove or
escort patients to a place of safety. Important?but
not much use in practice?is the law concerning
cruelty or neglect of mental patients, and the protection of women against the sexual desires of men.

Police rarely have time to consider why men are not
protected against lecherous women and, even if they
did, would be hard put to find an answer. The sober
truth is that the law on mental disorder does not figure
prominently in police manuals, whilst instruction on
the handling of mental patients is minimal.

Mental disorders and crime
-------------------------
It is in the general field of police duties that police
make frequent contact with the mentally disordered. If
the definitions set out in the Mental Health Act are
strictly applied the proportion of mentally disordered
offenders may not be high. Many, many crimes are
committed, however, under stress of one sort or
another which creates a mental attitude very close to
the statutory measure, though not reaching it.

Vandalism is a case in point. We nearly all enjoy
breaking things so that some forms of vandalism are
little more than a temporary release from restraints
which keep destructive urges within bounds. But some
of the systematic destruction of public property?

such as telephones, lavatory fittings, and trees and
plants in parks?is motivated by a desire for revenge
on society. Certainly a sizable minority have cause to
feel that society has rejected them, or at least neglected them, but the persistent vandal has nurtured
resentment until he is in much the same state as the
arsonist who longs to destroy so that he may enjoy
destruction. Sexual fantasies in arsonists are well
known; vandalism contains a similar element of savage
satisfaction. From a police point of view it is helpful to
know which of our young people, and they usually are
young, are so frustrated and dissatisfied with life in
society that their dissatisfaction is likely to lead to
crime of the dangerous purposeless type.

Some police forces have experimented with rough
predictive methods which give an indication of the
probability of a fall into criminality unless preventive
action is taken. This follows, to some extent, the predictive techniques demonstrated in the US by Sheldon
and Eleanor Glueck. It is probably right to say that,
though having no probative value, predictive techniques can be of value both to society and to young
people who are in the course of yielding to pressures
which create chronic criminality.

Most of us are repelled by any kind of analysis
which involves labelling a young person as 'potentially
criminal'. Yet, in logic and in fact, this is no different
to diagnosis (and prognosis) of a mentally handicapped child.

Society at present can do little to correct criminality
in an individual until criminality has been established.

This is usually done by prosecution. Not until the
prosecution has discharged the burden of proof which
the law requires does the machinery for diagnosing
and treating mental disturbance really begin to
operate. Even then psychiatry, which is no exact
science, may fail to come up with a solution. Worst
still a solution may be suggested which is impossible to
achieve because of lack of remedial facilities.
Prediction, scientifically developed, may yet play a
great part in reducing criminality if matched by adequate clinical and supervisory services. Advanced
predictive methods would entail a much improved
liason and understanding between police and the medical profession. Doctors would have to yield some of
their protective attitudes vis-a-vis patients.

One doctor frustrated attempts to prosecute one of
his patients for shoplifting by expressing a willingness
to testify, every time she was caught, that she was suffering from cyclical insanity i.e. was sane in between
but insane when she stole. Whether this protectiveness
was in the interests of his patient it is impossible to
judge. She might well have benefited by an order to
undergo treatment. Doctors might also have to get
used to the idea that preventing crime is as socially
useful?and respectable?as preventing tuberculosis
or cancer.

Police, on the other hand, would have to yield some
of their suspicion of psychiatrists. Police are not the
only people wary of 'head shrinkers' and 'trick
cyclists'. Their critics have ranged from HM Judges to
private soldiers in HM Forces. Black and white, right
and wrong, deliberate or compulsive, are often merged
by psychiatrists into a grey area of doubt which, however appropriate it may be in explaining the working
of the mind, prompts the suspicion that the whole
science of psychiatry is dubious. The eagerness with
which Freudian and other theories have been exploited
as justifying deviance from society's norms is also suspect by those who believe that restraint is essential to
communal living. There is plainly much to do.

Despite doubts on some aspects of psychiatry, police
experience of offenders establishes clear links with
mental disturbance. A middle-class wife, after divorcing her husband, formed a lesbian association with an
older woman. She became irritable and depressed,
probably through experiencing shame or guilt. Her
two sons, aged ten and twelve became delinquent. This
kind of complex situation is quite beyond the power of
the police to resolve. They can only hope that as a
results of prosecution someone will provide answers
and aid which the police cannot.

Serious domestic quarrels nearly always have an
undercurrent of mental stress. Police often call a halt
to hostilities and give sensible advice in domestic
crises, a social service which occupies more police time
than they willingly admit and which they regard as
outside 'normal' police duty. Helpful as this service is
there is room to doubt whether it represents the
best that can be done. Here again there is need for
liason between police and the family doctor. This is
specially true when minor violence may escalate into
major attack on one spouse or the other, or on the
children. Battered babies are more often due to parental inadequacy than to parental sadism. Over-burdened mothers contribute to murder statistics by
forming the disordered view that it is kind to destroy
children (often proir to suicide) to prevent them being
subjected to the same kind of distress they, the
mothers, are experiencing. Police who have to deal
with tragedies of this kind often feel that prevention
ought to have been possible, if only co-operative if not
co-ordinated social defence machinery had been available. Initiative in such cases would almost certainly
have to be taken by medical men and they, at present,
are powerfully inhibited by their own code of conduct.

Much the same applies to psychopaths and psychotics. Many violent assaults and murders are committed by mentally disturbed persons. To the laymen
such people are outwardly normal?though schoolteachers who, like police officers, are compelled
to aquire some understanding of psychology, are
frequently able to point unerringly to disturbed children, who, presumably, become disturbed adults if
there is no intervention. There seems no obvious way
acceptable to ail concerned by which family, teachers,
police and doctors could be brought together in a predisaster rescue operation. Mostly each keeps his own
knowledge to himself until a serious incident occurs
and even then may be reluctant to be involved in a
prosecution situation. Good social defence might prevent a prosecution situation arising but prosecution
must be accepted as a 'long-stop' where other social
defences have failed.

Mentally disordered people may commit crimes
against property as a substitute for violence. A disturbed child steals from its mother; a respectable
woman in menopause shop lifts for excitement; a
policeman under stress steals in protest against the
undiluted respectability of his occupation and his
private life. Even thefts which appear plain cases of
greed may have concealed stratas of stress and disorder.

Crime, after all, is a creation of the human mind,
and is inseparable from conscience or a sense of guilt.
It is not a crime to kill in battle; it is most heinous to
kill for personal pleasure. It is not a crime to have
sexual intercourse with a girl aged 16; it is a crime to
anticipate her birthday by a month, or even a day.
Rape and non-criminal over-persuasion are separated
by the haziest lines, made even hazier now that a permissive society has weakened the right of a women to
say 'No'. It is a crime to rob a bank of ?i million; it
is not a crime to gain the sum by manipulating the
stock market. Crime is thus forbidden selfishness;
many other forms of self-indulgence, which seem
morally on the same level, are left untouched. In this
kind of confused situation it is hard enough for the
highly intelligent to live lawfully and rationally; it is
very difficult indeed for those of low intelligence or of
disturbed mind.

Mental disorders and non-crimes
-------------------------------
Suicide has been mentioned and remains a crime
though attempted suicide no longer is. Suicide 'whilst
the balance of his mind was disturbed' is a common
enough Coroner's verdict. It must also be applicable
to most attempted suicides. No-one regretted the passing of attempted suicide as a crime but the absence of
sanctions often works against the individual's interest
rather than for him. Police are still frequently called to
attempted suicides though their only role is to help in
such ways as they can, as at the scene of an accident.
Though our consciences rest easier since attempted
suicide was removed from the list of criminal acts it is
doubtful if social defence is improved. Many mentally disordered people need some form of compulsion
if they are to be helped.

People under mental stress are apt to become 'missing persons' deliberately or, more rarely, under the
influence of amnesia. Police are caught in a dilemma.
It is not for them to prevent people removing themselves to more congenial surroundings, but the phrase
'lest harm has befallen them' is always remembered in
missing person cases. Children missing, and adolescent girls who have shown no sign of disturbance, warrant the full treatment. In other cases police must suit
action to circumstances, something which calls for the
exercise of judgement. Perhaps in all cases the family
doctor should be consulted before action is taken. But
will he tell? Does he want to be involved?

Police regard mainly as nuisances to be tolerated
the apparently harmless people who suffer from delusions. Completely innocent of danger in police experience are those who suffer from rays or currents
directed through walls by an anonymous 'they'. More
menacing is the situation when 'they' are identified
with neighbours, or priests, or police, because a focal
point for delusions may lead to potentially dangerous
counter-action. Do police do enough in such cases?
The usual technique is to pacify and placate, wasting
as little police time as possible. Should the police
report to mental health authorities or ought the deluded to be allowed their fantasies which harm no-one?
And there are persistent letter writers, including the
anonymous kind, and complainers who are so obsessed
with their grievances that mental instability is obvious
enough. There are those who simply stand and disconcertingly stare.

Plainly we are all in difficulties in distinguishing
between the eccentric and the mentally disturbed. We
are in difficulties in deciding when society should
intervene to control or help a potentially dangerous
person. We are in difficulties in reconciling one
method of social defence with another, particularly
when a doctor-patient relationship is involved. None
of these difficulties can be eliminated by any one
agency acting alone. One can only say that we have
allowed a 'who drills the holes' mentality to slow down
the move towards essential co-ordination.
