A Question of Madness
======================

:Author: Zhores and Roy Medveaev Macmillan
2.75

It is impossible to read this short
book without being profoundly
moved. The facts as related are
stark and clear. Zhores Medvedev,
a distinguished Russian biologist,
largely responsible for debunking
the Lysenko school of false genetics,
incurred further official disfavour by
his published plea for co-ordinated
scientific research on a world-wide
scale.

He was dismissed from his post
and subsequently, under the pretext
of discussing certain problems of his
adolescent son with a local senior
psychiatrist, was himself confronted
with the suggestion that his own
writings showed several signs of
mental deviation. He was invited to
enter a psychiatric hospital voluntarily.

He refused and was forcibly abducted from his home by the police.
Zhores' equally distinguished twin
brother, Roy, organised a campaign
of protest with some of the leading
Soviet publicists, scientists and
writers and Zhores was eventually
released.

But not before he was subjected
to further so-called psychiatric commissions in an effort to find some
mental abnormality. In hospital he
was reported to be showing 'signs
of heightened nervousness', not surprising perhaps in the circumstances. After repeated enquiry his
friends and relatives learnt that he
was 'a psychopathological person
with reformist tendencies' who had
'an exaggerated opinion of himself
and showed poor 'adaptation to the
social environment'. The nearest the
authorities got to an actual psychiatric diagnosis was 'incipient schizophrenia', whatever that may mean,
and not a shred of evidence was
presented.

What treatment he needed for
such alarming symptoms and why it
was necessary to detain him to have
it, was never made clear but could
be gathered from the final insult on
his release. He was expected to
attend an out-patient clinic and to
give up his public writings if he knew
what was good for him. Psychiatric
blackmail, indeed, as Medvedev
calls it.

It is clear enough that Medvedev's
detention in a psychiatric hospital
was politically inspired and that the
doctors concerned were merely
pawns in the game. Reports of a
number of similar cases have
seeped out of the Soviet Union
where the victims, not as influential
as Medvedev, are still incarcerated.
For the sceptics and others still
inclined to regard it all as just anticommunist propaganda this book
should be compulsory reading. In its
sober, restrained, factual manner it
is a tremendous indictment of a
despicable practice of psychiatry
prostituted to serve the interests of
a totalitarian state.

David Shaw
