Psychology at Work
====================

:Author: Peter B. Warr
Penguin Education, 75p

Human behaviour fascinates most
people, even if it may on occasion
confuse, confound or merely irritate.
The behaviour of people at work (or
on strike), can be any or all of this,
but it is also, by almost any yardstick, of considerable importance to
society. This new paperback with
twenty distinguished contributors
provides an up-to-date and welldocumented review of current knowledge and opinions in the rapidly
expanding field of occupational
psychology.

As the editor admits in the introduction, the book has been written
primarily for undergraduate or postgraduate students of psychology. It
will, however, enjoy a wider
audience since there is much in it
that will interest line or personnel
managers, trades unionists and
others such as those involved in
occupational health, safety or welfare.

But it is almost inevitable that in a
book of this kind some chapters are
a great deal easier to read and
understand than others. The first
chapter by Donald Broadbent,
Director of the Medical Research
Council's Applied Psychology Unit,
is an extremely clear discussion of
the role of the applied sciences in
stimulating developments in theoretical psychology. The same can be
said for Professor Tom Singleton's
chapter on the development of
ergonomics from its beginnings with
time and motion studies to the
recent concepts of systems and
errors ergonomics.

There are fifteen other more
specialised chapters which provide
valuable information on the views of
occupational psychologists on subjects such as accidents, shift work,
the employment of older workers,
selection, training, motivation, decision-making and the social structures of organisation.

There is no doubt that this is a
useful book, covering the field in a
most competent fashion. It has a
good index and at the end of each
chapter there are suggestions for
further reading. The student will also
find about 750 references to original
papers.

For the interested amateur, it will
not be a book to be read in a hurry
since only a few of the authors have
managed to avoid the use of jargon.
How many of the uninitiated couid
read terms such as 'nascent workflow bureaucracy' or even 'timeboundedness' without hesitating?
The book should be used as one
from which to select chapters on
subjects about which we already
know a little, it is not an elementary
introduction to occupational psychology.

Peter Taylor
