Love and Hate
==============

:Author: Irenaus Eibl-Eibesfeldt
Methuen, ?2.50

Professor Eibl-Eibesfeldt is a pupil
of Konrad Lorenz, the father of
ethology, and is director of the section concerned with human ethology
at the Max Planck Institute for comparative physiology. This book is a
translation from German and it follows an established tradition of
Lorenz, Desmond Morris and others
who are relating the human to
animal behaviour as studied in
various species of fishes, birds and
mammals.

Clearly behind such conceptualisation lies the issue of human evolution and here the jump from animal
to human behaviour is one laden
with dangerous traps on which only
the experts are fit to comment.

The author, of course, takes much
for granted in bridging this human/
animal gap and pursues a popular
and important theme?the roots of
aggression in the higher species
and its implications for man. He
starts by attacking the environmental theory that all aggression is
definitely not innate but the product
of the environmental forcesisuch as
frustration. The dream of all optimists that we can eliminate aggression by simply improving human
conditions is unacceptable to the
thesis which sees aggression as an
innate force in all species, including man.

He then examines how animals
and man have developed techniques
to take the sting out of aggression.
For this he utilises almost exclusively the formation of one-to-one
bonds. The mating bond is the fundamental one but the parent-child
relationship is seen to be of even
greater importance. It is the motherchild relationship that establishes
all the characteristics of closeness,
smiling, comforting, food-giving,
nurturing which continue throughout
adult life as the signs of contact,
friendship, appeasement and cohesion.

Thus the small group community
establishes close bonds within itself
which prevail against intra-group
aggression. People within the group
smile, greet, feed each other, all of
which reduces tension. The group,
however, closes its ranks against
outsiders who threaten its territory,
food and female members. But in
former periods peace could be
reached once again through the
visible and personal contact of
adjacent groups, if not always, at
most sometimes.

The breakdown of the intimate
group, the anonymity of communities, the impersonality of group
membership and the powerful destructive weapons have removed
many of these innate tendencies
towards peace and love.

Professor Eibl-Eibesfeldt nevertheless believes that man's inherent
biological tendencies towards bonding will prevail and he remains
optimistic about the future. Certainly
all his readers would wish to agree
with him fully. But there are reservations in that man's uniqueness in
complexity tends to outstrip his biological defence mechanisms.

Although the bonds of attachment formed between mother and
child are of permanent importance
in maintaining loving relationships
with others, man needs to develop
a will to care and to love which goes
far beyond his biological infrastructure requiring every ounce of
his reason and ultimately a force
outside himself which has variously
been called God.

J. Oominian

