Therapeutic Consultations in Child Psychiatry
==============================================

:Author: D. W. Winnicott
Hogarth Press, ?4.50

This posthumously published book
presents one of the most important
contributions that Donald Winnicott
made to clinical practice. He described it as the application of psychoanalysis to child psychiatry.
Details are given of the treatment
of twenty-one children, and the descriptions have the spontaneity and
right choice of words which characterised Dr Winnicott's encounters
with his patients.

The work had a very practical
objective. It became obvious that it
?was 'not useful or practicable to
prescribe a psychoanalytic treatment for every child', and Dr Winnicott found himself using a first interview for therapeutic purposes to
such good effect that, in many
cases, this was all that was needed.
At times he appears to be addressing himself to fellow analysts. He
refers to the pressures on analysts
to develop methods which will
spread the benefit of the analytical
process to far more patients than
could be dealt with by the formal
analytical method. By the same
token it is necessary to spread the
message and the understanding to
the even larger number of child
psychiatrists and therapists who are
not psychoanalysts.

Donald Winnicott had the power
to communicate ideas, without diluting them, to workers with different
backgrounds, training, experience
and so on. Each of his pupils,
readers, or members of his audiences, would get a separate message; but all of them got something
of him.

This particular book is for people
working in the clinical field and a
copy should be available in every
clinic.

J. H. Kahn
