What's Wrong with Sex Education?
=================================

:Author: Michael Lloyd-Jones

Sex education is intended to equip the young with knowledge and understanding of sexuality, so that they may join in its expression without guilt, fear
or danger. Too often it amounts to moral propaganda, seeking to discourage
all forms of sexual activity among the unmarried.

Despite wide recognition of the need for sex education
there is a great reluctance on the part of parents and
teachers to undertake it. Parents are handicapped by
their own lack of sex education which, in many cases,
has left them ignorant of anything more than a few
basic facts. Even in those cases where parents have
acquired detailed sexual knowledge, they often find
that their emotional involvement with their children
prevents them from discussing the subject. Teachers
are less emotionally involved with the children, but
more often than not suffer from the same ignorance
and embarrassment.

Moral propaganda
---------------
What sex education is given usually consists of
moral propaganda which is designed to persuade
young people that they should postpone all sex
experience until after marriage. Within this framework young people are taught as few facts as possible,
and information is deliberately withheld or distorted,
in order to reinforce this ban on pre-marital sex. This
judgement is based on a careful examination of
syllabuses, radio and television broadcasts for schools,
and - in particular - a large number of the books and
pamphlets which are frequently handed out to the
young as a substitute for a frank discussion of sex.

Children and teenagers are, meanwhile, eager for
the facts, but aware of the taboos that still persist in
adult society, and consequently uncertain where to
turn for information and help. It is obvious that their
lack of knowledge does not prevent sexual experimentation. The majority of young people are having sexual
experiences. This has always been the case, and it
seems that there is nothing society can do to prevent
this.

What society has done is to
ensure that this sexual
experimentation takes place
in an atmosphere of guilt
secrecy and clanger.

Instead of a frank recognition of the needs of
teenage sexuality, society condemns all forms of
sexual expression for the unmarried - even masturbation. A hundred years ago, self-stimulation was said
to be a 'secret vice' and those practising it were
threatened with fearful consequences, ranging from
blindness to insanity.

Today we know that there are no grounds for such
an attitude. Self-stimulation is universally practised
and is quite harmless, providing that those doing it
are not subjected to moralistic disapproval. Condemnation of this practice creates and encourages feelings
of guilt and anxiety which may impair sexual adjustment. It should therefore be one of the tasks of sex
education to reassure the young that there is no harm
in their enjoyment of self-stimulation. Many of the
latest books of sex education, however, are still
creating fears and fostering guilt.

In Your Guide to the Opposite Sex (Pitman, 1969),
Pauline Perry states that there are 'two dangers in
masturbation as a frequent practice'. (She does not
say what 'frequent' means.) 'Firstly, it is liable to
become a secretive and furtive thing, and can give a
boy the association of sex with guilty and unhappy
feelings. Secondly ... in adult life, and in marriage,
the boy who masturbates may find himself unable to
receive satisfaction in the sexual act.' Since 'frequently' is not defined, any reader may fear that he is
in that category, and in this way writers help to
create those same 'guilty and unhappy feelings'
which are the cause of the trouble.

A similar approach can be found in The Facts of
Sex (MacGibbon & Kee, 1969), which describes itself
as a 'revolutionary approach to sex instruction for
teenagers'. Its author, John James, says of masturbation, 'the habit can become a drug and the masturbator may get hooked. The more it is performed, the
more difficult it may become to stop doing it and so it
is better not to start, even though the fear and shame
of it is far worse than the thing itself.' It seems that
this book is not so 'revolutionary' after all.

No evidence
James Bevan, the author of Sex, The Plain Facts
(Faber, 1970), spreads the alarming idea that if a gir
masturbates by 'the thigh-rubbing method , she may
find it difficult to open her legs and obtain excitement
from coitus'. The author provides no evidence to
support this extraordinary threat.

It seems certain that the earliest sexual experiences
are usually of self-stimulation, but before long most
boys and girls wish to extend their sexual knowledge
and to share their sexual experiences. Petting is a
natural way of doing this, and should be a delight u
source of sexual experience. As such we shou
perhaps be encouraging love-play. Instead, as wit
self-stimulation, sex educators attempt to persuade
the young to resist all temptation, and warn t em
that the practice of petting is harmful.

In A Young Person's Guide to Life and ove
(Bodley Head, 1971), Dr Benjamin Spock appears to
recommend that teenagers should not pet until t ey
are 18 or 19 and even then he thinks 'it s sensible or a
teenager not to go beyond kissing and embracing the
Person he loves until there is some kind of commitment to marriage'. This advice is backed by t e
sinister warning that it is based on tragic cases
encountered in medical practice'. Meanwhile t e
Majority of young people continue to indulge in sue
tragic practices' and survive.

In A Parent's Guide to Sex Education (Corgi, 1968),
Clarie Rayner wrote that a girl who pets may
eventually become cold and unresponsive in her lovemaking - even frigid'. Here again, we see that this
could create those very fears which may cause sucn
Problems as frigidity. T, .

Intercourse is, of course, also proscribed,
prohibition is usually backed up by warnings a ou
^legitimacy and VD. Despite this apparent concern
about these risks, many sex educators seem strange y
reluctant to provide practical help. The county o
Wiltshire's scheme of Education for Personal Relationships (1971) provides an outstanding example of the
common evasion of the responsibility to give education in contraception.

The scheme states, 'In mentioning mechanical
methods it is important that they [the pupils] should
realise that these are not reliable unless correctly
used . . . Telling children about contraception in this
way should not be confused with giving instruction in
the use of birth control. There is no question that
teachers should be expected to do this.' In other
words, young people must be told of the dangers, but
the information they need in order to avoid these
dangers is to be withheld.

The problem of VD is a serious one, but it is
aggravated by the inadequate nature of most sex
education. Young people are not given enough
information about the symptoms, transmission and
treatment of these diseases. The Health Education
Council's research indicates that 'well over 50% of
young people show a complete misunderstanding
about VD'. (Baroness Birk, House of Lords, 11/5/70).
Wide-spread ignorance of the symptoms helps to
explain the high VD rate. But present sex education
contributes to the spread of these diseases in another
crucial way.

As long as sex education
consists of pious, moral
injunctions, and as long as
the facts are twisted and
concealed to suit this
purpose, then we cannot
blame the young for disregarding warnings about VD.

They are told so many half-truths and blatant
falsehoods, that many of them disbelieve all that
they are taught about sex. No wonder many
young people do not take the possibility of infection
very seriously. This is a direct consequence of the
attitude of mistrust which adult society has created in
the young. Is it not time for us to be honest with
them?

It is ironic that those who are the first to throw up
their hands in horror at the latest VD, illegitimacy or
abortion figures, are also often the first to oppose any
attempt to give practical advice and help to the young.

How can sex education face its responsibilities?
First, it must face reality. Sex should be seen for what
it is, a normal and delightful aspect of human
behaviour. Sex education should then make as its aim
the helping of the young to know about and to
understand sexuality, so that they may join in its
expression without guilt, fear or danger. If this aim
is to be fulfilled, then we should teach the young, at
the appropriate ages, the physical, psychological and
social facts about sexual development, variations of
sexual expression, reproduction, contraception, abortion, diseases and the various problems that young
people encounter as their bodies develop.

It is sometimes maintained that such a scheme
would ignore feelings and emotions. But these too are
facts, and should be treated as such, instead of which
at present they are largely ignored, falsely-romanticised or dismissed with classic under-statement ?
sexual excitement, for example, where it is mentioned
at all, is likely to be summed up like this: 'Intercourse
is accompanied by pleasurable feelings.'

All these facts should be explained as clearly as
possible, and teachers should not hesitate to illustrate
these facts, particularly with photographs, slides and
films. Not only do photographs usually convey more
information than sketches or diagrams, but they also
have the advantage of communicating a guilt-free
attitude. Photographs of, for example, self-stimulation, help to convey recognition of the fact that this
practice is normal and not something of which to be
ashamed.

This is not to say, of course, that sketches and
diagrams have no role to play; they have their uses for example, where photographs would not be very
informative or would be impossible to take. But
drawings should only be used in preference to
photographs when sketches or diagrams offer the
clearest illustration; they should never be used as a
means of avoiding realism.

The language used for explaining sex should also
be chosen with care. The scientific terms have their
uses, but they can also be adopted as a means of
avoiding frankness.

Scientific jargon can be as
euphemistic as baby-talk,
and there should be noplace
in sex education for the
embarrassed attitude which
leadsteacherstotake refuge
in obscure, medical terms.
The use of this kind of language must sound as
prudish to the young, as the circumlocutions of
the Victorians seem to us. Explanations should
be given in the terms the young know and
understand.

Freely available
----------------
But society's responsibility for the healthy sexual
development of our young people should not be
limited to providing sex education in schools. For
example, it is not enough to tell the young what the
best methods of contraception are; we should make
these contraceptives freely available to them and we
should help them if one of these methods fails.
Much of the responsibility for providing practical
help and reassurance lies with the parents. It is
generally agreed by psychologists that the basic
features of the personality are formed in the first few
years of life, before most children attend school.
These early years are a time of exploration and
discovery, and this includes sexual experimentation.
It is harmful to punish these early sex experiences,
such as infantile self-stimulation and other forms of
sex-play. Parents have a great responsibility to
encourage their children to have a natural and healthy
attitude towards sex.

Furtive experiences
-------------------
In the teenage years parents should not stop their
children from being alone with their boy or girl
friends, in their own homes. If young people are not
able to do their love-making at home, in comfort and
privacy, they will be driven out into the streets, into
furtive experiences on lonely commons, in dark
alleyways, or in the backs of cars. Who is to blame
for the consequences?

We have inherited from previous generations a
legacy of prudery, sexual guilt, and moral cant. At
present society is passing this legacy on to the next
generation. If we are not to perpetuate the pattern of
sexual misery and guilt, we must face the facts, and
recognise the sexual needs and desires of children and
teenagers. We should allow them to give physical
expression to their feelings and give them the knowledge and help they need to enjoy these experiences in
safety, comfort and privacy.

It may be too late for adult society fully to come to
terms with its own sexuality; it need not be too late
for our children. Sex education is a great responsibility. It is not a responsibility which parents can
pass to teachers, which teachers can leave to parents,
or society can leave to chance.
