taokshelf From Birth to Seven
==============================

:Author: R. Davie, N. 
Butler and C. Goldstein
Longman, ?2.00

This is a further report from the
National Children's Bureau, of the
National Child Development Study
(1958, Cohort), and, as the title
suggests, it is concerned with the
inter-relationships between various
aspects of childbirth and infancy on
the one hand and scholastic adjustment and attainment on the other
when children have been attending
infant schools for two years.

It is a known difficulty of longitudinal studies that, by the time
the results are available, society and
social conditions may well have
changed. In a period of rapidly
accelerating change, as at the present, the difficulty- is even more
pronounced. As a result, it is only
too easy to question the variables
chosen for the study in 1958 and to
ask what different variables might
now be used. It is interesting that
the smoking habits of the mothers
of this sample were investigated
since this provided interesting data
on the harmful effects which were
produced, and moreover, the extent
to which these effects seemed to
be cumulative.

As might be expected social class
factors were demonstrated to have
major effects on children's progress
and adjustment but the complexity
of the relationship was respected
and attempts were made, quite successfully, to isolate the varying
effects of different aspects of social
class membership. The reasoning,
however, is statistical rather than
psychological, and concerned with
measurable attributes rather than
developmental processes. (The
details of the statistical material
appear in the higher priced hard
back version of the book.)
The most novel findings in the
book stem from the careful study of
the medical aspects of childbirth
and development and the ways in
which these are shown to be related
to what children have achieved at
the age of seven.

The book concludes with a discussion of 'at risk' registers. The
data for inclusion on the list would
be available at the birth of a child,
and the criteria would be derived
from the analyses of the research
project reported in this book.

Although such a register would
seem to make good sense on statistical grounds, it might be less than
practical in, for example, a working
class area, in which case many
children would almost automatically,
be 'at risk'. Moreover, we do not
know the extent to which a classification as 'at risk' might in the long
run be disadvantageous to the very
child whom it sought to help.

This is a thoughtful and, in some
ways, . thought-provoking book.

People who are concerned with the
physical and educational development of children would find it both
informative and instructive. They
might also be rather surprised at
some of the links which are shown to
obtain from birth to seven.

A. T. Ravenette
