Psychology is about People
============================

:Author: H. J. Eysenck

Allen Lane. The Penguin Press, ?3.50
In this book Eysenck presents a
solution to modern social problems,
namely that his own particular
branch of behaviourist psychology
can offer modern civilization a way
out of its social dilemmas. Education, psychiatry, sexuality, pornography and political attitudes are
considered in turn. Social action,
Eysenck argues, should take account of inborn differences of personality and intelligence.

Thus, the selective principle
should govern schooling, political
attitudes should be recognised as
partly unmodifiable, and introverts
and extroverts as having different
sexual needs. Within such limits,
however, the manipulation of stimulus and reward (conditions) could
eliminate undesirable behaviour in
schools, psychiatric hospitals and
even failing mariages.

To those concerned with mental
health, probably the chapters on
psychiatric problems and on sexuality have most relevance. On the
first, for example, Eysenck's
account of psychotic conditions
seems dangerously misleading.

Psychotics are described as cruel
and inhumane', as 'liking to make
fools of other people and to upset
them" and as 'combining an extreme
degree of promiscuity with an
extreme degree of hostility to their
sex partners'. It is hard to recognise a typical schizophrenic or
severely depressed patient in such
a description.

Eysenck's treatment also adds
little to our understanding of the
relation between sexual adjustment
and mental health. Sexuality is discussed entirely without references
to its context of human relationships?this, despite the claim that
'psychology is about people'.

The book is aimed at the layman,
and is written in a readable, often
jocular style. It seems unlikely however, to make a major contribution
to the average person's understanding of mental health.

Phillida Salmon
