Report on the British Health Services
======================================

:Author: the Health Group of
P.E.P. (Political and Economic
Planning). Cloth, 10/6; paper
boards, 7/6. Postage 6d. extra.

Obtainable from P.E.P., 16
Queen Anne's Gate, S.W.I.

This Report of 200,000 words is designed
to show how the Health Services of Great
Britain work, how they fit together and what
are their achievements, problems and shortcomings. The survey?which is the outcome
of three years' work and the co-operation of
over 200 different authorities and organisations,?includes in its scope every aspect of
the Health Services, with maps, and includes
statistical tables on such subjects as the
maternal mortality rate, tuberculosis, infant
mortality, industrial accidents rate, etc.

An admirable Summary of the contents of
the Report and its conclusions, a synopsis of
each chapter, and a subject index, enables
the reader to find his way in what would
otherwise be a somewhat formidable document, and the material is presented throughout in an eminently readable form.

Material relating to Mental Health is to
be found in Chapter IX ("Special Services")
where there is outlined the present legal
provision for the treatment of mental
disease and the care of mental defectives
and in Chapter XIII ("Other Experimental
Services") where the position with regard to
psychological medicine and mental health is
described. In this chapter the prevalence of
mental ill-health is discussed and some
interesting figures are quoted from specific
enquiries that have been made in connection
with Industrial workers.

The key-note of the recommendations of
the Report is the word " Co-Ordination".
In its concluding paragraph it is pointed out
that there has been described:

" how a bewildering variety of agencies,
official and unofficial, have been created
during the past two or three generations
to work for health mainly by attacking
specific diseases and disabilities as they
occur and by maintaining the sufferers."
But the work of tracing causes and of
thereby preventing conditions resulting in
disturbed physical or mental health, is only
in its infancy?and cannot fully be developed
without co-ordinated and systematised
administrative machinery, a reorientation of
outlook, and a vigorous national policy based
on a new conception of the significance ot
the pursuit and maintenance of the " healthy
mind in the healthy body."
