The Adrenal Cortex and Intersexuality
======================================

:Author: L. R. Broster, Clifford Allen, H. W. C.
Vines, Tocelyn Patterson, Alan W.
Greenwood, G. F. Marrian and G. C.
Butler. First edition, 1938. Pp. 240.
15/- net. London, Chapman and Hall.

This book contains matter which few
doctors dealing with difficult sexual
problems can afford to miss. Even indirectly
the same to some extent holds. Parents,
teachers, ministers of religion, directors of
national affairs, when brought into touch
with sexual troubles, may refer to the
doctor. Too often, however, ignorance
leading to bitterness and antagonism, characterises the attitude even of those whose
outlook is ostensibly that of the scientist.
This book is a systematic, directed and withal
fruitful and human attempt to combat the
ignorance which leads to this unhappy state
of affairs.

At the outset Dr Broster deals with the
clinical and surgical aspects of the adrenogenital syndrome. This syndrome, which is
essentially bisexual in nature, is characterised by the appearance of male secondary
features in the female, with a corresponding
retrogression of the female sexual characteristics and functions. As is to be expected,
the earlier in life the onset of the corticoadrenal lesion, which is responsible for this
condition, the more marked the results, and
the less amenable to treatment. On the other
hand in the most favourable cases unilateral
adrenalectomy, the surgical procedure which
Broster describes, enabled him even to
reverse the changes.

The best results obtained in the secondary
or post-pubertal cases, when the pathological
changes followed upon a period of
normality. The primary or post-pubertal
cases, in which the largest adrenals occurred,
only yielded good results when operation
was performed as soon as possible after
the recognition of the condition, or at least
before the onset of puberty when the main
symptoms had appeared. Thirty-three
detailed case histories place the reader in a
good position for estimating the justice of
the conclusions to which Dr Broster's
clinical and surgical experience lead him,
namely that the adreno-genital syndrome
results from certain pathological changes in
the secretion of the adrenal cortex.

In the next section Dr Clifford Allen
deals with the psychological aspect of the
question. This is a matter of importance.
Recent advances in psychopathology show
that psychological factors have a definite
bearing upon the development and control
of human sexuality. A thorough psychiatric
examination, whose outline he gives in the
text, forms the basis upon which Dr Allen
founds his conclusions. Case histories add
their quota to the vividness and interest of
the section, at the same time that they
support Dr Allen's conclusions. He holds
that sexuality is a complex dependent upon
the inter-relation of endocrine and psychological factors : mutually stimulating, either
the one or the other may be at fault. A
sound and adequate clinical examination
alone can determine the type of therapy
which any one particular case requires.
Dr H. W. C. Vines, in the third section
of this book, describes the PoinceauFuchsin stain. This stain has a particular
colouration effect upon the cortical cells of
those adrenals in which adrenalectomy had
been performed for virilism. On the basis
of the research which this staining made
possible Dr Vines comes to the conclusion
that in normal sexual development the
adrenal cortex plays the part of an accessory
sex gland, secreting both androgenic and
oestrogenic hormones, under the control of
the pituitary throughout life. At puberty
the gonad-pituitary mechanism is superimposed upon the adreno-pituitary
mechanism. The occurrence in the female
during early foetal life of a short period of
androgenic and heterosexual development,
and the absence of a corresponding oestrogenic period in the male, accounts, in Dr.
Vines' opinion, for the greater frequency of
hetero-sexual changes in the female as
compared with the male sex. He goes on to
discuss the relation of pseudo-hermaphrodism, adolescent virilism, pituitary basophilism and cortical carcinoma to a
mechanism in which the gonads play a
passive and the adrenal cortex ^nd pituitary
an active part.

The biochemical investigation of the urine,
which Drs. Patterson and Greenwood undertake, represents the natural development of
the previous studies. When these investigators began their experiments four years ago,
the capon method of assay of male hormone
was already established as a reliable
measure of androgenic activity. It remained
for these workers to devise an extraction
method suitable for differentiating typical
virilism cases (with symptoms of masculinisation in the female) from the normal female
in respect of hormone activity. Discovery of
such a method, details of which are given,
enabled them to find in the urine of eleven
cases of adrenal virilism "free" male hormone. This substance absent from normal
female urine, is only present in small amounts
in normal male urine. They found in addition
an excessive amount of " bound " or " conjugated " hormone in cases of virilism. This
substance, which is present in normal male
urine, is present in only small amounts in
normal female urine. In no case of virilism
was there any grossly abnormal amount of
oestrogenic hormone found in the urine. The
authors then discuss the origin and nature
of the male and female hormones. Acknowledging the highly speculative aspects of
their views, they stress the intrinsic interest
of the subject, at the same time that they
point to the great amount of research which
this approach opens out.

Professor Marrian and Dr Butler discuss
a substance, " triol ", which they have
isolated from the urine of cases of virilism.
Since examination of a large number of
other urine samples from normal men and
women revealed no trace of this compound
they suggest that it is specifically related to
the pathological activity of the adrenal
gland.

The above resume of the work done by
different specialists in their own particular
field on the subject of the relation of the
adrenal gland to sexuality, suffices to show
the important results which may be obtained
by such team-work. This particular example
marks a definite step forward in the field of
medicine. Moreover, as Sir Walter Langdon
Brown says in the foreword, this subject
does not concern medicine alone. Abnormal
sex development not only causes a degree of
suffering incommensurate to the physical
abnormality, it also causes a degree of
injury beyond the individual immediately
concerned. The health and well-being of the
community also enters into the question.
This particular book has, therefore, many
points of interest. Illustrating the way in
which the combined attack of medical,
surgical, psychological, histological and
biochemical methods is able to accomplish
research work of particular value, it also
points the way to further progress.
Hilda Weber.
