Administrative Psychiatry
===========================

:Author: William A. Bryan, M.D-, Superintendent, Worcester State Hospital, Mass, London. George
Allen and Unwin, Ltd., 1937.
15/-.

There is, indeed, a dearth of literature
dealing with mental hospital administration
and the author of this book is to be congratulated on fulfilling a want in a field so
long left barren. While the book is necessarily written from an American viewpoint,
essential problems of administration vary
but little from country to country. Dr.
Bryan's opinions, based on long experience,
are worth while, practical and ably
presented, and his book should be of the
greatest benefit to all psychiatrists engaged
in institutional practice.

After an historical survey he goes on to
deal with the problems of hospital organization and he deplores the tendency, unfortunately common, to emphasize certain
material aspects of administration, whilst
relegating to the background more important considerations directly affecting
the treatment of the patients. " The
custom of judging the administration of
hospitals exclusively on the basis of per
capita cost is a vicious practice. They can be
operated at such low cost that the essential
purpose for which they are built is defeated.
Excessively low per capita costs are
invariably gained by sacrificing many things
that would contribute to the recovery of
patients. They are accompanied by poor
service, which is expensive at any price."
Preventive measures and organised research
at whatever cost will produce increasing
dividends in the restoration of patients to
sound health and economically adjusted life,
whereas short-sightedness and parsimony
mean custodial care and bigger and bigger
institutions. " Fine buildings, good equipment, adequate records, and all the things we
associate with well-managed hospitals are
essential, but unless they eventually lead to
an increase in the discharge rate, shortening
the hospital residence, and lengthening the
time the patient spends in the community,
the increased cost to the taxpayer is not
justified."

It may be of interest to note that Dr.
Bryan is a firm advocate of the one-man type
of administration traditional in mental hospitals and he castigates as an administrative
absurdity the placing of a medical director
in charge of the treatment of patients and a
business manager in control of the economic
side of the hospital. " A medical education
should be a requirement for any hospital
administrator. It is only through this background that he can apply the true principle
of mental hospital administration, which is
the cure of patients and the study and prevention of disease The leadership of the
institution must be professional if the atmosphere of the hospital is to be one of healing,
research and teaching.

Special attention is given to the way staff
should be built up and selected, and the
nursing problem, acutely to the foreground
in this country at the present time, is considered in some detail. The author is of the
opinion that it would be an economy of time
and money if nurses already trained could
be attracted to the Mental Hospital service;
he suggests that as a result the standard of
care would be raised from the custodial to
the nursing level. The ideal of staffing a
mental hospital with already trained staff,
except in the senior posts, is not feasible in
this country nor is it necessary in view of
the high standard of training already
available in most mental hospitals. He
wisely states that eight hours is a sufficiently
long period for anyone to spend in a ward
with psychotic patients. In analysing
accidents, he found that there were two
peaks in the twenty-four hours; one between
6?7 a.m. and one between 3?5 p.m., times
at which nurses shewed fatique, irritibilitv
and lack of care. It is considered advantageous that staff off duty should live away
from the hospital.

We are glad to note that most American
mental hospitals have barber's shops, hairdressing saloons and beauty parlours. A
number of hospitals in this country are now
equipped in this fashion and anyone having
experience of the heightened morale and
ensuing self-respect of patients, especially
female, having their hair skillfully attended
to, cannot but wonder why such an essential
innovation was so long delayed. Calisthenics,
recreation and organised occupational
therapy are all fully discussed. No hospital
that pretends to be in keeping with the times
can afford to neglect utilizing each of thesemeasures to the full.

Social service work, teaching, clinic
organisation and research have each a
chapter that is full of sound advice.

Research into the causation of mental
disease and deficiency is still shockingly
neglected in this, as in other countries. It is
gratifying to realise that responsible bodies
are becoming increasingly aware of the
gravity of the psychiatric problem and that
efforts are now being made to plan future
research cn a co-operative and co-ordinated
basis. The book concludes with an interesting chapter on the relationships of the
mental hospital with the public.

This, the first book of its kind, is well
deserving of study. It should be in every
mental hospital library.
T. J. Hennelly.
