Mental Deficiency
==================

:Author: J. Duncan, Headmaster, Hampshire County Special
(M.I).) School. | Watts & Co., 2/6.|

Air. Duncan is well-known to those
interested in the education of retarded
children, by reason of his experimental
work at Lankhills Residential School, and
we welcome his contribution to the literature on mental deficiency which has hitherto
lacked an adequate introductory text book
at a price within the reach even of the most
modest income.

The chapters on " What is Mental
Deficiency?" "Mental Deficiency in Childhood," and " The Adult Defective," give a
useful summary of the nature of mental
defect and of the legislative position in
regard to it. Free quotations are given from
the Wood Report, including references to
the historical background and the social
implications of the problem, though considerations of space have prevented a more
comprehensive treatment of these particular
aspects.

In discussing the question of Special
Schools, the abolition of medical certification as a condition of admission is advocated, and it is suggested that if children at"
the age of 11 plus, with Intelligence
Quotients of below 60 or thereabouts, were
more frequently notified for transfer to
Occupation Centres or to Institutions, there
would then be little difficulty in dealing with
the higher-grade defectives in " C " or " D "
streams in the ordinary schools. As a result
of the Hadow reorganisation, the Day
Special School, Mr. Duncan maintains, is
no longer needed.

In a chapter 011 " Intelligence and Intelligence Tests" and in the two following chapters, some new material is included that
should be of particular interest to teachers,
including a descriptive account of two types
of Special Schools and their contrasting educational methods. In these chapters, Mr.
Duncan writes from personal experience,
and in discussing Performance Tests he
emphasises the " capacity to deal intelligently
with things" (as distinct from abstract
thoughts and words) which can, by careful
training, be developed in defectives so that
in such tests, they may in some instances
score higher than a normal subject. To the
whole subject of the educational treatment
of defectives Mr. Duncan has given long and
intensive study accompanied by practical
experimental work of outstanding merit,
and we hope that at a later date he will
write of it in greater detail in a companion
volume to the present book.

Chapter VIII deals with "The Problem
of the Intellectually Dull." In '.t is pointed
out the fallacy of the conception that this
is a problem separate and distinct from any
other educational problem?that " on the
one hand there will be a large group of what
are called normal ' children having one kind
of education ; on the other hand will be a
smaller group of dull children having an
entirely different kind of education." Though
the " dull " may have special needs due to
their difficult}- in the understanding of the
use of words and to their general slowness
in acquiring skill of any kind, the principles
underlying their education are?it is urged
?equally sound for the education of the
normal child; in fact, "the education of the
dull appears to be the i base on which the
whole of education can be built."

The concluding chapters of the book deal
with sterilisation and touch on other
methods of preventing mental subnormality,
such as birth control, educational improvements and the raising of the standard of
life, particularly in the case of the skilled
workers.

This book is brief (only 149 pages), easily
and quickly read and free from technicalities. It should be of real value as an
introduction to a more profound study of
its subject and it can be recommended
without hesitation to students, to social
workers, and to those teachers who have
not as yet come to grips with the challenge
presented by every " retarded " child under
their care.
A. L. H.
