The Backward Child
===================

:Author: Cyril Burt,
M.A., D.Sc., University of
London Press, 1937. 20/-.

This is a worthy companion for " The
Young Delinquent". Professor Burt has
succeeded admirably in providing readable
material for teachers and psychologists
alike. It may be that every reader will be
content to skim or omit some sections, but
there will be sufficient material for study
to satisfy the most selective. Professional
psychologists will be grateful for the highly
technical appendices. Written with the
scholarly care and felicity of style that we
have appreciated in the author's earlier
works, the book covers a very wide range of
subjects, each being treated in so great
detail that it is text-book of research
methods as well as an indispensable work
of reference.

Professor Burt defines backwardness in
two ways. The backward comprise ' all
those who in the middle of their school
career would be unable to do the work of
the class next below that which is normal
for their age.' (p. 77.) In alternative terms
that child is retarded ' whose educational
ratio falls below 85 per cent.' (p. 79.) It may
be said that these limits are arbitrary, but
that would be the case with any others, and
these are convenient in practice. The lower
limit of the class is set by the upper limit of
mental deficiency, a topic not treated in this
book.Within these limits we have in England
and Wales some half-million children, all
presumably capable of some degree of
education, and all required by the state to be
educated, but none of them capable of
profiting greatly by the instruction suitable
for those of average ability. Such is the
magnitude of the pedagogic and sociological
problem which Professor Burt confronts.
The causal factors of backwardness are
submitted to close statistical treatment, with
results which may distress too optimistic
social theorists. ' The causes of backwardness prove unexpectedly numerous and
varied : and in most cases not one cause, but
several, are at work.' (p. 564.) But the chief
cause of backwardness is naturally dull intelligence, a condition beyond remedy. Most
teachers and clinic workers will readily
accept this conclusion, and attempts at
reform must consequently be concentrated
upon improving educational methods with a
view to minimizing the secondary effects of
dullness. Next, but a long way after, come
social conditions, ' including under this term
the intellectual and moral status of the home
as well as sheer poverty.' (p. 571.) The other
factors of health, temperament, and specific
disabilities are relatively unimportant statistically, though they may be decisive in
individual cases. It follows from this
analysis that the most far-reaching social
and medical improvements could only
slightly reduce the pool of backwardness,
and make the path of the dull a little easier
by removing additional handicaps. The
essential problem would still remain.

So we turn to the author's practical
suggestions, which are, in brief, segregation
and special training. He is aware of the
difficulties of segregation, but it may be
doubted whether he allows sufficient weight
to them. The present writer knows a town
which provides reasonable facilities for
admission to secondary schools, and a very
generous system of selective central schools.

The result is that the non-selective senior
schools are in fact negatively selected. They
contain the majority of the elder children
and nearly all the ' normal' intelligence of
the school population, as well as the backward, who are in the minority. But they are
definitely under a cloud. Scholars and
parents are disappointed, and feel attendance
at them to be something of a stigma. Can
we disregard the social and emotional
difficulties which would be introduced by
further down-grading? Professor Burt
suggests special classes for the backward to
be conducted in the ordinary schools. This
is a sound practice for cases of specific or
remediable backwardness, but there remain
the intellectually dull who will remain indefinitely in the class, which will be known
by all the children for what it is. The most
ingenious titles are thin disguises, through
which children soon see. The experience
gained from the ' B' forms of secondary
schools is discouraging.

The happiest solution would be such a
reduction in the size of classes as would
permit of individual teaching where
required, together with a greater flexibility
of internal organization. Even then the
question of curriculum is a difficult one. We
are warned against the fallacy of the
common belief that the dull can compensate
by manual skill. The clumsy mind usually
directs clumsy hands. It may still be urged,
however, that the education of the
backward should be practical, provided
that the term is not taken to mean
manual and nothing else. The topic cannot
be pursued here, but the chapter deserves the
most careful study. It is impossible to offer
a detailed review of a book of this wide
scope, but we must express our thanks
particularly for the chapter on ' Defects of
Speech '.
A. W. Wolters.
