Board of Control
=================

23rd Annual Report for the Year 1936. Part I.
H.M. Stationery Omce, 1/6.
From the Board of Control's Report for
1936 (Part 1) we take the following facts
which should be of interest to all who are
dealing with the problem of Mental
Deficiency.

Numbers under Care
On January 1st, 1937, the total number of
defectives under care was 82,726?an
increase of 3,985 on the figures for the
preceding year.

Of the total number, 42,441 were in
Certified Institutions and Homes; 3,978
under Guardianship or Notified, and 36,307
under Statutory Supervision.

Ascertainment
-------------
The ascertainment rate of defectives
reported to Local Authorities was?at the
beginning of 1937?2.88 per 1,000 of the
population. (It will be remembered that the
estimate given by the Wood Committee, of
defectives for whom Local Authorities are,
or may at anv time become, responsible was
4.52 per 1,000.)

To the usual table giving the ascertainment rate of each individual Local
Authority, the Board have this year added
a column showing the proportion of ascertained defectives who have been placed
under community care as well as those sent
to institutions. This shows that in no
instance has action been taken on all the
cases ascertained as being " subject to be
dealt with "?although in some areas the
discrepancy may be explained by the extensive use of voluntary rather than statutory
supervision.

The number of children notified by Local
Education Authorities during the year under
the provisions of the Mental Deficiency Acts,
was 3,991. This is an increase of 458 on the
1935 figures, but it is unsatisfactory to note
that in 14.2 per cent, of the cases, no official
action followed the receipt of notification.
In addition to children statutorily notified,
3,584 children between the ages of 14 and
16 (outside the provisions of the Acts
because they have not attended Special
Schools) were informally reported to Local
Education Authorities for Voluntary SuperDefectives on Public Assistance
The number of defectives "subject to be
dealt with " and in receipt of Poor Relief
was 9,494, an increase of 220 on last year's
figure. This number, it is pointed out, can
only diminish with the growth of the colony
accommodation which is so urgently necessary.

ft is suggested, however, that in regard to
the 3,896 defectives (1935 : 3,781) in receipt
of Out-Relief, there is no reason why these
should not be transferred to the Mental
Deficiency Authority as the provision of
financial assistance can then be accompanied
by the other types of help?such as training
and supervision?which are needed in such
cases.

Accommodation
-------------
On January 1st, 1937, the total number
of beds available in Certified Institutions
provided by Local Authorities, and by other
bodies, and in Public Assistance Institutions
under Section 37, was 39,254. This is an
increase of 1,014 on last year's figure, but the
need for still further beds remains urgent.
Twenty-one Local Authorities have not
yet provided any institutional accommodation, although the majority of these have
schemes under consideration. A number of
other schemes have received statutory
approval or approval in principle.

Licence
-------
There was an addition of 586 cases on
Licence during the year (3,023 as against
2,437), and figures from five of the older
Institutions show that the numbers coming
under this category at any one time vary
between 8.6 per cent, to 17.9 per cent, of the
total number of patients on the books. There
is, however, only one Institution?the Royal
Eastern Counties'?where the practice of
placing patients with foster-parents rather
than in their homes, is extensively practised,
31 per cent of the lower grade licensed
patients being dealt with in this way.
In the Report is incorporated a Memorandum on the question of Licence issued to
Local Authorities in May, 1937.

Guardianship
-------------At the beginning of 1937, there were
3,729 defectives under Guardianship, of
which number 52.7 per cent, were placed
with parents. The total number represents
an increase of 348 on last year's figures.

Supervision
------------
The number of defectives under Statutory
Supervision on January 1st, 1937, viz,
36,307, represents as increase of 1,467; the
number under Voluntary Supervision,
25,048, is 643 less than last year.
In referring to the use of Voluntary
Supervision the Board point out the
limitations of this form of care and urge
its substitution by a proper system of
Statutory Supervision accompanied by
training.

Occupation Centres, Industrial Centres and
Home Training
-------------------------------------------
There were, on January 1st, 1937,
actuall}' three Centres less than on the same
date twelve months earlier?189 as against
192).

This was largely due to amalgamations of
certain of the smaller ones, but it is disappointing to read that there has been an
increase of only 13 defectives, viz., 4,021
as against 4,008 in attendance at Centres
throughout the country. Only one new Club
was opened during the year, and as two
were closed, there was a net loss of one.
In commenting on this position, the Board
refer to the " apparently haphazard development " of Centres in relation to population;
thus there are towns of over 200,000 inhabitants where no such provision is yet
made, and much smaller areas where it has
been successfully established. Day training,
they point out, is an essential service without
which community care can never be fully
effective.

In only nine areas (Birmingham, Buckinghamshire, Devon, Hastings, Huntingdonshire, Middlesex, Staffordshire, Suffolk and
Sunderland) is Home Training by supervising officers or visiting teachers being
carried on.

The appointment in certain large areas,
of a supervisor responsible for the training of defectives, living in their own homes,
in order to assist the Local Authority in
carrying out its duty in this respect, is
favourably noted.

Mental Defect and Crime
-----------------------
In 1936, 367 defectives were dealt with
under Section 8 and Section 9 of the Mental
Deficiency Acts (as against 401 in 1935). It
is not, however, considered that this gives a
true picture of the number of defectives
who have committed criminal offences, as in
many instances, instead of taking proceedings under the Acts magistrates record no
conviction but request the Local Authority
to deal with a delinquent defective as
" found neglected " or as having been notified by the Local Education Authority.
The Board deplore the fact that in 1936,
there was an increase in the number of
criminal defectives sent by the Courts under
Section 8 or transferred under Section 9,
to Certified Public Assistance Institutions
instead of to Colonies. In 1935, only 8.2 per
cent, of the total number of cases were dealt
with in this way, whereas in 1936, the proportion rose to 21.5 per cent.

Dealing with the previous histories of
defectives coming before the Courts, the
Board point out that the majority continue
to come from elementary schools (during
the last three years, this figure has been in
the neighbourhood of 70 per cent.) and to
have been hitherto unascertained by Education Authorities.

A table showing the distribution of
offences committed by defectives in the years
1934, 1935 and 1936, shows a total number
of 344 cases of Larceny, and 284 of sex
offences, this latter category representing
26 per cent, of the total.
