Problems of Life and Mind
===========================

295
REVIEWS.

: the Study of Psychology, its
Object, Scope and Method. Third Series. By George
Henry Lewes. London : Triibner & Co. 1879.

The late Mr. Gr. H. Lewes, who was well known as a dille-
tante physiologist and psychologist, published before his death
a work entitled The Physical Basis of Life, which added
nothing to our knowledge of physiology, and was only remark-
able for pretentiousness and pedantry. His posthumous treatise,
Problems of Life and Mind, is a still greater failure. He
belongs to the same school of pseudo-philosophy as Comte,
Bain, Werndt, Spencer, Huxley, &c. &c., though differing from
them on some points; but in spite of his metaphysical verbiage,
his leaning towards materialism is perfectly apparent. The
anxious student whose mind is wavering between belief in ne-
cessity or freewill, and who takes up these Problems in the hope
of finding the solution of his doubts, is likely to rise from
the perusal of them with his brain completely addled. We can
picture to ourselves the misery and distraction he would have
to endure whilst attempting to get at the meaning of the
following passage with reference to the general question of
objective and subjective laws : " Biology presents it in a peculiar
light; for here for the first time the twofold aspect of phe-
nomena becomes conspicuous, our interest in the subjective side,
that of feeling, being as great as our interest incthe objective
side, that of force, "it takes its undeniable place among the
objective sciences, for although vital phenomena are special,
they are specialisations of the general properties of matter,
and are expressible in terms of force. It also takes its place
among the subjective sciences, since its phenomena include
those of mind. In its evolution it passes from vegetality
to aniinality, and through animality to humanity. With
animality a new factor, sensibility, becomes conspicuous. With
humanity another factor emerges?sociality."

G. H. Lewes, like all the physiological psychologists, has
jumbled mental faculties and bodily functions together, in a
manner not warranted by introspection or scientific research.
Psychological and Ethical Definitions on a Physiological
Basis. By Charles Bray. London: Triibner & Co.

This pamphlet is dedicated to the President and Members
of the Psychological Society of Great Britain. We cannot
suppose that a treatise like this, with an unmistakably strong
materialistic tendency, can be acceptable to a society which
believes that the spirit of man is so entirely independent of
physiological conditions, that it can pass through stone walls
with as much facility as a harlequin through a trap-door. The
writer is a profound admirer of Gr. H. Lewes, whom he takes
as his model, and his judgment is constantly warped by the
speculations of that physiological psychologist. Under the
influence of his teaching, and of the school to which he belongs,
his conclusions are based on a wrong premiss, and it would be a
waste of time to point out the numerous mistakes into which
false logic has led him; for, as Groethe liomorously said?
If the premises are hollow
The conclusions will not follow..
