Lunacy In Scotland
===================

258
Art. VII.?

The twenty-first annual Report is before us on the condi-
tion and management of lunatics and lunatic asylums in
Scotland. Since the last Report was issued, Sir James Coxe,
one of the Medical Commissioners, has died, who for more than
twenty years was on the Commission. Dr John Sibbald has
succeeded him.

On January 1, 1879, there were 1,578 registered as private
patients and 7,751 as paupers.

A number of interesting statistical tables are given, and on
the comparative prevalence of insanity in different localities the
Commissioners make the following remarks :?

" It might be expected that the statistical data possessed
by the Board would afford the means of ascertaining in which
localities insanity occurs most frequently. But the reasons for
placing persons upon our registers are so various, and involve
so many considerations irrespective of the question of insanity,
that no conclusive inferences can be drawn from the facts
furnished to us in regard to that question. The statistical data
on which perhaps we can most safely rely in studying the dis-
tribution of insanity are those furnished by the classified tables
of deaths given in his annual reports by the Registrar-General.
Even these data, however, can only be regarded as a trustworthy
basis for broad and general inferences, and we wish to guard
ourselves from being supposed to attach more significance to
them than they really possess. We by no means regard them
as affording absolute information as to the amount of insanity
either in the country as a whole, or in any part of it.* The
following remarks, however, will show how the data supplied by
the Registrar-Greneral may throw light on questions relating to
the amount and distribution of insanity. The kind of inference
which may be safely drawn from them is, that a persistently
high rate of mortality in a district is an indication of a greater
prevalence of disease in that locality than exists in a district
characterised by a persistently low rate of mortality ; or it may
also be safely inferred in regard to any large class of diseases,
such, for example, as diseases of the chest, that a persistently
high rate of mortality attributable to chest diseases is an indi-
* The certificates of death from which the Registrar draws his facts do not
necessarily, in cases of death among the insane, give any indication that insanity ?
had existed. The majority of those who die in asylums are returned as dying of
diseases having no special connection with mental disorder. But this, it will be
seen, in no way affects the argument used in the text.

cation that diseases of that class are specially prevalent there.
We should not, of course, be justified in assuming that the
number returned as dying of chest diseases indicates the total
number who suffer from chest diseases; for we know that
chest disease will be found in such a locality affecting a great
many persons in whom it does not prove fatal. But if the
inquiry were made in what localities does difficulty of breathing,
or cough, or any other disturbance of function which is inti-
mately associated with chest disease, exist most extensively
among the population, we should be justified in selecting those
localities where the deaths from diseases of the chest are reported
in specially large proportion. And we should not consider this
inference disturbed in any important degree by the fact that
difficulty of breathing or cough is occasionally symptomatic of
diseases of the nervous or digestive, rather than of the respiratory
systems. The same reasoning is, of course, applicable to nervous
diseases. We may take it as an admitted fact that mental
disorder is inconsistent with a healthy discharge of the functions
of the brain and other portions of the nervous system?that it
is a symptom of a morbid condition of some portion of the
nervous system?and we may therefore infer that mental dis-
order will be most frequent where diseases of the nervous system
are most fatal. We have no data to indicate what proportion
of persons labouring under diseases of the nervous system exhibit
mental disorder, nor is it necessary here to inquire what that
proportion may be. It is sufficient for our purpose that there is
no reason to suppose that the proportion in one locality will
differ materially from the proportion in another locality.
Hence, if in any locality we find the number of deaths from
diseases of the nervous system persistently large year after year,
we may with fairness conclude that mental disorder, and the
other manifestations of disordered nervous system, will be ex-
hibited with proportional frequency in that locality.
" If, proceeding upon this view, we refer to the Report of
the Registrar-General for Scotland (Twentieth Detailed Annual
Report, 1878, pp. xxxii-xxxiii), we find in the analysis of the
number of deaths, that according to the character of the localities
in which they occurred, diseases of the nervous system are said
to have proved fatal in every 100,000 of the population in the
following proportions:?
In the eight principal towns...... 250
? large towns . . ? ? ? ? .271
? small ? ....... 203
,, mainland-rural districts . . . . .175
? insular-rural ?  Ill
"These figures, which do not differ much from those of
previous years, indicate that nervous diseases are exceptionally
more frequent in densely populated districts, and we think they
may also be accepted as indicating that insanity, which is one of
the manifestations of nervous disease, exists to a greater extent
in urban than in rural districts. We may refer, in support of
this conclusion, to our Eighteenth Report, pp. xiv-xviii, where
we gave the results of a careful inquiry into the statistics of one
of the most easily recognised and most fatal of the nervous
diseases that produce insanity, and showed, by analysis of all
the cases reported to ns since 1858, that the urban populations
yielded cases of that disease in much larger proportion than the
rural populations."

Some valuable data are given in reference to the increase of
insanity both in England and Scotland, and the facts are worthy
of our careful consideration.

" The increase in the number of persons registered as
lunatics, which has been going on ever since the legislature
established the present systems of administration, is a fact that
is worthy of attentive consideration. Since 1859 the private
lunatics registered in England have increased from 4,980 in 1859
to 7,692 in 1878, or from 25 to 31 per 100,000 of the popula-
tion; and the pauper lunatics have increased from 31,782 in
1859 to 60,846 in 1878, or from 161 to 245 per 100,000 of the
population. In Scotland the increase has been, for private
lunatics, from 1,035 in 1859 to 1,468 in 1879, or from 34 to 41
per 100,000 of the population; and for pauper lunatics, from
4,980 in 1859 to 7,690 in 1879, or from 164 to 214 per 100,000
of the population. The total increase in England has been for
each 100,000 of the population from 187 in 1859 to 276 in
1878 ; and in Scotland from 199 in 1859 to 255 in 1879.
" The history of the increase in Scotland is instructive. As
regards private patients the increase of their number is easily
accounted for. It depends almost entirely upon the circumstance
that the Act of 1866 (29 & 30 Vic. c. 51, sec. 17) for the
first time placed the supervision of lunatics having judicial
factors directly under the supervision of the Board. The
addition to the number of registered private patients due to the
legislation of 1866, just referred to, consists almost exclusively of
patients who are not in asylums. If we confine attention to
those private patients who are in asylums, an examination of
the numbers does not show any increase beyond what is accounted
for by the increase of population in the country. Ninety-five
per cent, of the lunatics annually added to the register are placed
in establishments, only 5 per cent, being otherwise provided for.
In other words, so large a proportion of lunatics annually added
to the register are placed in establishments, that we may ap-
proximately estimate the annual production of registered lunacy
In the number of persons admitted to establishments. By
dividing the period from 1859 to 1878 into quinquennial periods
the rate of increase, both of private and pauper patients, may-
be seen in the following statement.

Quinquennial Periods
Admissions to Establishments during twenty years
1859-78
Average Annual
Admissions
Private
Pauper
Proportion per 100,000
of Population
Private
Pauper
From 1859 to 1863
? 1864 ? 1868
? 1869 ? 1873
? 1874 ? 1878
394
413
438
479
1,030
1,164
1,463
1,784
13
13
13
14
34
37
44
50

" During the year 1878 the number of admissions per 100,000
of population was 13 for private patients and 53 for pauper
patients. The increased annual production of registered lunacy
we thus see to have been entirely due to the increase of pauper
patients; the annual admissions of these per 100,000 of the
population having increased 56 per cent, during the twenty
years.

" The total number of pauper patients resident in establish-
ments has increased from 3,103 in 1859 to 6,292 in 1879, being
an increase of more than 100 per cent. This is a greater increase
than that of the aggregate number of pauper lunatics on the
register, that is, of pauper lunatics both in establishments and
in private dwellings; because during the same period those regi-
stered pauper lunatics who are provided for in private dwellings
have decreased from 1,877 to 1,398. The pauper lunatics in
private dwellings consist partly of persons who are intimated to
us as lunatics by inspectors of poor and who are certified by the
parochial medical officers as not requiring asylum treatment,
and partly of pauper lunatics who have been discharged from
asylums as no longer requiring asylum treatment but who con-
tinue to be maintained as paupers. During the ten years, 1859
to 1868, these patients decreased in number from 1,877 to 1,521,
partly in consequence of a larger number of them being trans-
ferred to establishments than the number that were received
from establishments, and partly by the decrease from deaths,
from recoveries, and from ceasing to be paupers, being greater
than the additions to the list of new cases. Since 1868 the
decrease in number has not been so rapid, owing chiefly to the
number received from establishments being greater than the
number transferred to establishments. In 1875, however, the
year in which the parliamentary grant was first given in aid of
the maintenance of pauper lunatics, this preponderance of the
transfers from establishments decreased, and since then the
average has been in favour of transfers to establishments. In
1875 there was also a considerable increase in the number of
newly reported cases left in private dwellings. For the previous
six years the highest annual number of such cases had been 74;
in 1875 it was 138; in 1876, 132; in 1877, 90; and in 1878,
111. It has resulted from this that, although the interchange
of pauper patients between private dwellings and establishments
has increased the number of inmates of establishments at the ex-
pense of the number in private dwellings, the aggregate number
of such patients has not diminished during the past five years.
" In discussing the history of the increase in the number of
pauper lunatics in asylums, it will be found convenient to
divide the period since the establishment of the Board into three
sections. First, the period before the provisions of the Act of
1857 had so far taken effect as to bring into existence much of
the new asylum accommodation which it was one of the objects
of the Act to provide. Second, the period after the new accom-
modation began to be largely available till the parliamentary
grant in aid of the maintenance of pauper lunatics was estab-
lished. And third, the period since the grant was established.
" The first period may be taken as extending from 1858 till
1863, inclusive. During this period the number of pauper
lunatics in asylums increased from 2,953 to 3,683. At first the
increase was rapid, which may be regarded as a natural result
of the establishment of a stricter system of supervision than had
formerly existed, under which many patients who had been im-
properly cared for in private dwellings were sent to asylums.
During the first two years, therefore, the annual increase was
an average of 213 patients. During the subsequent four years
the average annual increase was 76.

"The second period extended from 1864 to 1874, inclusive.
During this period the number of pauper lunatics in asylums
increased from 3,683 to 5,274. The first portion of this period
was also distinguished by a specially large annual increase, the
increase between 1864 to 1869 being an average of 174; and
this is readily accounted for by the number of new asylums
which were opened during those years, and which were both
superior in construction and more conveniently situated than
most of those previously existing. During the second portion
of the period, comprising the five years from 1870 to 1874 in-
clusive, the annual admissions again fell to a lower number, the
average for these years being 109. But if the year 1874, during
which the increase was 186, be excluded from this period, we
find the average annual increase for the remaining four years to
be only 90. And it would probably be only proper so to exclude
it; for, although the grant was first actually given in 1875, it
is believed that the expectation of receiving it had an effect
upon parochial authorities in making them more willing to incur
expense in providing for their lunatics. The average increase
of 90 per annum would, upon that supposition, represent the
rate of increase for the period after the provision of new and
improved asylum accommodation had exhausted its immediate
effect of encouraging an increased resort to asylum treatment
for the lunatics in the several districts.

" The third period consists of the four years 1875 to 1878
inclusive. During this period the pauper lunatics in asylums
increased from 5,274 to 6,292, being an average annual increase
of 254, much the highest rate of increase since the establishment
of the Board. There appears reason to believe that this greater
rate of increase is to be attributed partially, if not wholly, to the
influence of the parliamentary grant, in inducing parochial
boards to admit lunatics more easily to the roll of paupers than
before the aid from imperial sources was given.

" The increase during the periods which we have described
is shown in the following tabular statement:?

Pauper Patients in Establishments
Annual Increase
Number at the end
of each Period
During 1858-59
18G0-63
1864-69
1870-73
1874
1875
1876
1877
1878
213
76
174
90
186
257
242
267
252
3,379
3,683
4,728
5,088
5,274
5,531
5,773
6,040
6,292

" The increase during the last four years has been caused
partly by an increased number of admissions to establishments,
and partly by a decrease in the proportion of patients discharged.
The admissions during these years have been an annual average
?f 1,835, instead of an average during 1870-73 of 1,462. And
the annual average of discharges and deaths has been 1,595,
instead of 1,381, which was the annual average during 1870-73.
In other words, the discharges and deaths during the last four
years have been 87 per cent, calculated on the admissions,
instead of 95 per cent, as it was in 1870-73. These figures
show not only a considerably increased tendency to place patients
as pauper lunatics in asylums, but also a decreased tendency to
remove them from asylums.

" Establishments for the insane in Scotland arrange them-
selves in the following groups :?(a) Royal and District Asy-
lums, (6) Parochial Asylums, (c) Private Asylums, (d) Lunatic
Wards of Poorhouses, (e) Training Schools for Imbecile Child-
ren, and (f) the Department for Criminal or State Patients in
the General Prison.

" In discussing the results of treatment, and noting the con-
dition of individual establishments, it will be convenient to ob-
serve this grouping.

" The reports by the Commissioners of their inspection of
the different establishments are given in Appendix E.
" In our last report we indicated the general nature of the
changes which have taken place during late years in the struc-
ture and management of Scotch asylums, and in the manner of
treating the patients. We showed that these changes had been
chiefly in the direction of removing, both from the structure of
the buildings and the mode of life of the inmates, some of the
more distinctive features which were deviations from the con-
ditions of ordinary life. In regard to the buildings we had to
record the decreasing use of walled airing courts as places of
exercise for the patients. Many asylums were then unprovided
with such arrangements, and there were others in which, though
they still existed, they were never used. In several instances
the airing court walls had been pulled down ; and in the case of
no recently erected establishment had any walled airing courts
been provided. The practice of surrounding the general grounds
attached to asylums by high fences was also stated to be de-
creasing in frequency, in some cases the grounds which had been
thus enclosed having been opened up, and no new fences having
been recently erected for this purpose. We also drew attention
to the fact, that the practice of keeping patients while indoors
always under lock and key, had been undergoing important
modification. In some asylums the key scarcely required to be
used during the day, and in most the necessity for its use had
greatly diminished. Greater liberty was also accorded to the
patients by a larger number being permitted to go about on
parole; and, in the medical treatment of the patients, the use
of stimulants and narcotics was not so much resorted to as it
had previously been. All these changes are in the direction of
substituting moral for physical restraint, and of relaxing the
discipline of asylums in its present aspect and introducing
in its stead a greater amount of intelligent supervision and
guidance.

'* I he changes which have taken place during the past year
have been in accordance with the spirit which dictated those of
previous years, and we regard them as having conduced to the
wellbeing of the inmates of the establishments in which they
have been carried out. The practice of secluding patients in
single rooms is resorted to in some asylums more than in others.
It is still regarded as the most judicious mode of treatment for a
certain class of cases, though it appears to be viewed by medical
officers generally with decreasing favour. In some asylums it
is seldom used, and its disuse is chiefly to be observed in those
where mechanical restrictions have in other ways most notably
diminished. Personal mechanical restraints are occasionally
employed, but generally with the view of conserving the strength
of the patients or preventing injury to themselves, rather than
for the prevention of violence to others.

" Increasing attention appears to be given to the industrial
occupation of pauper patients ; and one of the chief evidences of
this is the acquisition by many institutions of additional land.
During recent years a considerable extent has thus been acquired,
and during the past year five establishments have added to what
they had previously possessed. The Aberdeen Royal Asylum
has acquired 3 acres; the Edinburgh Eoyal Asylum, 50 acres;
the Elgin District Asylum, 61 acres ; the Buchan Combination
Poorhouse, 11 acres; the Cuninghame Combination Poorhouse,
31 acres. We record these facts with pleasure, because we re-
gard the possession of a considerable extent of land as of great
use to all classes of establishments where lunatics are detained.
The benefits that it confers are of various kinds. It affords the
means of healthy occupation invaluable as a curative agent in a
large number of curable cases; and it affords an opportunity
of placing many chronic and incurable patients in conditions
more nearly resembling the ordinary life of sane persons than
can be obtained in any other way. One of the difficulties arising
from the accumulation of a large number of the insane in an
establishment is the necessity of organising the daily life of the
community by a system of what may be described as artificial
discipline. This discipline is directed to such desirable objects
as the promotion of the recovery or improvement of the patients,
to the enforcement of order, the prevention of escapes, and the
provision of occupation and amusement. Such discipline can-
not of course be dispensed with in a well-regulated asylum, and
in the case of many of the inmates the presence of active mental
disorder or hopeless mental decay, makes the discipline wholly
beneficial in its influence. But the sense of tutelage which it
suggests, and the frequent reminders which it involves, that
those subjected to it are regarded as insane, proves injuriously
irksome to many. It is consequently desirable to introduce as
much as possible into the daily routine of an asylum such
arrangements as will easily commend themselves to the minds of
such patients without suggesting ideas of discipline or treat-
ment. The more a patient can be made to feel himself a
voluntary agent rather than a person under tutelage, the more
may his mental state be expected to be healthy. It is therefore
desirable for a large number, especially of the pauper inmates
of asylums, that their position should be assimilated, as far as
possible, to that of members of an industrial community in
ordinary life. In order to carry out these views asylums are
generally provided with workshops and other means of industrial
occupation. It is impossible, however, to provide more than a
few of the occupations followed by the artisan class of inmates,
and many such occupations, were it possible to provide them,
would be unsuitable in an asylum, on account of their general
unhealthiness or special unfitness as occupations for the insane.
No occupation is found in practice to be so generally useful as
outdoor labour. In agricultural districts it provides naturally
for the employment of the large majority ; and, in districts not
especially agricultural, it is the occupation most easily resorted
to by those who cannot be engaged in their own particular
trades. It is chiefly, therefore, on account of the importance
of introducing the industrial element largely into asylum organi-
sation, and because the possession of a considerable farm affords
the best means of supplying that element, that we approve
strongly of asylum authorities providing an ample extent of
land in connection with the establishments under their charge.
" These observations are applicable both to establishments
devoted to the treatment of active or curable insanity, and those
whose inmates are chiefly of the chronic and incurable class.
The advantages of such occupation as a farm affords in promot-
ing the recovery of curable cases are great, and are generally
recognised. During the course of an attack of mental excite-
ment such occupation has usually a beneficial influence, and
this is often best seen when the ordinary occupation of the pa-
tient has been one whose hygienic conditions are less favourable.
Experience shows also that, besides the direct benefits which the
farm work confers upon the patients as a means of treatment,
important collateral advantages are obtained by it. It facilitates
the introduction of variety into the dietary of the patients; and
the supply of vegetables and milk, which ought to enter largely
into asylum dietaries, is generally made more abundant. When
the farm is properly managed it is also found to be a source of
profit to the institution, and therefore, in the case of public
establishments, a means of diminishing the burden on the rate-
payer.

" The advantages of a farm as a source of occupation are
necessarily felt more in the treatment of men than of women.
As providing a useful kind of work for females, an effort has
been made in some institutions to develop the work of the
laundry and washing house. It is desirable in many cases to
have recourse to regular occupation in which a considerable
amount of physical exercise is obtained, and for this purpose the
work of the laundry and washing house is suitable. In some
establishments the advantages of such work have been so far re-
cognised that a considerable amount is accomplished for persons
unconnected with the institutions, in addition to what is required
for the institutions themselves.

" Though we insist strongly on the importance of the indus-
trial .element in asylum management, we do not undervalue the
many other elements that have hitherto been regarded as im-
portant. Indeed, we believe that the presence of the industrial
element in due proportion enhances the value and importance
of the others. Grood medical treatment, a comfortable and
cheerful abode, the supply of nutritious food and suitable cloth-
ing, and opportunities for healthy recreation and amusement,
are all in themselves useful and important in contributing to the
health and happiness of the patients. And we have pleasure in
recognising the willingness of local authorities in Scotland to
make satisfactory provision for these requirements. But, in the
case of patients whose condition renders them fit for it, these
benefits can only be fully taken advantage of by those who are
engaged in useful daily work. On the other hand, it is necessary
that adequate provision for the comfort and happiness of the
patients should be made, in order to enable them, while in an asy-
lum, to engage successfully in industrial occupation. The several
elements of good administration are not only desirable on their
own account, but also because they are complementary to one an-
other, each one facilitating the beneficial action of all the resit.
" The advantages of manual labour as a means of improving
bodily health and affording rest to perturbed mental functions
cannot be obtained so easily in the case of private patients as in
that of paupers ; and this, indeed, often constitutes an important
difficulty in the treatment of private patients. Similar advan-
tages are, however, sought to be attained by engaging private
patients in amusements of a character which involves more 01*
less physical exertion, and we are glad to note that commendable
and successful efforts are made generally in asylums where such
patients are received to provide such amusements."

The condition of the various asylums is given, and the report
on the whole may be pronounced as a great improvement on
the one of last year.
