Lunacy In England
==================

248
Art. VI.?

The thirty-third Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy has
just been issued. We have great satisfaction in testifying to
the intrinsic value of the matter contained in its pages.
At the present time, when so much preposterous nonsense is
written in connection with Lunacy and the Acts of Parliament
bearing upon it, both in the medical as well as public press,
we welcome the contents of the Report, as being the result of
experience obtained by gentlemen whose sole object is to study
the welfare of the insane, and to superintend the general
management of asylums and hospitals for those mentally
afflicted, and not of outsiders, who as a rule are ignorant of the
very elements upon which they profess to enlighten others.
The following summary gives the classification and distri-
bution of patients on the Commissioners' register :?

Where maintained
on January 1, 1879
Private
M. F.
Pauper
F.
Total
In county and borough asylums
In registered hospitals .
In licensed houses:
Metropolitan
Provincial
In naval and military hospitals
and Royal India Asylum
In Criminal Lunatic Asylum
(Broadmoor) .
In workhouses:
Ordinary workhouses .
Metropolitan district asylum
Private single patients
Outdoor paupers
Total .
216
1,422
1,058
790
325
184
4,187
260
1,298
862
825
280
3,591
476
2,720
1,920
1,615
342
233
17,462
69
174
238
20,933
48
382
316
472
5,014
1,971
2,378
6,683
2,337
3,852
7,778
27,496
34,611
38,395
117
11.697
4,308
6,230
17,678
1,491
1,232
1,028
325
374
5,014
1,971
192
2,378
21,193
1,346
1,244
1,141
17
109
6,683
2,337
280
3,852
38,871
2,837
2,476
2,169
11,697
4,308
472
6,230
62,107
31,683
38,202
69,885

There were 202 lunatics found so by inquisition, which are
not included in the summary given.
Private patients have increased in county and borough
asylums by 13, in registered hospitals by 40, and in licensed
houses by 63.

Pauper patients have increased in county and borough
asylums by 1,098, in registered hospitals by 19, and in licensed
houses by 16, decreasing, however, in ordinary workhouses by
162, and in the Metropolitan Asylums of Leavesden, Caterham,
and Darenth by 98. Both these statistics refer to a comparison
between private and pauper patients on the register of January
1, 1878 and 1879.

The statistical tables are now given which were commenced
ten years ago and have gradually and progressively been im-
proved and added to.

Of the various causes for Insanity intemperance is again at
the head of the list, and stands out -per se with a large propor-
tion of cases. Among the others may be mentioned venereal
disease, self-abuse, overwork, change of life and puberty,
previous attacks, sunstroke, &c.

The total number of patients in asylums and as "single
patients" on January 1, 1879, was 47,650, of whom 4,187
males and 3,591 females were private patients, and 18,133
males and 21,739 females were paupers. The total admissions
during 1878 were 15,102, but 10*14 per cent, of these were
transfers.

Out of 8,796 discharged from asylums, 5,332 are returned
as recovered, showing a large proportion, and during the year
4,715 patients died in asylums.

On January 1, 1878, there were 17,116 males and 20,647
females in county and borough asylums, and the admissions
during the year were 11,604 (5,807 males and 5,797 females).
Out of 6,471 discharged, 4,247 are registered as recovered.
The recoveries during the year as compared with the ad-
missions are at the rate of 40*3 per cent, for both series.
The Commissioners pass on to consider the improvements
which have taken place at the various public asylums.
A new asylum is to be erected in Essex, at a cost of
?65,000. It is to provide accommodation for 150 patients of
both sexes.

The county asylum of Derbyshire is to be enlarged. An
auxiliary asylum is to be built in Gloucestershire, and also one in
connection with the Lancaster, Prestwich, Eainhill, and
^ hittingham Asylums.
In consequence of the termination in the lease of about
40 acres of land occupied by the Committee of Visitors of
the Leicestershire and Kutland Asylum it is proposed to remove
it to another site. Improvements are to be made at Hanwell
and Colney Hatch.

The Commissioners comment severely on the unhealthy
locality of the Hull Asylum, which never appearefree from some
epidemic, and suggests its removal to some healthy locality:
" We cannot sufficiently deplore the inactivity which permits
the continuance of the asylum on this unhealthy spot."
The following suicides have occurred, particulars of which we
give in extenso:?

" W. K., a man 71 years of age, was admitted into the
Bucks County Asylum on December 28, 1876. This was the
second time he had been placed under treatment in an asylum.
He had never been considered suicidally disposed, nor shown any
signs of violence either towards himself or others, and was in
consequence trusted to go into the garden alone, and even on
some occasions had been permitted to go to Aylesbury un-
attended to visit his friends. In the garden of the asylum there
is a space about 80 yards square, enclosed by a boarding 4 feet
high, and in the boarding is a door fastened by a padlock, and
kept locked. This space is used for propagating plants and
cuttings, and there is in it also a water tank, enclosed in brick-
work, which is capable of holding water to the depth of rather
more than two feet. This tank was covered by a frame, and able
to be secured by a padlock, which it was the gardener's duty to
see was in proper order and duly fastened.

" On Sunday, May 5, W. K., after attending Divine ser-
vice, obtained leave to go into the garden, where he was left by
himself. As he did not return to his dinner, a search was in-
stituted, and he was found drowned in this tank. He had got
over the boarding which surrounds the tank, where he found the
cover of the tank not properly secured, and was thus enabled
to destroy himself. The gardener stated in his evidence
before the coroner that he had taken the padlock from the tank
to fasten the gate with, as the one attached to the gate was out
of repair. The verdict of the jury did not attribute blame to
anyone, but we felt that some serious notice ought to be taken
of the gardener's conduct, as it was owing to his carelessness and
neglect of orders that the patient had the opportunity of com-
mitting suicide afforded him, and we expressed our opinions on
the matter to the Committee.

"At the County Asylum at Chester, in March 1878, a
patient named J. L. was admitted, the statement of particulars
describing him as subject to epilepsy and of suicidal propensi-
ties. He was sent to the ward set apart for such cases.
" On May 21 he was in a restless, anxious state of
mind. He ate his dinner and returned to the ward. It was
then the attendants' dinner hour, and the charge attendant was
left by himself in the ward. Expecting in a few minutes to be
called to his own dinner, he placed his knife and fork in the
breast pocket of his coat. He was walking down the corridor,
talking to and endeavouring to quiet the patient, when the
latter suddenly seized the knife from the attendant's pocket, and
then and there cut his own throat. The attendant, with the
assistance of some of the patients, wrested the knife from J. L.'s
hand, and immediately summoned medical assistance, which
was speedily obtained. In spite of treatment, death ensued on
the 24th of the month.

" It appearing that the number of attendants for the ward
in question was only three, while the patient's placed there
amounted to 37, mostly of the epileptic and suicidal class, an
arrangement which explains how all the patients were left during
the dinner hour in charge of one man, we urged upon the Com-
mittee of Visitors an addition to the staff. At the visit of our
colleagues in July, it was found that our recommendation had
been adopted, but it was then suggested that the table knives
for attendants ought either to be secured immediately after
meals in a locked box placed in the messroom ; or, if left in the
attendant's hands, to be kept in the bedrooms, and they should
have proper cases.

" W. 3VL, admitted into the asylum on November 1,
1876, died on November 15, 1878, in the following circum-
stances.

" This patient was an epileptic, and at times subject to fits
of great excitement. On November 14, after dining, he,
without any reason, went across the room and struck one of
the patients. Four attendants then removed him, struggling
violentl}T, to another ward, when, immediately on being loosed, he
seized a chair and turned upon the attendants, who ran away
and shut the door after them, leaving W. M. alone in the
ward. On looking through the keyhole he was seen beating
the table with the chair. Assistance was called, and six atten-
dants entered the ward No. 12 ; the patient then ran away into
a passage, where he again turned and attacked the attendants.
He then rushed up a staircase, and, on reaching the first land-
ing, turned round and held the attendants at bay. One of the
attendants telling the others to follow him, picked up a chair,
and carried it, legs upwards, towards the patient. There then
appears to have been a severe struggle, W. M. and the attend-
ants eventually falling 4 all in a heap' on the stairs, the deceased
being beneath the others. He was then conveyed to a ward,
struggling all the time. Shortly after this he had a severe fit
in the presence of the head attendant, who had by this time been
summoned, and who did not see any reason to report the occur-
rence to the medical officers till seven in the evening, as there
were no signs indicating that the man had been injured in the
struggle, though he had been very sick and had gone to bed
about four o'clock. On being visited by the medical officer at
seven, no special indications of serious mischief were observed,
but shortly after symptoms of collapse appeared, and the patient
died early on the morning of November 15. The post-
mortem examination disclosed rupture of the abdominal aorta
and small intestines.

" On reviewing the circumstances of this case, it seemed to
us that there had been a great want of judgment on the part of
the attendants in placing this patient, in the first instance, in
the empty ward, where he was able to obtain possession of the
chair, which in his hands became a dangerous weapon, and where
he was in a position to effect mischief. Had the patient been
placed at once in a single room, the consequences which actually
resulted could not have ensued. We also considered that, in
not reporting the occurrence to one of the medical officers with
as little delay as possible, the attendants had committed a breach
of the existing regulations for the government of the asylum,
for which they should be severely reprimanded. We strongly
recommended that a further regulation should be made, requir-
ing the head attendant at once to report to the medical super-
intendent, or a medical officer, any case of violence which might
come to his knowledge. It ought not to be left to the dis-
cretion of a head attendant, however deserving of general con-
fidence, and of whatever length of experience, whether to report
such occurrence or to refrain from reporting.

" Owing to the neglect of an attendant to close the door of
a pantry, where she had placed the knife and fork she had
just used in cutting up the dinners of the patients belonging
to the ward, a female patient at the Eainhill Asylum was
enabled, unperceived, to obtain possession of a knife, and to
retire therewith to a water closet.

" She was missed almost directly, and was very quickly
found, but not soon enough to prevent her from cutting her
throat, and that so severely, as to cause her death on the
following day, November 15.

" This patient, though not stated on her admission in
August 1878 to be suicidal, had been an inmate of the asylum
on a former occasion, and from her antecedents and depressed
state of mind, was kept under more or less close observation,
and was not entrusted with knife or scissors.

" The attendant to whose carelessness this suicide was due,
had been for two years and a half a good servant of the
asylum, and shortly before the fatal occurrence had been
assaulted by two violent patients, producing, not unnaturally,
a certain amount of ' flurry.' In all the circumstances, Dr.
Rogers thought it sufficient to point out very strongly to the
attendant the deplorable consequences of her neglect, and to
transfer her to another ward, where the patients require less
constant vigilance.

" At the Whittingham Asylum there have been three deaths
by suicide in the course of the past year.

" In the first instance, a male patient, E. K., destroyed
himself on March 7 by poison, which he obtained in the follow-
ing way. The patient was suicidal, but apparently much
improved in mental condition. He was employed in the
joiners' shop, and on the day named was engaged in assisting
Walter Walsh, who was the foreman joiner at the asylum, in
some work at the superintendent's house. Some of the wards
being infested with rats, the superintendent had procured rat
poison for the purpose of destroying them. A portion of this
poison was, from time to time, given out to Walsh, with in-
structions to place it in the rat holes after all the patients had
retired to bed, and to remove, early in the morning, any of the
poison that might remain.

" From Walsh's evidence, taken on the coroner s inquest,
it appeared that he had in his coat pocket, on March 7,
a box of the rat poison ; that he took off his coat and threw
it on the ground when at work at the superintendent's house,
and forgetting the presence of the poison, subsequently asked
E. K. to get him a tool out of a pocket of the coat. In doing
this E. K. obtained possession of the poison, some of which
he took, and he was shortly afterwards found in a closet by an
attendant, who noticed that he was trembling and that there
was vomit on the flags. The medical officers were summoned,
and suspecting that the patient had taken an irritant poison,
applied the usual remedies, but about midnight E. K. died.
" Walsh stated in his evidence that he had got the box of
poison from a cupboard in the joiners' shop, and placed it in
his pocket on the Monday preceding March 7 (which was
a Thursday), and that he had kept it in his pocket during
the interval.

" There appeared to us to have been a very censurable
degree of negligence on the part of Walsh, who had been made
fully acquainted with the patient's suicidal propensity. We
called the attention of the Visitors to the case, and subse-
quently learnt that Walsh had been 4 severely reprimanded for
his conduct.'

" The second case was that of a female patient, M. B.,
aged 74 years, admitted into the asylum in February 1878,
and who committed suicide there on July 23. She had not been
suspected of suicidal tendencies, and had been placed at night
in a single room. In the early morning of the day just
mentioned, she was found dead, having hung herself by a
handkerchief and the string of an apron, which she had con-
cealed, to the bar of the window, the glass of which she had
broken during the night.

" The third death by suicide at the Whittingham Asylum
was that of a male patient, admitted on May 4. As he
was described as suicidal he was placed in the special dor-
mitory (containing 67 patients) at night, from the date of his
admission up to the 17th of the same month, when, owing to
his noisy habits and disturbing the other occupants of the
dormitory, he was transferred to a single room adjoining, which
admitted of constant inspection through a window in the
panel. The next night, the 18th, he was again placed in the
single room, and his hands were put into locked gloves to
prevent self-injury. He was seen standing near the window
by the attendant about 11p.m., when he asked to have his
gloves removed. This was not done, and the attendant went
to the other end of the dormitory to assist a man in a fit;
after that he returned to the room occupied by the patient,
and, finding him in bed, went in to see him, and then disco-
vered that he had torn a strip off his sheet and had contrived
to fasten it round his neck. He died about 11p.m., almost
immediately after the strip had been removed. The night
attendant in charge of these 67 epileptic and suicidal cases
had no assistance except that of a patient. We expressed a
strong opinion that there ought to be two competent paid
night attendants for a dormitory containing so large a number
of patients of such a class, but in the circumstances we did
not consider that any blame could properly be attached to the
attendant.

"Besides these cases of suicide two other deaths at the
Whittingham Asylum deserve mention. A male patient, aged
64, died on March 15 from the effects of injuries received
by falling from a window of the infirmary. The coroner's
jury considered there was no evidence to show that the
patient intended to destroy himself, but that he might have
been merely attempting to escape from the asylum.
The size of the pane of glass through which the patient
fell was 19 by 15 inches, and only one pane was broken.
The medical superintendent informed us that no similar casualty
had taken place since the opening of the asylum. The windows,
however, containing these large panes of glass have been pro-
tected, since the occurrence of this casualty, by slight rods of
iron, which at a little distance escape ordinary observation."
Suicides have also taken place at Han well, Staffordshire,
Wandsworth, Brookwood, Warwick, Yorkshire, Leicester, and
Newcastle-upon-Tyne Asylums. We are of opinion that many
of the suicides taking place in these asylums are due to the
reluctance for using moderate restraint which exists in some
superintendents.

We also give particulars of two suicides which took place at
two of our Registered Hospitals, Barnwood House and Coton Hill.
" The first to which we have to call attention was the
case of a married lady, aged 57, who was admitted into
Barnwood House on March 5, 1878, in a state of acute mania.
She was not then reported by her husband as suicidal, but the
nature of her delusions induced the authorities at Barnwood
House to fear that she might become so. A written intimation
to this effect was therefore given to the attendants, as well as
verbal caution that due care should be exercised.

"On October 4 the patient rose in the morning and
dressed. The attendant in charge asked if she was ready to
come downstairs; she said she was. The attendant led the way
downstairs, supposing that Mrs. D. was following her, with
the four other ladies under her care.

" The attendant, after entering the sitting room and making
the tea, noticed for the first time the absence of Mrs. D.
Search was made, and she was found dead in a water closet, into
which she had slipped unobserved. She was hanging by her
small cambric handkerchief to the handle of the door.
" The coroner's jury attributed no blame to anyone.

" The other suicide to which we have referred took place at
Coton Hill. Mr. N. was admitted a patient on Saturday,
February 23, 1878. He was not described as suicidal in the
statement accompanying the order for his reception, or in the
medical certificates, but he was considered by the medical
officers to be so disposed, for verbal instructions were at once
given to the head attendant that he was not to be lost sight of.
The patient slept badly during the night after his admission,
but got up and dressed himself, and appeared quiet on the next
(Sunday) morning. He had breakfast, and after it lay down to
rest on a sofa in the breakfast room, an attendant named Edwin
Rogers being then in charge. Rogers left the room, 'to prepare
things for dinner,' as he stated, and Mr. N. took advantage of
his absence to strip himself naked and then to throw himself
through a window, breaking the glass, and falling down a
height of 17 or 18 feet into the garden below. On taking him
up it was found that he was bleeding profusely from a wound
in the throat, caused during his passage through the window, or
afterwards self-inflicted with a piece of the broken glass, and he
died in the afternoon of the same day. A coroner's inquest was
held, and after finding a verdict in accordance with the above
facts, the jury expressed their opinion that blame attached to
Rogers for leaving deceased contrary to orders."

The following tabular statement shows the number of single
private patients registered, and the changes which have occurred
since the commencement of the year:?
Number, 1st January 1878
Registered during the year
Discharged and removed .
,, of whom recovered
Died ....
Remaining 1st January 1879
Males
188
77
55
6
18
192
286
99
85
14
20
280
474
176
140
20
38
472

"Ofthese 472 patients remaining on January 1, 1879, 135,
namely, 59 of the male sex and 76 of the female sex, were
lunatics so found by inquisition, and placed by order of their
committees in unlicensed houses, whose reception is notified to us
under the provisions of the Act 25 & 26 Vic. c. Ill, s. 22. This
leaves as patients to be regularly visited by members of this
Board 337 ; namely, 133 males and 204 females.

" Besides these, there are 202 other lunatics so found by
inquisition, who are understood to be residing with their com-
mittees.

" Thus, in all, there were, on January 1, 1879, 337 such
lunatics residing elsewhere than in asylums, registered hos-
pitals, and licensed houses.

" The removal of a large number of chronic lunatics from
hospitals and licensed houses, with a view of placing them in
private abodes, has been occasionally advocated as a measure
likely to be advantageous to the patients.

" There may be many cases now in establishments for the
insane no longer needing active treatment, or very constant
supervision, who might receive sufficient attention and care at
their own homes, in charge of their nearest relatives, if these
were able and willing to receive them ; but as to ' single charge'
by strangers, all our experience goes to this, that although in
favourable circumstances patients so placed are made happy and
comfortable, yet that a large number of them are less well
looked after, and are not better satisfied with their position than
they would be in an asylum or other institution.

" The fact is that persons really well qualified to take charge
of the insane, and willing to do so for a pecuniary recompense,
are comparatively few ; fewer still are those who would accept
such charge at the low rates often current in licensed
houses and hospitals, where not only do the poorer patients
participate as a matter of course in many luxuries provided
for the richer, but where both rich and poor can be maintained
and treated at less cost than singly by reason of their aggregate
number."

Infringements of the lunacy law has been met with the
immediate action of the Commissioners in Lunacy. In several
of these instances prosecutions have been initiated.
Various attendants have been fined and prosecuted for ill-
treating patients, and instances are given of the detention
of persons of unsound mind in unlicensed houses without the
necessary certificates.

The Commissioners now pass on to consider the Report of
the Lunacy Committee appointed last year, and make some
valuable remarks on the consolidation and amendment of the
Lunacy Acts to which we refer in our chapter, " Lunacy Laws."
Mr. Wilkes and Mr. Campbell have resigned their appoint-
ments as Visiting Commissioners, though still remaining on the
Board as honorary Commissioners, and Dr W. Rhys Williams
and William Edward Frere, Esq., have succeeded to these posts.
The two former gentlemen have done valuable work in the
lunacy cause, and it is a great satisfaction to know that though
free from the active work of a Commissioner, they will, from
their long experience, render great assistance in any question
before the Board.

This excellent Report concludes with the usual statistical
tables of asylums and notices of the public hospitals visited.
We are of opinion that the information and data here
contained are of the greatest value, and, as we have previously
stated, are the result of experience.
