Tbffi Pshysiology Of Nightmare
===============================

Ill
Art. VI.?.
:Author:  EDWIN VOOTON.

Nightmare, or incubus, the bane of so many lives, is the term
used to denote the psychological state of the man when, having
been overcome by sleep, visions of the horrible and loathsome
rise before him?now pursuing their victim, now strangling
him ; while he, the sufferer, feels himself helpless as a child,
barely able to move a limb, without power?save to silently
gasp the words his being is panting to utter, and which he
knows would, if spoken, bring to his immediate aid the strong
and friendly arm. It were needless to describe the diverse
forms assumed by this malady?for such I must term it;
enough, that throughout its various manifestations it presents to
the mind of the sufferer one common trait?immediate danger.

Of what, then, is this peculiar mental state the result ? Blood
is supplied to the brain from two sources, the vertebral and
internal carotid arteries; it is the storehouse from whence the
cells of the encephalon draw the materials by which they are
enabled to elaborate themselves for the subsequent discharge of
their functions. To the majority of persons if the head be laid
on a low pillow so as to result in an increase of the brain's
blood supply, sleep will not supervene ; and on the other hand,
it has been proved that if in the case of the restless the head
be supported on a high pillow, sleep is the more readily
obtained. From these facts we are led to conclude that the
manifestation of energy on the part of the brain is in direct
proportion to its blood supply. The left internal carotid artery
of a rabbit was cut, the right being ligatured, as also the
proximal extremity of the cut left; insensibility occurred in
4 min. 36 sees. Another rabbit was then taken of similar age,
size, and apparent strength; both its internal carotids were
cut, and insensibility ensued in 3 min. 45 sees. In the case of
a third rabbit, in whom not only the internal carotid but the
vertebral arteries were cut, insensibility ensued in 70 sees. The
conclusions to which these experiments led were as follows: ?
That the brain is constantly depending for manifestations of
energy on its blood supply; that it has not the accumulative
and retentive power of the muscle, which latter, after the
severance of all arterial communication, is yet capable of acting
for a considerable time. Hence, we have a right to consider that
an abnormal localisation of this organ's arterial supply would
produce a corresponding increase in the functional discharge of
the part affected. It were, perhaps, needless for me to remind
the reader of the perfect symmetry of the brain and its arteries ;
the latter, indeed, appear designed for the purpose of distribut-
ing an equal and unceasing current of blood to all the parts
supplied. Now, in the very general, and most healthy, posture
for sleeping?on the side?there can be, evidently, no tendency
to a localisation of blood; and here also we are met by the fact,
that nightmare seldom, if ever, occurs when the sleeper is in this
position; on the contrary, in the vast majority of cases, in all
that have come under my notice, the person is affected only
when lying on his back. In this latter position, it need hardly
be pointed out, we have two physical results, the latter con-
sequent on the former: first, an increase in the arterial supply
of the back of the brain ; secondly, a decrease in that of its
front. Let us now consider with what psychological phenomena
these two positions correspond.

In the former?when lying on the side?there is sometimes
a performance of rational processes ; the sleeper will argue, take
part in, and appreciate the merits of, a conversation. But in
the latter position, when the wretched dreamer is on his back,
the mental phenomena are horrible and diabolical, and it is to
these the name of nightmare lias been given. We are thus led
to conclude that the primary cause of the malady is the increase
of the blood supply to the back of the brain, and a consequent
manifestation of local energy ; and this opinion is backed by the
fact that the respiratory movements of the sufferer are so vigorous
as to cause a feeling of pain, pointing to the fact that the reflect-
ing power of the medulla is increased.

We have now to enquire as to the particular agencies
concerned in the production of the two principal phases of
nightmare, namely, inability to speak and to walk. Perhaps I
had better include these, together with other similar phenomena,
under the term, loss of control over muscular actions. It has
been asserted that this loss of control is due to absence of the
co-ordinating power. If, for the sake of argument, I grant this
to be true, it would not clash with my theory as hitherto
demonstrated. In every case where the actions of the voluntary
muscles are co-ordinated, two parts, at least, of the encephalon
are engaged, the cerebrum and the cerebellum ; and it has been
demonstrated beyond all dispute that the power of will is
lodged in the former, the latter merely fulfilling the mechanical
function of co-ordination proper, i.e. the distribution of nerve
force to muscles intended for combined action. This property,
tlien, of the cerebellum is simply secondary?it can only be put in
action in obedience to a higher authority; the organ is totally
incapable of manifesting this species of energy by itself; and
consequently, an increase of its blood supply would produce no
result in this direction. If, then, the theory of lack of co-ordina-
tion be still accepted, we have but one hypothesis remaining,
that it is due to the feebleness of the will. Subject to a very
considerable modification, I shall strive to demonstrate this as
correct. The advocates of the theory of non-co-ordination use
the latter word in a purely physical sense. They assume,
that the sensations experienced in nightmare are due to the
actual inaction of the muscles, and in this they are guilty of the
grossest absurdity. What then, I ask, is dreaming ? Its very
essence consists in imagination?not movement. Dreamers not
suffering from the more horrible phenomena of nightmare, walk,
1-,-in, and speak without moving a muscle. Were the theory I
am opposing true, it would logically follow that, if not in all, in
at least the vast majority of cases, whenever the sleeper dreams
?f performing an action the latter must necessarily correspond
t0 the idea. I need hardly say that common experience proves
this to be utterly untrue. It is only in very rare cases that
action ever follows the impression. In one, when any rational
processes are being enacted, men will sometimes speak and
laugh. In another, when the sexual passion is excited, the
action " semper eadem " is probably reflex. But were these cases
manifold, instead of few, it would give no man the right to
assume that the lack of ability to perform an imaginary action
rested in the powerlessness of the actual muscle. Such an
assumption, again, would give us an equal right to suppose that,
where a sleeper dreams of performing an action, he must be
enabled at least in his waking hours to carry his idea into effect.
" Ad reductio absurdum," should a sailor whose arms have been
amputated above the elbow dream of rowing, his ability to cany
out the latter feat cannot be questioned, ^et such di earns 111
similar cases to the one cited have often occurred. Bettei let
us fall back on Bishop Berkeley's theory of the non-existence o
matter. Further, instances are known of men in A\hom tie
cerebella have been diseased, when all co-ordinating powei
has been actually lost, having dreamt of performing various
muscular actions.

I come now to consider the hyjiothesis of the feebleness ot
the will as the cause of the imaginary loss of musculai action
m nightmare. In the rational processes I have before spoken
where physical movement follows the idea, theie is an
evident exercise of the will. In dreams far less horrible than
those of nightmare, when the sleeper, lying on his side,is engaged
in imaginary fights, the motive power is put forth?he wishes
to hit, and he does so. But the phenomena of nightmare point
to an utter absence of will even sufficient to imagine a bold
muscular action?the sleeper feels himself feeble, helpless, and
terror struck. To what, then, can this lack of mental power be
due ? We know that the will is seated in the cerebral hemi-
sphere. We have seen that the manifestation of energy on the
part of the brain is in proportion to its supply of blood. We
have seen also that in nightmare there is an increased vascular
supply to the back of the brain, and one considerably lessened.
to its front, the amount of blood increasing from before back-
wards. We are therefore led to conclude that the will is
situated in the front part of the cerebral hemispheres, and that
its lack of manifestation, owing to the paucity of material to be
transformed into force, is the cause of the imaginary lack of
muscular action in nightmare. Further, that the back of the
brain is not the organ of will, reason, or exalted imagination,
but is the seat of emotions which, when manifested by itself
alone, without the controlling power, are ignoble and debased.
