Criminal Lunatics
===================

PSYCHOLOGICAL ANNOTATIONS.

Two important trials have occurred lately in which the plea
of insanity was raised. I allude to that of Madden, tried for
threatening the life of the Queen, and acquitted on the ground
of insanity ; and Mullens, found guilty of threatening the life
of an officer connected with the Board of Trade. The nature
of the two cases is precisely similar, but the result of the trials
diametrically opposite. We have frequently urged that a jury
are incompetent to form a correct opinion on the mental state
of an individual. Many of the agitators on lunacy reform have
stated that previous to the admission of any person into an
asylum he should be examined by a jury of his fellow-country-
men. This may appear feasible, but it is quite impracticable
and absurd. Every case of alleged lunacy which comes within
the province of a jury proves their inability to properly grasp
the matter sub judice. Guilt or innocence may be determined
by them, but not the line of demarcation existing between
sanity and insanity. This is proved at every trial in which the
plea of insanity is raised. Both the prisoners were certified
lunatics, and under confinement in asylums. Madden ought
not to have been arraigned in the first instance, having escaped
from a lunatic asylum, to which he ought to have been sent
back, and not detained as a criminal in a gaol. His mental state
was well known, and there was no occasion to waste the time of
the Court by deciding a question which was already admitted.
In reference to the case of Mullens, we wish to draw especial
attention to the rule of law as laid down by Mr. Justice Hawkins
in summing up. In commenting, however, on his remarks, we
do not want to show any disrespect to a ruling of a judge, but
feel it is imperative that some remarks should be made on the
subject. Mr. Justice Hawkins is reported to have said as
follows :?" It is not sufficient excuse to justify you in acquit-
ting a prisoner on the ground of insanity that he might be
eccentric and violent, or that he might have illusions on parti-
cular matters." It may naturally be asked, What is Mr. Justice
Hawkins's idea of insanity ? If an ordinary certificate in lunacy,
required by 8 and 9 Vict., c. 100, was signed, stating that an in-
dividual was excitable, violent, eccentric, and laboured under
definite illusions, the medical man giving it would be perfectly
justified in so signing, and the Commissioners in Lunacy would
accept these facts as evidence of the man's mental condition.
Dr Edgar Sheppard and Mr. Gibson both gave evidence of
the prisoner's insanity, but the question reserved for the jury
was, whether at the time of writing the threatening letter he
knew what he was doing, and the consequences of his contem-
plated act. The jury found that this was so, and found him
guilty. According to the rule of law laid down in our criminal
code, a person is amenable to the law of the land if at the time
of an illegal act he can discriminate between right and wrong.
There is no more cruel or unjust clause in the whole of our
legislation than this one. According to it, if a person is ever
so insane and yet conscious of this distinction, lie must suffer the
penalty of the law as it exists. Another point occurs to us in
connection with the case. There was no doubt from the medical
testimony that he was insane when placed on his trial; and,
therefore, we maintain that he was unable to plead, as being
non compos mentis. One of the last cases of importance in
which the accused was not allowed to plead from affirmed mental
incapacity was that of the Rev. Mr. Dodwell; and it is not out
of place to ask the following questions in reference to this case
as compared with the two under consideration: Why was Mr.
Dodwell not allowed the services of Mr. Gibson, the surgeon of
Newgate, at his trial ? This gentleman was in attendance in
court, prepared to give his testimony as to his sanity; and this
opinion was formed after many lengthy examinations. Mr.
Gibson was called in both these cases. Why was Mr. Dodwell
? who proved that he knew what he was doing and the serious-
ness and criminality of his act by the letters written shortly
before he fired the pistol at the Master of the Rolls, proving
judgment and premeditation?pronounced to be unable to plead
in consequence of being considered insane ? If the doctrine
between right and wrong is considered a test in one case, in the
name of justice let it apply to all, On the one hand, a man
commits a crime, the jury find that he did not know the serious-
ness of what he was doing, and consequently, unable to plead,
he is acquitted as of unsound mind. On the other hand, as in
the case of Mr. Dodwell, an act is premeditated, he is perfectly
conscious of what he is doing, he is considered of sound mind by
the surgeon of the gaol, but, nevertheless, he is pronounced by
the jury as unable to plead. We have heard a great deal lately
on lunacy reform ; but what is really required is an alteration in
our criminal code in reference to the trial of persons alleged to
be insane.

BROCA'S THEORY.

Dr Foulis, of Glasgow, has published in the British Medical
Journal for March 15, 1879, a case which entirely settles the
question of the dependence of aphasia on disease of the
posterior part of the third left convolution of the brain. The
patient, when admitted into the Glasgow infirmary, was suffer-
ing from cardiac dropsy, of which he died. There was no defect
in his speech, and he could talk with perfect fluency and
correctness. After deatli the third left frontal convolution was
found to be almost destroyed, together with two-thirds of
the island of Reil. Dr Foulis concludes bis summary of the
case with the following pertinent remarks:?

" The various theories of the localisation of speech have
been fully discussed by Mr. Dodds in the Journal of Anatomy
and Physiology, vol. xii. Dr Dodds reduces them to three.
Of these the narrowest is that of Broca, who places the
centre of language ' always and only in the posterior part of
the third left frontal convolution,' and apropos of this, Dr.
Dodds remarks that ' a single complete case of lesion of the
posterior part of the third left frontal without aphasia would
effectually overthrow Broca's attempt at exclusive localisation.'
Several cases are on record, in which lesion of the third left frontal
existed without aphasia, but to these there are certain minor
objections. The case of Batty Tuke appeared at first to over-
throw Broca's views, but it was afterwards ascertained that in
the course of that case there had been a period of distinct
aphasia. This lends an additional importance to the case
which I have detailed above; for in it there is no evidence of
aphasia at any time, while the destruction of the third left
frontal convolution was so complete as to abolish any function
which it may have exercised. It cannot be believed that the
thin hollow fragment at the junction of the third left frontal
with the ascending frontal could have sufficed to maintain the
function of the convolution. I hold, therefore, that the view of
Broca is rendered untenable by this case."

EPILEPSY OF GREAT EATERS.

Three cases of epilepsy supervening on excess in food in
persons of sanguine temperament, have enabled M. Lepeire to
demonstrate the advantages of blood-letting and spare diet.
(Annales Medico-Psychologiques, Janvier 1879, p. 133.)

ACTION OF PICKOTOXIN IN CONVULSIVE DISEASES.

Dr Planat lias found Picrotoxin useful, and even curative,
in idiopathic as well as sympathetic epilepsy, puerperal convul-
sions, chorea, or diaphragmatic spasm.

Dr Planat conceives that his success has been such as to
justify him in designating the drug an anti-convulsive.
(,Journal de Therapeutique, publie par M. A. Grubler.)

SLEEPLESSNESS.

1. Sleep is caused by the diminished activity of the nervous
cells when they have been exhausted by functional work; these
physical conditions modify the vaso-motor innervation ; the
afflux of blood is diminished, the activity of the brain is sus-
pended, and the reparation of tissue proceeds.

2. The habitual cause of insomnia is the permanent exist-
ence of excitement of the central nervous elements under the
influence of some cause, whether external or internal; it may
likewise depend upon an active congestion of the brain, which
maintains the functional activity of the cells.

3. Insomnia may proceed likewise from nervous irritability
coincident with general anemia, producing a modification of
the modality of the nervous elements.

4. The treatment of insomnia must depend upon the dis-
covery of its cause. Transitory sleeplessness will almost always
be relieved by a return to rigid hygienic laws.

5. The source of pervigiliam when symptomatic of acute
or chronic maladies can be, in the majority of cases, easily
removed by recourse to hypnotics, of which the most trust-
worthy are opium and its alkaloids.

6. Morphia is the most potent principle of opium ; narceine
and codeine are less active, but are not followed by the malaise
which accompanies the use of morphia. The preparations are
chiefly indicated in order to allay pain, but are contra-indi-
cated where cerebral congestion is present.

7. Bromide of potassium, which is even less powerful, is
indicated where there is acceleration of the circulation, as
where wakefulness depends upon nervous agitation, when opiates
would be inefficacious. It is employed successfully in children.
It is contra-indicated where ancemia is distinctly marked.

8. Sulphate of quinine, like bromide, seems to act in anta-
gonism to congestion of the brain ; upon the same principle
liquid chloroform is successful in nervous pervigilium.
9. Hydrate of chloral is a new hypnotic, distinguished by
its rapidity of action. It is suitable in almost all cases of
insomnia, except where dyspnoea,.cardiac affections, and great
debility are present.

10. The sleeplessness of aged, feeble, anaemic patients will
be better counteracted by tonics, bitters, medicaments, wine,
and the water cure. (Archives Generates de Medicine.)

RHEUMATIC CHOREA.

There is no more connection between chorea and rheuma-
tism than between it, scrofula, syphilis, or skin disease. It is
simply chorea?that is to say, a particular state of the functions
of the nervous system, under the influence of physical debility,
following a malady of some kind and manifesting itself in a
want of correspondence between what wills and what executes
muscular movement. (Le Mouvement Medical.)

EXPOSURE OF SPIRITUALISM.

The tricks of the contemptible delusion termed Spiritualism
were successfully exposed in the New Public Halls, Glasgow, on
the evenings of the 25tli and 26th ult., by Mr. Bishop, a young
American gentleman, who had just been entertaining and in-
structing in a similar manner the modern Athenians. Mr. Bishop
was invited to Glasgow by the University authorities, who mus-
tered in great force on the occasion of both seances?if Mr.
Bishop will pardon us the use of the word. The proceeds of both
meetings were in aid of the funds of the "Western Infirmary.
Mr. Bishop was ably assisted in his well-executed and interest-
ing performances by the learned Professor of the University,
Dr Gairdner. (.Medical Press and Circular, March 5, 1879.)

THE REV. MR. DODWELL.

Justice is not satisfied by the statement recently made in
the House of Commons, that medical men have visited Mr.
Dodwell and reported that the safety of the public still requires
that he should be detained at Broadmoor as a dangerous lunatic.
It would not settle the question to say that fifty or a hundred
doctors had visited him, if the facts on which they formed their
opinion are not published. What is demanded is, that the case
should be tried on its own merits.

We will now briefly repeat the facts on wliicli we founded
our judgment of his sanity :?

1. That he gave a clear and correct account of the grievances
which induced him to commit a misdemeanour, having failed
in every other attempt to get a hearing in courts of justice.
2. That he did not fire a blank cartridge at the Judge from
an insane impulse, but had been premeditating the act for six
months, and was so determined to avoid any possible injury to
his Lordship that he stood at a safe distance from him before
discharging the pistol.

3. All the medical men who saw him, about six weeks before
his being sent to Broadmoor, found him perfectly coherent in
conversation, and they could not discover the least trace of a
delusion.

4. From all he said it was evident that he was a highly
honourable, truthful, and religious man, with strong reasoning
powers and a highly cultivated intellect; possessing also great
determination of will, and feelings keenly sensitive to insult or
injury.

5. It has been assumed that Mr. Dodwell has a morbid
sense of his ill-treatment by the Brighton guardians. Can a
man be said to have a morbid sense of an injury which has
reduced him and his family to beggary ?

In conclusion, we would again ask, Why was medical evidence
taken in the case of Madden, and not of Mr. Dodwell, at the
time of trial ? and that if the knowledge of right and wrong be
considered a legal test of insanity, why was it not adopted by
the judge and jury in passing sentence on the latter gentleman ?
Since the above was written, Mrs. Dodwell has presented a
petition to the Queen. We subjoin her letter, and the answer
which she received from the Home Office:?

" To the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty,?I have taken the
great liberty of writing to your Majesty to make an appeal on
behalf of my husband, the Rev. Henry John Dodwell, who is
detained during your Majesty's pleasure at Broadmoor Lunatic
Asylum. I humbly submit to the general opinion that he
deserved some punishment for his unwise act, but after the long
and happy married life we have lived, his uniform kindness to
our children and myself, his calmness and perseverance for five
years under the irritating difficulties experienced in endeavour-
ing to obtain redress for the wrongs that had been done to him,
is not to me consistent with his being branded as a lunatic.
And as the eminent medical men who have examined him are
divided in opinion, I humbly and earnestly pray that your
Majest}7 will give liim the benefit of the doubt and liberate
him, so that he may return to protect our four children and
release me from the helpless position I am in, and save me from
my only resource, the workhouse.?I beg to remain your
Majesty's most humble and obedient subject, Eliza Don well,
wife of H. J. Dodwell, 77 Great College Street, London, N.W.,
6th March, 1879. To Her Majesty Queen Victoria, Windsor
Castle."?"Home Office, Whitehall, 15th March 1879.?
Madam,?In reply to your application to her Majesty, praying
the release of the Rev. Henry John Dodwell from Broadmoor
Asylum, I am directed by Mr. Secretary Cross to acquaint you
that the same has been laid before the Queen, who was not
pleased to give any instructions thereon.?I am, madam, your
obedient servant (signed), A. F. 0. Liddell. Mrs. Dodwell, 77
Great College Street, N.W."

The reply of the Home Secretary is far from satisfactory,
and does not meet the exigencies of the case. The public have
again and again requested to be precisely informed what are
the grounds, both legal and psychological, for Mr. Dodwell's
indefinitely prolonged incarceration. The only, answer that has
been given is, that the medical men who were ordered by Mr.
Secretary Cross to visit Mr. Dodwell, reported him to be insane,
but the public have never been informed of the data on which
they form their opinion. Two medical men, Dr Forbes
Winslow and Dr Winn, who have repeatedly visited him, and
who must be considered entirely independent witnesses, as
they have refused any fees for their professional services, have
laid before the public a full and explicit statement of their
reasons for his sanity.

The Euenincj Standard for March 24,1879, in commenting
on Mrs. Dodweil's petition, observes:?" The plea of the poor
lady amounts to this: Her husband did a wrong thing, for
which he deserved to be punished ; but as to his madness, the
best of the experts differ." * * * "As regards the par-
ticular case of Mr. Dodwell, we desire to express no opinion,
except that the word insane is sadly in want of a definition, and
that, in the absence of a definition, it is only reasonable that
men who draw attention to their supposed wrongs by firing
pistols at her Majesty's judges are best under lock and key."
The writer of this x'emark forgets to state that the pistol
fired by Mr. Dodwell was a leadless one, and that his wrongs
were real, not imaginary. If he is to be pronounced insane
from the mere circumstance of his having committed a mis-
demeanour, it follows that every criminal who commits an
assault must be considered mad.
