Cyclopaedia of the Practice of Medicine
========================================

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTICES. 149
:Author:  Br. H. von Ziemssen. Vols. xi. xii. xiii. and xiv.

In the great work edited by Yon Ziemssen, four volumes
are devoted to diseases of the nervous system. Of the four two
are written by Professor Erb ; the other two are made up of
monographs by various authors. The first of these volumes
(the eleventh of the Cyclopaedia) is on diseases of the peripheral
cerebro-spinal system. It is written by Professor Erb alone.
It treats of neuralgias, anaesthesiae, neuroses of special senses,
neuroses of motor nerves, and anatomical diseases of peripheral
nerves.

Neuralgia is handled with great minuteness; and in the
section on treatment some valuable remarks are made. The
great worth of electricity, rather as a palliative than as a curative
agent, is insisted upon. The galvanic current is found of use
more frequently than the faradic current. The cases that
specially call for this remedy cannot as yet be stated with pre-
cision. Those, however, most likely to be benefited are the
so-called idiopathic neuralgiae, and those due to a rheumatic
or to a neuritic process.

The various other alterations in sensation are next discussed.
Then follows a most readable account of spasms and paralyses.
The volume closes with a section on the anatomical diseases of
the peripheral nerves?hyperaemia, inflammation, atrophy, and
hypertrophy.

The modes of testing sensibility, special and general, and
motility are admirable, and will fully repay perusal.
The second of these four volumes (xii.) deals with diseases
of the brain and its membranes.

The first essay is on Anaemia, Hyperaemia, Haemorrhage,
Embolism, and Thrombosis of the Brain, by Nothnagel. It
gives a very satisfactory account of the subjects it deals with.
The next essay is a most interesting and instructive one by
Obernier on Tumours of the Brain. Then follow Heubner on
Syphilis of the Brain and Nervous System, and Huguenin on
Acute and Chronic Inflammation of the Brain and its Mem-
branes,?the latter being an article marked by rare ability both
in regard to fulness of matter and lucidity of exposition. The
final essay in this volume is by Hitzig. He treats of hyper-
trophy and atrophy of the brain; and under this latter title
general paralysis of the insane is discussed. The account given
of it is a very good one?concise, clear, accurate, and full.
The next volume (xiii.), like the eleventh, is written
solely by Professor Erb. It comprises diseases of the spinal
cord and medulla oblongata. It is characterised throughout
by clearness in stating facts and theories, and by caution in
discussing tliem. Several diseases that are not yet well known
to the mass of British practitioners are described in a very
readable way. The account of multiple sclerosis, though lacking
the vivacity of Charcot's description, is perhaps not a whit less
pleasant to read, and is, in some respects, more satisfactory.
Spasmodic Spinal Paralysis, first fully described by Erb
himself in 1875, having been previously indicated by Zuerck
and by Charcot, receives copious consideration. " The disease
is clinically characterised by a gradually increasing paresis and
paralysis, generally advancing slowly from below upwards, with
muscular tension, reflex contractions, and contractures, with
strikingly increased reflex actions of tendons, while, at the
same time, there is entire, or almost entire, absence of all dis-
turbances of sensibility or trophic disturbances, of all vesical
or sexual weakness, and of all cerebral disturbances." Such
is the author's definition. The affection is slow in development,
insidious and chronic in course. The anatomical basis is in all
probability a symmetrical sclerosis of the lateral columns,
especially of their posterior divisions, advancing gradually from
below upwards. The diseases of the medulla, too, are exhaus-
tively dealt with.

The last of the four volumes (xiv.) consists of articles
on Vaso-Motor and Trophic Neuroses, by Eulenburg ; Epilepsy
and Eclampsia, by Nothnagel; Tetanus, by Bauer; Catalepsy,
Tremor, and Paralysis Agitans, by Eulenburg; Chorea, by Von
Ziemssen; Hysteria, by Jolly ; and Disturbances of Speech, by
Kussmaul. The last-named essay occupies more than one-third
of the whole book, and is one of the most fascinating articles to
be found in the work. It gives a masterly account of speech,
considered both from a psychological and from a physiological
point of view. It will be read with pleasure as well as with
profit by all engaged in observing mental phenomena.

Physicians specially interested in neuroses and neuro-
pathology have good reason to be thankful for these volumes.
