Our School Houses
==================

:Author:  William Estabrook Chancellor,
Superintendent of Schools, South Norwalk, Conn.

In 1906 a commission was appointed by act of Congress
to report to that body a plan of a better type of schoolhouse for the District of Columbia. The commission was composed of the Superintendent of Schools, the Supervising Architect
of the Treasury, and the Engineer Commissioner of the District.

Two members were, therefore, expert builders. This commission, of which I was chairman, visited many of the important
cities of the country?among them New York, Chicago, Boston, St.
Louis, Cleveland, Rochester, Syracuse, Springfield and Worcester?and published a report now known as Senate Document
No. 338, Sixtieth Congress, First Session. We examined every
one of the one hundred and fifty-six schoolhouses of the district.
We visited in all twenty-five other cities. In addition, I myself
have visited schools in the more remote parts of the country, including the South and the Pacific coast. In all, I have examined
some fifteen hundred schoolhouses. This paper is a summary of
some things I have seen and some opinions I have formed.
IIow bad some of the conditions are I do not like to say. I
have too much patriotic pride, and too great a sense of the decencies
of public print. I have visited many schoolhouses which smelled
like prisons, there being no warrant why either schools or jails
should have an offensive odor. I have seen schools where boys
and girls used the same outhouses. I have seen schools which were
obviously firetraps. I know that most schools are firetraps, but
those to which I refer defied even the dullest "common sense".
On the other hand, I have seen a few beautiful, commodious
and safe buildings. I have seen even some locations and grounds
which were really adequate for the best educational purposes.
While I have seen nothing as good as the competent school architect
with adequate resources could provide, I have seen approximations
to such ideals.

As I have not yet been able to visit all the important cities
and all the states, it would be invidious for me to cite any state or
any city as either the worst or the best. I have certain cities in
mind which deserve the brand of infamy in respect to their schoolhouses, but it may be that there are some others equally bad.
Until the advent, some half dozen years ago, of Colonel John
Biddle, U. S. A. Engineer Corps, as Commissioner of the District
of Columbia, the city of Washington, the alias of the district, was
perilously near being the worst city of America in respect to its
schoolhouses, partly because of the indifference of Congress, partly
because of the quarrel, a century old, between the "Nationals" and
the "Domestics". Since that time, however, there has been a
radical improvement

In those cities where the board of education has the power to
bond the municipality for schools, we generally find the best conditions, while the worst conditions are usually to be found where the
board has no power at all over schoolhouses. To this rule, however, Boston is a notable exception.
I can also say that where the board, the city council, or the
schoolhouse commission, employs a genuine school architect who
gives his entire time to that work, we have the best new schools.
Chicago secured such an architect by competitive examination
determined by architects, with the result that the work of that city
in recent years has been unsurpassed in this country. Four men
have done so much more and so much better work for their cities
than any others have been able or permitted to do, that they deserve
to be specifically mentioned?Dwight H. Perkins, of Chicago;
William B. Ittner, of St. Louis; C. B. J. Snyder, of New York,
and R. Clipston Sturgis, of Boston. The best thing that any board
member or school superintendent can do for his community in
respect to new buildings is to buy a railroad ticket and spend a
week investigating the new schoolhouses of some one of these four
cities.

It is a significant feature of the new high school awakening
of the past twenty years that in general our high schools are
superior to our grammar schools. They are superior in two important respects: First, they are built to accommodate the pupils
and the courses of study, and secondly, they are not structures
made of new materials shaped upon traditional lines.

What are the difficulties which seem to bar the way to progress
in schoolhouse construction in most cities ?

First, in relation to size of plot.?There is an idea that a large
playground for children takes a lot of real estate out of the taxable
property. I have not time here to discuss this strange fallacy in
all its details, nor the incidence of taxation in general, but in
passing I may note two things, that the people who do not live
in tenements upon the space devoted to the playground do live
somewhere else and create values there, and that because they are
forced out upon the periphery of the community, they have more
breathing space than if they had been allowed to stay in the heart
of the city. They are merely displaced. With those afflicted with
taxpayers' or politicians' nearsightedness of this kind, argument is,
of course, useless. I have known of cases where governing boards
actually sold playgrounds which wise predecessors had had the
foresight to acquire.

Secondly, in relation to architecture.?Most new elementary
school buildings simply repeat the plan of older buildings. The
idea has prevailed that so many classes of so many pupils each
constitute a school. The problem was, therefore, to fix the proper
size of the unit school room and then repeat this as often as may be,
with halls and stairways for entrance and exit By this plan, it
has come to pass that most schoolhouses are little more than barracks. Building schools in this way is not a difficult enterprise
for a board. It requires no thought, but involves simply functioning by habit. Not long ago, in a New England city, a man
came out with a letter in which he explained how a certain large
schoolhouse came to be what it was. His explanation, in a few
words, was that he himself, in his capacity of a board member, sat
down one evening and drew the plans, and that next day the contract was let?for eighty thousand dollars of the public money.
This school has inner halls without light, the halls being six feet
wider than necessary. The reduction of this space would have
more than paid an architect's fee of five per cent. Cubical contents cost so much per unit, a fact that this economist did not deem
worth considering. Moreover, because the halls have no light,
there is a monthly gas bill for illumination representing five per
cent per annum upon a thousand dollars. And, in addition, the
building is so ugly as to be a direct detriment to every piece of
property near it. I cite this merely as an illustration.
Another city had thirteen schools to build at one time, and
twelve architects entered the competition. This community
awarded a school to each of the architects, the assignment of the odd
school being determined by lot. By this happy procedure, the city
avoided hurting the feelings of eleven architects, and acquired
some fine examples of freak schoolhouses.

Thirdly, in relation to replacement.?Here is the worst of all
the troubles. Once up, a schoolhouse stays apparently forever.
In nine cases out of ten, there is no economic motive for replacement. Its users are children without power to help themselves.
The building may grow musty. The street level may be changed.
The character of the neighborhood may be revolutionized. But
for want of occasion and for want of rivalry, the building stands.
The only way to get an old building torn down is to have it condemned by the board of health, and this is seldom possible. It is
too easy to tinker the hulk into the appearance of availability.
Occasionally, a neighborhood radically improves, and, when
it becomes of sufficient political importance, it is able to induce
the powers that rule to give it a better schoolhouse. But these
instances make the common presence of the old schoolhouse only
the more apparent. We are carrying our schoolhouses now, for
all America, at the book-value of $843,000,000.* We have no
knowledge as to what they are really worth. Many are utterly
worthless. Some are positively dangerous.

Fourthly, in relation to the teachers.?It is an irritating fact
to men who believe in living in the world as a part of it, that so
many schoolmen as regards practical things are wanderers in a
fog of ignorance. I recall an experience of the schoolhouse commission. We had finished inspecting a fine, large building. Our
guide was the school principal, a man in middle life. As we
prepared to depart, we asked him what the building had cost. He
did not know. We then asked in what year it had been built.
He did not know that. Finally, we asked the name of the architect
or the contractors. He did not know. !Now this was but a small
community, and the principal had lived in the town at the time
the schoolhouse was built. The people paid him the generous
salary, for a rural town, of two thousand dollars, yet he evidently
regarded these material concerns as outside his interests. The
druggist across the street from this fine property had all these
items at his tongue's end. This may appear a trifling incident,
but in the light of many such experiences in nearly every state
of the Union, I am not an optimist with respect to the ability of
school principals to prepare boys for real life. The principals
accuse the superintendents of being long on business, short on
pedagogy; the superintendents are warranted in replying that the
principals are dead to the every-day life going on about them.
I have known principals to give up small salaries in beautiful
new school buildings to take slightly larger ones in miserable
?Report of Commissioner of Education, 1908.

structures, and then not be able to tell in what respects, if at
all, the latter were superior to the former. It is small wonder
that in our cities and towns the more practical board members
are not particularly interested in the views of the pedagogues.
I remember well one case in which the commission were gravely informed that the old building was really superior to the fine
new one that replaced it because in the old building was a tower
from which the principal could command the entire recess yards,
whereas in the new schoolhouse he was compelled to go down stairs
and walk around the yards. This was told to us by a young man,
twenty-nine years of age, in apparently splendid health. I cite this
illustration in order to make it clear that criticisms of schoolhouses
by pedagogues are not invariably valid.

One more illustration will suffice. In a certain city stands
an eight-room brick building with no cellar. The principal was
sure that the absence of a cellar was desirable because there was,
in consequence, no playroom in the basement to be looked after in
rainy weather.

I may summarize the situation by saying that the school
architects and the school superintendents are combining in America
to give better schoolhouses to the pupils, and are usually opposed
in their efforts by taxpayers, by traditionalists, and by politicians
more or less often in league with contractors. Not infrequently
also they are opposed by the principals of schools. It is unpleasant
but necessary to add that they are often opposed by architects
who occasionally build schoolhouses, but who have never entered
fully into the problems of schoolhouse construction.

The first requirement for a good schoolhouse is one so commonly neglected that many rooms in a majority of American
schools should be abandoned for classroom purposes. This requirement is that into every such room the direct sunlight should come
at least one hour every day. It is easy enough on a proper area
of land to secure this result. There are all varieties of available
floor plans,?the square, the rectangle, the T, the U, the L, the X,
the H, the E, the Y, and various combinations of these. I have
seen new schools in which there are northeast rooms and northwest
rooms taking their light only from the north, whereas they might
equally well take it only from the east or west. Sunlight is the
true germ killer. And yet I know a large city school in which
the janitor invariably shuts the inner blinds of every classroom
throughout holiday periods.

Often, in the case of a new building, one does not discover
for years what the trouble is with the north rooms. But as surely
as the sun shines, just so surely this sunshine is needed in every
room occupied by human beings for considerable periods of time.
The sunlighted rooms of even badly ventilated old structures never
smell as foul as do the unlighted rooms. Reflected sunlight and
diffused sunlight have lost their greatest health value.
Every building of more than one story should be fireproof.
In order to secure this requisite, it is necessary to spend from
six to eight thousand dollars per room. Many cities have the
latter maximum now. One of the beneficent results of the Schoolhouse Commission of the District of Columbia was that its report
convinced Congress of the desirability of strictly fireproof construction. And since then all appropriations have been based upon
the last named figures. I have heard it argued that rural schoolhouses of two stories need not be fireproof. There are one hundred
and fifty schoolhouses burned down every year. These fires are
by no means confined to cities. Fireproof construction is the true
economy not only of life but also of money.

Schoolhouses should also be panic-proof, as far as that is
possible in dealing with children, who are peculiarly susceptible
to panic. For this there are two requirements. The stairways
should be two for the first four classrooms above the ground
floor, and one for every two additional classrooms. A building
with twelve classrooms above the first floor requires six stairways.
These stairways should be of such a width as to permit two people
to pass up or down side by side or one up and one down, which
means four and a half or five feet wide. Where there are three or
more stories the singular stairway used in IvTew York city is admirable. This permits up and down pairs of stairs in the same space,
and is a remarkably ingenious device. The other requirement is
that the hallways should not be too wide, the width, of course,
depending upon the number of rooms opening out upon the hallways. The general standards are twelve to fourteen feet for
hallways with four rooms opening upon them, and one foot more
for each additional room. It is exceedingly important that nowhere shall there be a "neck-in-the-bottle" construction by which
children are forced into narrower spaces as they move forward.
Outside doors must open outward, and they must be as wide as
the hallways.

Each hallway should be lighted fully from end to end by
daylight. This seems axiomatic, but it is a requirement often
neglected.

It is no longer considered good school practice to have general
basement toilets. The best plan is that adopted in Chicago, where
what is known as tlie "tower plan" is used. By this plan the
ventilation of the toilets is isolated from the general system, and
separate rooms are provided for each group of one hundred or
more boys or girls. These accommodations are arranged conveniently upon each floor.
Every child needs twenty square feet of floor space in his
classroom, and as many more in his playroom. The Indiana standard of fifteen feet is too low. The ceiling height should be at least
twelve feet, and in the South it should go to fifteen or sixteen
feet as the minimum. It follows that for forty-two children, therefore, the schoolroom should be in area either twenty-four by thirtytwo or twenty-five by thirty feet.
The lighting surface of window glass should be twenty per
cent of the floor surface, and the height of the window glass at least
sixty-five per cent of the floor width. It is no longer necessary
to argue for unilateral or quadrant lighting. We have come to
understand the dangers of cross-lights to the eyesight and nervous
system.

We must have forced ventilation both summer and winter.
The lives of not a few eminent architects and engineers are being
devoted to this one matter. The air in the rooms must be fresh
all the time. It is not enough that it should be occasionally renewed, and it must be introduced in such a way as not to cause
drafts. By so-called "practical" people, I have often been asked
what windows are for, if not primarily to be opened and shut.
Windows are for light.

Our schools should be the molds into which the building
materials are poured, not our buildings the molds into which the
children are poured. We need many rooms seldom present in
elementary schools but coming at last into the high schools. Among
such rooms, I would specify:?

an art museum and a science or nature museum;
an assembly hall;
a music room;
a drawing room or studio;
exercise or drill halls for physical training, with shower baths
attached, preferably one hall for each sex;
a library and reading room;
rooms for teachers, for principal, for janitor;
various shoprooms for manual training, domestic science and
art, and the crafts.

This will cost money to secure ? Yes, indeed. Boston has
already spent a vast sum upon that finest school building in
America, the Charleston High School, which has, however, no
playgrounds. It has equipped the building with lockers, so that
every desk in it may be used by three different sets of pupils,?
evening, afternoon and morning, if necessary. The little town of
Naugatuck, in Connecticut, has a high school almost equally
fine,?the gift of a millionaire who is a civic patriot. Let us have
fine buildings, and let us use them all the time.

We are going to spend a great deal more money every year
upon public education in America. I am sorry to say that most
of the increase will not go to raise teachers' salaries. It will go
for new buildings. The time will come when for our new buildings we shall be looking for a higher grade of teacher. The general
public can see the good of the money which it spends upon school
buildings, but it cannot yet see the good of the money which it
spends upon teachers. That will come in time.

We are now entering upon a building renaissance in schoolhouse construction; it is well, therefore, for educators and students
of education to think seriously and to inquire carefully into the
kind of buildings we really need. Everywhere the chief trouble
is plain ignorance on the part of all concerned. The financial
board knows no better, and the architect, if there is one, knows
no better, and the teachers who must use the building know but
little more. Once a school superintendent actually defeated the
proposal of a good architect for a ventilating system in a new
school by saying to the board that "operating it would prevent
the teachers from doing proper classroom work."

I have but three practical suggestions to make. First, there
are now three books upon schoolhouse construction which are worth
studying.* Secondly, it is eminently worth while to buy a railroad ticket and proceed to inspect such of the newer school buildings as may be within reasonable distance. It will not do to accept these in toto, but they are bound to prove suggestive. Thirdly,
schoolmen, whether superintendents or principals, should advise
the powers who build schoolhouses in their own communities as
to the ideals and standards they themselves have in mind. The
attitude, "I will take what I can get," may be finally necessary,
but, in some instances at least, the demand for high standards
has been productive of good results.

*Briggs, W. R. Modern American School Buildings. N. Y., Wiley, 1902.
Bruce, W. G. School Architecture. Milwaukee, School Board
Journal. .3d ed? 1906.
Moore, J. A. The Schoolhouse, Its Heating and Ventilation. Boston,
Moore,, 1905.
