State Association of Town and City Superintendents
===================================================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.
Report of Committee on Delinquent and Dependent Children Including Truancy, Juvenile Courts and Poor Relief.*
 
[1 ranklin, Ind.] 1908.
Pp. 40.

In the present state of our knowledge each new study not only
adds to our knowledge of local conditions, but contributes something
to the elucidation of the general problem of retardation. Not infrequently such studies present new facts, or lay a new emphasis on
those already familiar. In the present report the statistical substructure is loosely put together, but the presentation is a striking
one. The facts purport to relate to seven thousand children, and are
gathered in "about twenty-five cities in all parts of the state," and
"usually by returns from one representative building." Had such a
method been followed throughout, the results, valuable as they are for
the several grades, might be equally valuable in the aggregate, as representing a typical distribution by grades and ages in Indiana schools.
But we are not given a general age and grade table by which to judge
at a glance whether such a condition obtains. Since, however, we are
given both the number and percentage of over-age pupils in each
grade we may by calculation construct the grade totals as follows:

Grade 1  1000
Grade 2   905
Grade 3   573
Grade 4   100G
Grade 5   936
Grade 6   887
Grade 7   982
Grade 8   729
7018

Obviously this is not a normal grade distribution, in which each grade
would be successively smaller than the next preceding. Any properly
calculated average of the whole, taking into account as it should the
numbers in the several grades, must be considerably affected by such
an abnormal grade distribution.

In the absence of a general age and grade table which would have
shown at a glance the weaknesses of the material, we find instead a
?Copies of this report may be obtained from the chairman of the committee,
Supt. A. O. Ncal, Franklin, Ind.
number of subsidiary tables and some effective diagrams. Reducing
these tables to a compact statement we have the following:
Statistics of 7000 Children in Indiana.
Grade
Range of ages
>>
?
U
a
S
I2
53 cj
Q >,
Pupils of
Minimum
age
?? a
u n
C 3
Ph ft
Average pupils
Standard
Jl
a
o M
c-S
? co
o ^
u, a
O p
PL, ft
Most frequent age
o*
JSji
o h us
a"-a
? a 5
ox 2
U ft ft
?3ft
ft d
G
7
9
9
10
11
12
15
14
10
17
18
18
17
7
10
8
9
7
0
7
8
9
10
11
12
03
58
51
30
35
29
33
34
35

9 yrs. or over...
10'yrs. or over...
11 yrs. or over...
12 yrs. or over...
13 yrs. or over...
14 yrs. or over...
15 yrs. or over...
10 yrs.'or over...

48
07
121
155
148
120
111
70
4.8
7.4
21.1
15.4
15.3
14.2
11.3
9.0
12.4
0
7
9
9
11
12
13
10
57
44
32
30
29
23
20
22
?Estimated
from diagram.

This table serves to bring out the wide variations in ages which are
posssible in the several grades, though in the absence of exact figures
we cannot determine how much significance is to be attached to the
extreme figures. The gradual decline in the percentage of pupils of
the minimum age until the fifth grade is reached is another interesting factor. In the discussion of over-age pupils it is regretable that
a standard should be adopted which differs from the one commonly
in use, since it makes comparison with familiar figures more difficult. No good reason is assigned for making over-age pupils in the
first grade those of nine years and upward, instead of eight years and
upward. The reason given points to the common usage. The increasing proportion of over-age pupils revealed by these figures as the
grades advance, and the diminishing proportion as the upper grades
are reached is familiar. But it is quite unusual that the maximum
proportion of over-age children should be in the third grade. Let
us compare these results with those of Fort Wayne, computed on the
same basis of retardation from the table reprinted in the report:
Per cent Overage.

7000 Indiana Fort Wayne, 1906-07,
Grade Children. 5558 Children.
1   4.8  3.0
2   7.4  5.5
3   21.1  89
4   15.4  15.6
5   15.8  10.G
G   14.2   12.3
7   11.3  7.0
8   9.G  5.3

The Fort Wayne figures make a showing directly comparable with those
observed in other cities. Here the maximum retardation is in the
fifth grade. In Dr Cornman's study we find it to be in the fourth
grade in Kansas City and in the fifth grade in Camden, Boston,
New York and Philadelphia. If the statistical basis of the Indiana
investigation were a given system, or a group of systems, or even a
normal distribution of grades, a maximum retardation in the third
grade would be a very striking fact. As it is we are forced to the
conclusion that it results from the choice of the figures presented
for consideration.

In regard to the retardation of 12.4 per cent for the whole body
of children reported upon, it may be said that this average is gained
by taking the percentage column, adding it up and dividing by eight.
This is certainly not a scientific way of getting an average. We
are told that 84G children were retarded in an aggregate of 7000.
This is 12.1 per cent. The difference is not noticeable, but it is certain that were the grades more uneven in number the result might be
quite different.

If we have gone into a somewhat detailed analysis it is not with
any desire to underrate the many excellencies of this report. It is
particularly strong in its presentation of facts by means of diagrams;
and in its appeal to the interest of schoolmen is probably more
effective than some of the more carefully worked out statistical treatments of the subject. If it does not, as stated, very accurately measure
retardation, there can be no doubt that it proves the existence of the
problem, and makes a strong plea for the special treatment of the
backward child. From the conclusion that there is a need for special
ungraded schools in every community with a school population of one
thousand or over, there is likely to be little dissent.
R. P. F.
