An Examination of the Eyes, Ears, and Throats of Children in the Public Schools of Jefferson City, Missouri
=============================================================================================================

:Author:  C. M. Sneed, M.D., and Guy Monteose Whipple, Ph.D.
Purpose. The public schools of Jefferson City have an enrolment of some 1530 pupils. The physical examination which is
here reported occupied the greater portion of the school year,
1907-8. The primary purpose was to test the eyesight and hearing
of 1000 white and 100 colored children, but as the work progressed
its scope was widened to include observations of the throat, nose,
etc. An inquiry was then made as to the correlation of sensory
defects with school standings. Some attention was also paid to the
value of issuing cards of warning to parents.

Method. As a preliminary to the work a printed record-sheet
was supplied to each child to be filled out as far as possible by
the child himself, or by the teacher for the children in the lower
grades. On this were first recorded certain scholastic and personal
data (building, room, grade, teacher, name of pupil, sex, years in
school, color of hair and eyes, name and address of parents, etc.) ;
then followed questions concerning the pupil's physiological condition, e. g., Does the pupil habitually suffer from inflamed eyes or
lids ? Do the eyes and head habitually grow weary and painful
after study ? Does the pupil appear to be cross-eyed ? Does the
pupil complain of earache in either ear? Does matter (pus)
of foul odor proceed from either ear ? Is the pupil frequently subject to colds in the head, and discharges from the nose or throat ?f
Blank spaces for remarks were used to note the presence of abnor?"The work of examination was done by Dr Sneed under the direction
of Dr Whipple, then Acting Professor of Educational Psychology in the
University of Missouri. Dr Sneed undertook the work from personal interest
and served as Medical Inspector without pay. The Superintendent of
Schools and the School Board of the city facilitated the investigation by
giving him an official appointment and aided him in many other ways.
fMost of these questions are based upon those devised by Dr Frank
Allport of Chicago and incorporated by him upon the charts published
especially for school tests by F. A. Hardy & Co. of that city.
malities, such as goitre, enlarged tonsils, skin diseases, and other
defects.

The direct personal examination of each child was executed
by Doctor Sneed as thoroughly as possible without the use of instruments or material other than the test-chart, the watch, and a card
or thin ruler for exposing the conjunctiva.
This examination comprised the following details. First,
the lids were everted and examined for the presence of trachoma,
granulated lids, or other inflammatory condition of the conjunctiva.
Secondly, the throat was inspected for the presence of enlarged
tonsils or other abnormal conditions. (Careful throat ins'pection
was made upon only 377 children.) The tonsils were considered
enlarged if they were somewhat larger than an almond. Special
attention was given to the throat and nasal passages of those pupils
who were reported as "hard of hearing," "subject to colds in the
head," or as "habitual mouth breathers." These pupils were
examined for adenoids in so far as was feasible without direct
digital exploration.

Thirdly, acuity of vision was tested by the ordinary Snellen
types, with proper precautions to avoid the memorizing of the testletters. Defective vision was recorded upon failure to read as
many as four letters in the 20-foot line.*

Fourthly, acuity of hearing was tested by placing the pupil 20
feet distant, with his back to the examiner and with the untested
ear closed by firm pressure of the fleshy portion of the palm at the
base of the thumb, while short, vocalized words or sentences,?e. g.,
"Do you hear?" "Hoav old are you?", etc.,?were spoken in a
normal or conversational tone of voice. The watch-test was also
used in some instances. Like the test of visual acuity, this test
of auditory acuity is extremely rough and calculated to detect only
pronounced incapacity, since the range of ordinary speech is in
the neighborhood of one hundred feet or more.
Chief Results. In Table 1 we have summarized our data for
the 1000 white children and the 100 colored children. In our
subsequent discussion, unless the contrary be noted, we refer to the
results for the white children alone.
?It is important to make clear that this simple distance-test, which is
the one commonly employed in the examination of school-children, usually
fails to detect hyperopia, unless complicated with appreciable astigmatism,
yet hyperopia is the commonest type of defect in younger children and the
source of serious eye-strain. In the absence of supplementary tests, our
only way of "catching" these cases was through the report of headache
or pain in the eyes after studying.

TABLE I.
PERCENTAGE DEFECTIVE AMONG 1000 WHITE AND 100 COLORED CHILDREN.
Defects White Colored
Defective vision (Snellen test)   36.5 19
Defective vision (one eye only)   13.8 7
Defective vision (both eyes)     22.7 12
Defective vision (first three grades, 147 pupils)   29.4
Defective vision (high school, 116 pupils)   40.5
Pain after using eyes at study   29.5 34
Probably needing glasses   41.0 ?
Wearing glasses when examined   3.8 5
Cross-eyed   3.0 2
Inflamed lids   17.5 11
Trachoma   8.3 1
Defective hearing  7.7 7
Defective hearing (one ear only)   (5.4 4
Defective hearing (both ears)   1.3 3
Discharging ears   4.0
Suffer from ear-ache   11.3 17
Mouth breathers   24.2 10
Frequent colds   38.7 22
Tonsils enlarged   22.8 1
Goiter   3.G 1
Miscellaneous abnormalities   2.(5 G
Cards of warning issued, 551. Number who heeded the warning, 74 of tlie
423 that could be investigated, or 17.5 per cent.

Comments on the results. The recorded percentage of negro
children who suffer from pain in the eyes or ears is unquestionably
too high, for we discovered that these children took a peculiar
pride in having as many "symptoms" as possible, and that many
of them seemed to consider sore eyes a sign of intellectual prowess.
When these two items are excluded, a comparison of the two races
shows clearly the superior physical condition of the negro children.
Incidentally, we noted that the negro children had by far the better
teeth.

The percentage of those who need glasses (41.0) is determined
by adding to the 365 children who failed with the Snellen test, 45
other children who passed the test but complained of headache or
painful eyes after study. We have, in other words, estimated 4.5
per cent of undetected hyperopia. Our final percentage of defect
is much lower than that recorded by Risley and other competent
investigators by means of instrumental tests. We deem it a very
conservative statement, therefore, to say that four in ten of the
children in the public schools of Jefferson City need glasses. Compare with this the fact that less than four in a hundred are actually
wearing them! When the unquestioned physical and mental
handicap of defective vision is considered, the loss in efficiency in
the public school system is surely most impressive. Several of the
teachers in Jefferson City can attest the radical improvement in
scholarship and behavior which has resulted from the adoption of
glasses by some of the pupils examined.

Comparison of the younger and the older pupils shows that
inability to pass the Snellen test is a third more prevalent in the
high than in the primary school, largely, of course, owing to the
increase of myopia through the grades. Four pupils in every ten in
the high school are unable to read the normal 20-foot line. What,
then, can they be expected to gain from blackboard exercises ?
The relation of visual defect to school standing has been computed on the basis of the grading-marks assigned "by the teachers.
Five marks are now in use, A, B, C, X, and Xm, which are used
to indicate superior, average, poor, failure, and very dull (or
mentally deficient), respectively. The relation of these grades to
visual defect is represented in Table 2. From this table it is evident that defective vision is an appreciable positive factor in
handicapping the work of the child at his studies.*

TABLE 2.
Relation of School Standing and Visual Defect.
School work
satisfactory not satisfactory
Vision good   469 166
Vision defective   228 137
"With regard to trachoma we cannot be certain that all of the
84 cases recorded are genuine, but, even if only half of them are
real trachoma, the situation is sufficiently startling when it is
remembered that three-fourths of all untreated cases result in blindness, and that the disease is highly contagious. Infection is spread
by fingers, handkerchiefs, towels, etc. A single undetected and
untreated case of trachoma in the public schools may mean the
infection of several other innocent children, whose life for future
usefulness may be ruined thereby. The presence of this malady
alone is enough to justify the vigorous prosecution of systematic
medical inspection, as has been amply shown in New York City.
Among the abnormalities recorded are a double uvula, an
imperforate ear (no opening to the ear-passage), a congenital
*By the method of correlation by presence and absence, as developed
by Yule and other mathematicians, we may compute the index of correlation here to be + 0.22, with a probable error of about .03. This result
confirms the conclusions of practically all who bare Investigated this
relation.

cataract, and a peculiar case of what we have called a "ticking
ear," in which a clicking or cricket-like sound, synchronous with
the pulse, emanated from one ear with sufficient intensity to be
heard by the examiner two feet away. Several cases of chicken pox
and scabies (itch) were also found among the pupils.

Cards of warning, 551 in number, were sent to parents whose
children were known to be suffering from defects which hindered
their progress in school. These cards were of the usual form: they
called attention to the existence of some physical defect and earnestly requested the parents to consult the family-physician with a
view to alleviating the infirmity. Several weeks after the entire
examination had been finished, an effort was made to determine
how many parents had heeded the request. Of the 423 pupils
who could be asked, 74, or 17.5 per cent, reported that their parents
had taken them to a physician for consultation. At first, thought,
this percentage may seem low, but we believe that the outcome
is fairly encouraging wThen we consider the general public's present
state of apathy and ignorance upon matters of hygiene and sanitation. This result indicates, in our opinion, that an important
feature of medical inspection should be the planning of method?
for engaging the sympathetic and intelligent cooperation of parents.
A tactfully conducted series of general lectures before parents'
meetings might contribute toward this end, but doubtless the best
solution lies in the employment of school nurses to "follow up"
the cases reported by the inspector.

In the main, the work at JefFerson City was well received : some
half-dozen parents raised minor objections to the work of inspection, objections which turned out usually to spring from a misunderstanding of the purpose of the examination; on the other hand,
not a few parents expressed their warm appreciation of the work,
while the medical profession strongly endorsed it.
