On the Training of Parents
===========================

:Author:  Ernest Hamlin Abbott. Boston:
Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1908. Pp. 140.

It is a thankless task not unaccompanied by danger to animadvert
on the subject of parents. The reader is in all likelihood an actual,
prospective, or would-be parent himself, with the pride and acute sensitiveness of that large class.
Mr. Abbott in his book "On the Training of Parents," treats the
subject with humor and tact and on the whole lets the parent down
not ungently. His book does not cover so broad a range as its title
might lead one to suppose. He confines himself to pointing out the
attitude toward the child which he considers brings the best results
and causes the least unnecessary friction. "The theory of total depravity, by which our forefathers explained the unpleasant doings
of youngsters, is," he concludes, "a doctrine which parents devised in
order to shift the burden of their own failures to the shoulders of
their offspring." And he ventures to doubt whether it is really just
to lay the Fifth Commandment upon all American children without
pointing out the reciprocal duty therein implied. He might go furREVIEWS AND CRITICISM 177
ther and challenge the idea that life is an inestimable gift bestowed
upon us by our1 parents, receiving which we immediately incur a lasting obligation. "Sue for a Debt we never did contract, And cannot
answer?Oh the sorry trade!"

If at birth the baby is willing to cry "quits" with his parents, he
should be considered by any fair-minded person a generous infant.
As children are brought into the world for every reason except for
their own interest and pleasure, the debt cannot be fairly said to start
on their side. In the attitude of some parents toward their offspring,
we are reminded of Mr. Pumblechook's exhortation to poor Pip,?
"Especially be grateful, boy, to them which brought you up by hand."
Whether the credit side, after much shifting, rests finally with the
parent or child must depend on the individual case.

Mr. Abbott in his first chapter points out two methods of governing children, one by collision, "wait till the child does wrong, then
collide with him," unfortunately only too popular; the other, governing
by habit. He draws a pretty distinction between governing them and
interfering with them, and urges the patent to cultivate the habit of
non-interference, another name for the habit of self-restraint. He
believes that the process of training children is the process of forming habits and that to provide children with a contented acquiescence
in a regular life and an habitual disposition to obedience requires in
the parents no unusual qualities of mind.

Mr. Abbott lays great emphasis on the necessity for parents respecting their children. He says, "No one who respects another will
lie to him, or visit him with empty threats, or make to him vain
promises; yet fathers and mothers in all parts of the country are at
this moment lying to their children, threatening them with punishments they do not mean to inflict, and making promises they do not
intend to fulfill." Mr. Abbott does not believe in administering corporal punishment in the jaunty spirit of the Chinese proverb: "A
cloudy day?leisure to beat the children." At the same time to the
question, "Do you believe in spanking a child?" he thinks the only
possible answer is, "What child?" Many parents knowing how worse
than useless a slippering has proved, will yet recognize the truth of
the statement: "With some temperaments in some moods the rod is
like the wand of a magician." The child "responds to it with renewed
affection and restored sweetness of temper."

Mr Abbott gives some convincing examples to prove that a trained
imagination is a necessary quality in the parent who would develop
in a child the spirit of obedience. Against the modern complicated
mechanical toys Mr. Abbott's face is sternly set. "Simple food, simple
occupations, simple toys, simple surroundings?there are no riches like
these to the child?or the adult?who has not been robbed of his imagination."
To mothers, Mr. Abbott says, "There are two ways in which you
can act. You can either adjust your children to their environment,
or their environment to them." It does not need the forceful examples offered to convince us of the paramount value of the first of these
two methods.

Instead of looking upon children's quarrels as deplorable, Mr.
Abbott sees in them an educational implement made ready to the
parents' hand. He considers it a parental duty to teach children how
to quarrel and what to quarrel about, and thinks an only child's indisputable misfortune lies in the fact that there is no one in the family
he can really quarrel with.

Intelligent parents who read Mr. Abbott's interesting book will
discover that the principal part in the training of their children is
the training of themselves, and that "the art of being a parent is an
art of give and take."
E. R. W.
