Irregular Attendance? A Cause of Retardation
=============================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. III. No. 1. March 15, 1909.

:Author:  Leonard P. Ayres,
In Charge of Backward Children Investigation, Russell Sage Foundation,
New York City.

In the current discussion of backwardness or retardation
among school children, it has been established that from onequarter to one-half of all of the children in the schools are behind
the proper grade for their age or have made less progress than
they should in the time they have attended school. Whether
classified by the criterion of age or by that of time in school, a
large part of all of our school children are backward.

It has also been thoroughly established, as an immediate
result of this condition, that many children, upon reaching the
age of fourteen or fifteen years, find themselves in the fifth or
sixth grade instead of in the eighth, and becoming discouraged,
drop out. Thus it happens that a comparatively small proportion
of the children entering our schools stay to complete the elementary
school course. The result is that the amount of education received
by the majority of young people is painfully small, and the educational aims of our school system are, in a large measure, defeated.
Up to the present time, studies of the phenomena of retardation and elimination have been chiefly confined to attempts at
quantitative measurement. Most of the attempts that have been
made to point out causes have been somewhat speculative in nature.
Among the causes assigned, late starting, ignorance of the English
language, innate dulness, and physical handicaps have been particularly emphasized. Less frequently, irregular attendance has
been mentioned as a contributory factor. It is the purpose of
the present article to present data showing that irregular attend(1)
ance is a large, if not the largest, factor in bringing about retardation.

The principles underlying the commonly used measurements
for enumerating the children reached by a school system are comparatively simple. The common measures are three, namely:
total enrolment, average enrolment, and average attendance.
Total enrolment ,as commonly interpreted is a statement of
the total number of children who have been in school during the
year for any length of time, long or short.
Average enrolment is often stated by months. It is an expression of the number of children on the roll on the supposition
that all remained during the entire period. It is, of course, always
smaller than the total enrolment.

Average attendance is computed substantially as is the average
enrolment. It is an expression of the number present on the supposition that all were present during the entire time. It is, of
course, always smaller than average enrolment.

These three measures of attendance have come into so nearly
universal use that they are generally accepted without question.
A school or a system that reports 90 or 95 per cent attendance is
thought to have made a fine record and the figure naturally leads
the school authorities to feel that substantially every child was
present and receiving the benefits of instruction every day.
How far this is from being the case is shown by comparing
the average attendance with the total enrolment in some of our
cities. According to the latest available figures, the relation be
tween them in five of our largest systems is as follows:

Total Average
enrolment attendance
New York 1000 751
Philadelphia  1000 695
Chicago  1000 823
Baltimore  1000 662
St. Louis 1000 813
Kansas City  1000 733

It is plain that total enrolment, the figure almost always
used in stating the magnitude of our public school systems, while
appealing effectively to civic pride, does not in reality give any
accurate idea of how many children are present and receiving instruction each day.
In nearly all systems provision is made for temporarily
dropping from the roll the name of any pupil absent for more than
a few days. In some places the period of absence allowed before
dropping the name is three days, in others, five, and in still others,
ten. Thus the enrolment is automatically kept just a little ahead
of attendance and a high percentage of attendance is assured.
I he fluctuations of attendance below 100 per cent really indicate
nothing more than that absences of a day or two have been more or
less frequent as the case may be.

It is obvious that such a system does not answer any question
as to persistence of attendance. It does not tell us how many
children have been present the entire year, and how many only a
fraction of the year. It tells nothing about the attendance of
an individual; whether he has been present most of the time or
not. And yet, if a child has been in attendance only half of the
time it would obviously be vain to hope that he could be regularly
promoted and go on with his classmates. The fluctuations from
day to day in a given school are in reality little more than an
indication of the clemency of the weather or the attractiveness of
outside diversions. When the weather is stormy, or the circus is
m town, the attendance falls; when the sun shines and the circus
leaves, attendance rises. The figures tell us nothing at all as to
which pupils and how many are always in school and the number
of those frequently absent.

It is probable that few school men realize how many of the
children in their schools arc present only a small fraction of the
.year.
According to the last United States census thirteen million
children (13,385,628) attended school during the year 1900. Of
these only nine million (0,814,040) attended as much as six
months. This indicates that the question of the duration of attendance is well worth consideration.
A diligent study of school reports brings to light ten whose
figures show the persistence of attendance of the pupils. These
reports are from the following places: Columbus, Ohio (1907);
Cleveland, Ohio (190(5) ; Dayton, Ohio (1907) ; Kansas City, Mo.
(1907) ; New Orleans, La. (1907) ; Porto Rico (1907) ; Springfield, Ohio (1907); St. Louis, Mo. (1907); Syracuse, N. Y.
(1907).

The figures they give are not all computed on exactly the
same basis. Cleveland and Porto Rico give figures showing the
duration of enrolment, not attendance. It is impossible to dis*
cover from the report the basis on which the Columbus figures
are computed. The seven other cities give figures showing the
duration of attendance of all the children enrolled during the
year. The figures showing the attendance in the white district
schools of St. Louis are as follows:

200 days   3,367
180 to 200   32,672
160 to 180   11,935
140 to 160   5,776
120 to 140   3,681
100 to 120   3,188
80 to 100   3,321
60 to 80   2,656
40 to 60   3,009
20 to 40   3,282
Less than 20   2,844
Total  -  75,731

It is plain that the pupils who attended two hundred days
were never absent, that those who fell within the one hundred and
eighty to two hundred days group were in continual attendance
with merely casual absences of a day or two, and that most, if
not all, of the rest were absent for considerable periods, or else
began late in the year or left early.

In order to compare conditions in the different localities
some common basis must be established. The easiest way to do
this is to reduce the data to relative figures on the basis of conditions among 1000 children. When the St. Louis figures are so
reduced they appear as follows:

200 days  44
180 to 200   431
160 to 180  158
140 to 160   76
120 to 140   49
100 to 120   42
80 to 100   44
60 to 80   35
40 to 60  40
20 to 40   43
Less than 20   38 1000
Now, it will certainly be conceded that Ave can hardly hope
that pupils will be promoted unless they have been in attendance
during at least three-fourths of the school year. It is desirable
then to arrange our figures so as to measure attendance by fourths
of the year. With attendance stated by groups of twenty days in
a school year of two hundred days this, is impossible, but if we
rearrange the table, dividing each group in two so as to state attendance by groups of ten days, instead of twenty, we can divide the
table into four groups. When this is done and each group divided
in two we have a new table giving the same information in new
form as follows:

200 days   44
190 to 200   216
180 to 190   215
170 to 180   79
160 to 170     79
150 to 160   38 671 67.1%
140 to 150   38
130 to 140   25
120 to 130   24
110 to 120   21
110 to 110   21 129 12.9%
90 to 100   22
80 to 90   22
70 to 80   18
60 to 70   17
50 to 60   20 99
40 to 50   20
30 to 40   22
20 to 30   21
10 to 20   19
0 to 10   19 101 10.1%
Total 1000

The dotted lines divide the year into fourths, leaving in the
first division those who have attended more than three-fourths of
the time, in the second those who have been present from one-half
to three-fourths of the year and so on.

This explanation has been given to make clear the treatment
to which the figures from all the localities have been subjected.
The final-results are presented in the following table:
Persistence of Attendance of Pupils in Different Cities
and in Porto Rico.

Attendance by Fourths of the Year.
Less than Less than Less than More than
one-fourth one-half three-fourths three-fourths
Porto Rico   2.0 9.2 21.6 78.4
Dayton, Ohio  4.7 12.1 23.6 76.4
Grand Rapids   6.7 14.8 27.5 72.5
Cleveland   8.6 18.3 28.0 72.0
Springfield, Ohio . . . 6.5 13.7 28.2 71.8
Syracuse   6.2 16.0 29.7 70.3
St. Louis  10.1 20.0 32.9 67.1
Kansas City, Mo.. .. 10.6 20.8 35.1 64.9
New Orleans   7.7 21.3 37.4 62.6
Columbus, Ohio .... 6.9 18.1 38.6 61.4
Average   7.0 16.4 30.3 69.7
The figures for Porto Rico and Cleveland are based on length
of enrolment, and each would occupy a lower position in the table
if the figures gave attendance instead. The basis of the Columbus
figures is uncertain. The figures for St. Louis and New Orleans
are for white elementary schools only.

The striking condition disclosed is that, with the exception
of Dayton, in no city do as many as three-fourths of the children
attend as much as three-fourths of the school year. This is a radically different showing from that made by the figures published
by some of these same cities giving percentages of attendance
ranging from 90 to 85. The published percentages do not disclose significant conditions. The figures giving attendance by
periods of time do.

Only three of the cities publish figures which enable us to
compare the number of children promoted with the number present at least three-fourths of the time. The results are as follows:
Per cent
present at Per cent
at least J promoted.
of the year.
Springfield, 0  71.8 72.8
Syracuse   70.3 64.9
New Orleans   62.6 54.9

It is obvious that, wo have not greatly erred when we assumed
that a low percentage of attendance was accompanied by a low
percentage of promotions. The low percentages of promotion
may surprise some, since we are accustomed to read in reports of
from SO to 90 per cent of the pupils being promoted. The reason
for the low figures in our table is that they are the result of comparing the pupils promoted with the whole number enrolled, not
with those enrolled 011 the last day of the year, which is the
common basis.

We may now consider the relation which such low percentages of promotion bear to retardation and its correlated evil,
elimination. It is apparent that if considerable numbers of the
children entering school fail to be advanced regularly, the lower
grades will become abnormally swollen by the damming of the
stream of pupils passing through them. Experience teaches us, too,
that in the upper grades the pupils who have advanced slowly and
so are over-age will drop out before completing the course, thus
making these grades abnormally small.

Certain general rules govern these phenomena. The first
is that the number of children in the lower grades before the dropping out process begins will vary as the inverse of the rate of progress. That is, if we have four-fifths of the normal progress in
these grades we shall have five-fourths of the normal number of
children in each grade. To state it still again in terms of school
administration: If we have a steady rate of promotion of 80
per cent we shall find twelve hundred and fifty pupils in the first
grade for each thousand new pupils entering each year.
Another rule which is less exact and which varies in different localities, is that no matter what their progress we may
expect about 10 per cent of the children to leave school upon
reaching the age of thirteen, about 50 per cent of the remainder
at fourteen years, and again about 50 per cent of these at fifteen
years.

Where these conditions hold?and they exist as stated in many
localities?if we assume a stationary population and no deaths, all
the children entering school at the age of seven and a steady rate
of promotion of 80 per cent, we shall have a grade distribution
for every thousand children entering school as follows:

Grades Pupils Grades Pupils
1 1,250 5 1,112
2  1,247 6  865
3 1,238 7  517
4 1,215 8  227
8 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
The notable characteristics of this grade distribution are
that for each thousand children entering school we find twelve
hundred and fifty in the first grade, and only 227 reaching
the eighth. Similar conditions exist in many of our cities. Where
they are better, it is usually because many children enter before
the age of seven, or because fewer drop out at the ages of thirteen,
fourteen and fifteen. More rarely it is because the percentage of
promotion is higher.

To summarize then we may state our conclusion in four
propositions:
1. Such figures as are available indicate that in our cities less
than three-fourths of the children continue in attendance as much
as three-fourths of the year.
2. Irregular attendance is accompanied by a low percentage
of promotions.
3. Low percentage of promotions is a potent factor in bringing about retardation.
4. Retardation results in elimination.

In the foregoing, no attempt has been made to discuss the
fact that a part of the short term attendance is due to the immigration and emigration of families into and from different cities.
Undoubtedly many children begin the school year in one city and
continue it in another, thus contributing to swell the figures of
short term attendance in both places. It is undoubtedly true,
too, that the process usually results in halting the child's progress for a time and often in causing him to lose a grade.
In a paper of this scope it is impossible to enter into a discussion of this factor or of other relevant factors, such as the
frequency and effect of "double promotions", or the relative effect
of short term attendance, on progress in systems promoting by
whole grades only, and in those where the grades are divided into
"A" and "B" sections. But such discussion of these minor factors is not necessary to an understanding of the importance of the
lessons gained from a study of the attendance figures.
