Lunatic Asylums of Ireland
=============================

HENRY DUESBURY, ARCHITECT, 1848.

Iu Dr Fitzgerald's annual report of the Limerick District Lunatic Asylum,
embracing the three counties of Limerick, Clare, and Kerry, for the year ended
31st March, 1852, we find the following summary of the year's proceedings con-
tained in " Table No. 1."

Males. Females. Total.
Number of patients in the asylum the 1st of
April, 1851   167 170 337
Number admitted during the year .... 34 32 66
Total under treatment during the year . . . 201 202 403
Discharged cured and relieved  19 22 41
Ditto not cured  4 3 7
Died  8 6 14
31 31 62
Remaining in the asylum 31st March, 1852 . 170 171 341

According to " Table No. 2," the total expenditure of the year appears to have
been ?4399 16s. 7d., and the average annual cost of each patient, including all
charges, ?12 18s. Ofd. The employment of the patients is contained in "Table
No. 3," which shows the total employed amongst the males as 68; of whom, 56
were engaged in farm and garden labour, and 12 in miscellaneous works. Of
the females, 74 were employed; their avocations being needlework (26), knitting
(27), assisting in laundry (11), and cleaning the house (10); thus making the
total, male and female, employed 165, and unemployed 176. "Table No. 4"
shows the produce of the farm and garden during the year to have been valued
at ?220 19s. "Table No. 5" is devoted to a statement of the work and
" repairs^" executed by the females, which would appear to have been very con-
siderable, and " No. 6 " to carpenter's work, but whether done by inmates or
not, is not stated. The last table in the list, "No. 7," has reference to the
" comparative amounts annually issued from the treasury for the last five years,"
which shows that a regular decrease of expenditure has been going on during
that period, viz., from ?15, in round numbers, to ?12, and on which subject the
report states that, " although an increased number of patients have been received,
it is satisfactory to be able to say that it is by several hundred pounds less than
the expenditure of the preceding years, as will be seen by the comparative
issues from the treasury as set forth, together with the average cost per head
per annum of each patient." And, again, " these financial statements I am well
aware would fall far short of being satisfactory, if at the same time I could not
assure you that the inmates receive every care and comfort that it is possible
to bestow upon them." We are well pleased with this deliberate, and as we
take it, bona fide statement of Dr Fitzgerald, as there is much danger we are
afraid, owing to the clipping-down system of the present day in public institu-
tions, and especially in lunatic asylums, of their inmates being reduced down to
the lowest state of maintenance, in order to obtain the favour of the authorities,
by showing how much economy has been practised, and how much better, ac-
cordingly, that asylum is managed, whose expenditure is at a low figure than
another at a higher one, which we must protest against as being a most unfair
and disingenuous mode of procedure, and yet the one of all others that is sure
to be extolled by the public, and its abettors held up as nothing short of bene-
factors ! But we would fain hope better things of men of enlarged and educated
minds, the members of an honourable profession who are placed in immediate
care of the insane in public asylums, with whom the primary object always
should be, and we trust is, to discharge their important trust towards their
unfortunately afflicted patients faithfully and liberally, and never sacrifice their
interests and well-being at the shrine of economy, for the sake of being smiled
upon by rate-payers and boards of governors, or visiting justices. We, how-
ever, would have been glad had the dietary table of the Limerick Asylum
appeared in this report, so as to enable us to form some criterion of the " care
and comfort" that is bestowed, as regards the " creature comforts," on its in-
mates ; it may be on a very liberal scale, and as we suppose it is, from Dr.
Fitzgerald's so specially guarding his institution against any imputation of its
inmates not "receiving every care and comfort that it is possible to bestow upon
them," by reason of the vaunted saving of the " several hundred pounds "
referred to; but were we to judge it on this point of detail by other asylums in
Ireland, we would have to pronounce it very far short of what it ought to be.
In point of ordinary statistical information this report of the Limerick Asylum
is exceedingly deficient; for instance, we have no particulars given of the
causes of the deaths which occurred during the year, nor of those of derange-
ment, or of the ages of the patients admitted and discharged, or who died,
neither of the period of time under treatment prior to being discharged as
" curedall which and sundry others, we submit should be, as a matter of
course, contained in the official reports of hospitals for the insane, and which
we hope Dr Fitzgerald will for the future embody in his, and at the same time
" enlarge its borders " a slight degree, as a more lilliputian document of the
kind, or one so morally mean in externals, coming from a great public institution,
our editorial eyes never before beheld; but which perhaps was necessary in
helping to carry out so sedulously and perseveringly that system of expendi-
ture, whose motto is " every little makes a muckle," and which, like everything
else that is good in the abstract, may be carried out to a most pernicious extreme
in practice.

The Carlow District Hospital for the insane poor of the counties of Carlow,
Kildare, Wexford, and Kilkenny, is superintended by Dr W. E. White, from
whose nineteenth annual report, for the year ended 31st March, 1852, we
collect that there remained in hospital on the 1st April, 1851, 107 males and
90 females; since which, 29 new cases of males and 30 females had been
admitted, together with four relapses of males and three of females, making a total
under treatment during the year, of 263; of whom, 140 were males and 123
females. Those discharged recovered, were 18 males and 14 females; relieved
or removed by friends, six males and five females; unfit or incurable, three males
and two females. " Discharged died, 10 males and six females." This method
of enumerating deaths amongst the disc/targes, we frequently observe in reports,
which is palpably wrong, and should be corrected. The number remaining in
hospital 31st March, 1852, was 302 ; of whom, 103 were males and 199 females,
Of the patients admitted during the year, 22 were between 20 and 30 years of
age, 15 between 15 and 20, and 30 and 40, respectively, 10 between 40 and 50,
3 between 50 and 60, and one under 15. Amongst the causes we find 22 under
the head of hereditary predisposition, 8 from anxiety, caused by the state
of the times, 6 from fever, &c. &c. In social condition, 37 of the admissions
of the year were single, 19 married, 3 widowers, 1 widow, and 7 unknown, and
whom, we may reasonably conclude, were of the single class: thus making it
more than double that of the married. In point of education, 24 could read
and write, 11 were well-educated, 9 could read only; uneducated 1, and
unknown 21, wh.ch appears strange not to have been able to discover. Of the
cases who were discharged, recovered or otherwise, 30 were of those admitted
during the year, 6 trom one to two years, 2 from two to three years, 4 from
three to five years, and 6 were five years and upwards under treatment. The
oldest patients amongst those who died were a male and a female, whose ages
were each between 50 and GO years, the youngest from 20 to 30, being four in
all; two males and two females. The period of residence of those who died
was as follows :?under one year, 5 ; from one to two years 2 ; two to live years,
2 ; five to seven years, 2 ; seven to ten years, 2 ; ten years and upwards, 3. The
causes of death are thus given:?cerebral congestion, 1; scrofulous disease of
the pancreas, 1; scrofulous tubercles in mesentery, 1; dropsy, 1; dysentery, 2 ;
haemorrhoids, 1; paralysis des alienes, 2 ; pneumonia, 1 ; phthisis pulmonalis, 3;
maniacal exhaustion, 2 ; old age and natural decay, 1.

The general dietary is, breakfast 8 oz. of ineai made into one quart of stir-
about (or porridge), and one-third of a quart of new milk. Dinner, males,
10f oz. of bread and 1 pint of mixed milk on four days in the week, and the
other three days a quart of good beef soup, with the meat and vegetables cut
up in it, instead of the milk, and bread the same. The females get the same
fare with the exception of the bread, which for them is reduced to 8 oz. The
supper for all is half a pound of bread with one pint of mixed milk. The
cost incurred in maintaining the establishment during the year amounted io
?3084 lGs. Id.; the items of which were?for provisions, ?1216 12s. 7d.;
groceries, ?44 10s. Gd.; clothing, ?208 19s.; bedding, ?87 Is. 6d ; furniture,
?43 7s. lid.; building and repairs, ?2G1 19s. 8d.; soap, starch, gas, &c.
?55 3s. Id.; coals and turf, ?106 7s. 2d.; farm and garden, ?10 Is.; taxes
and insurance, ?5 8s. 9d.; books, stationary, and printing, ?20 3s. lid.;
medicine, ?15 Gs. 9d.; wine, porter, and spirits, ?18 2s. 10s.; tobacco and
snuff, ?22 5s. 7d.; salaries, ?515; wages, ?245 12s.; premiums to servants,
?20 7s. Gd.; incidents, ?38 Gs. 4d. Dr White makes some very judicious
remarks in this report, which bears evidence of being very carefully and credit-
ably written; no important matter in the conduct of the institution being
omitted, and much that is suggestive contained in its pages. We are surprised
to find from his report that there are only three Irish acres of land under
cultivation in his establishment, exclusive of the gardens, the rest of the
ground being occupied with buildings, the consequence of which is, lie observes,
" that for the great portion of the male patients we have literally no employ-
ment, as soon as the few busy spring and autumn days are passed." To remedy
this great evil?for a great one it is?Dr White suggests the prudence of
taking " a small farm, say from ten to fifteen acres ol land, at some conve-
niently short distance from the asylum. The working^ men might be marched
there every day, under charge of tfieir attendants, after breakfast, and they
need not return till evening, as their dinner could be sent to them. This
would give occupation, exercise, variety of scene and circumstance ; and I am
certain all these would be eminently beneficial towards their recovery."
There is novelty and excellent good feeling in this proposal, but we have
strong doubts that the multitude of inconveniences and annoyances of various
kinds in carrying it out, would more than counterbalance the anticipated good
effects from its adoption. Dr White will excuse us, we are sure, for not
falling in exactly with his well intended and humane views on this point; we
most cordially concur, however, with him as to the absolute necessity of addi-
tional ground being procured, but we would most strongly recommend him to
have it, and those employed on it, as immediately as possible under his own
eye, otherwise he will find that his daily troubles and cares will be immeasur-
ably added to, and that ultimately the speculation will have to lie surrendered
as an utterly impracticable one. The annexed paragraph respecting " criminal
lunatics," so called, is interesting:

"The removal, some time since, of the criminal lunatics to the Central
Asylum at Dundrum, has been attended with very beneficial effects. This class
of patients was exceedingly troublesome in an institution like ours. Many of
them imagined their position?' government patients,' as they styled themselves,
gave them a different status in the house to that of the others; in short, they
were 'personages' in their own opinion, and very difficult personages to manage.
They were frequently quarrelling with the other inmates, and with the attend-
ants ; the criminal act they had committed would by some chance or other
transpire, and their companions would perhaps allude to it. Hence would
arise complaints, and lying, and tale-bearing. Being for the most part either
recovered, or only partially and temporarily insane, their character of ' criminal
lunatics' made a stricter and more rigid discipline necessary to prevent their
escape than would have been at all required, or even useful, for ordinary
patients. This is now at an end. The former prison character of our hospitals
is removed; and we have now the satisfaction of superintending curative
institutions instead of gaols. Tor all this, as well as for many other changes
calculated to improve the position and status of the resident officers of these
institutions, we are indebted to Iks. White and Nugent, the inspectors-general
of our department, who have been unceasing in their attentions to the interests
and comforts of all under their charge. Sit laus ubi laus debetur."
The Maryborough District Lunatic Asylum has for its resident physician Dr.
Thomas C. Burton; his report of which, from 1st April, 1851, to 31st March,
1852, shows that the admissions during the year amounted to 42; readmissions,
4; the discharges cured to 27; the deaths to 23 ; remaining, 31st March, 1852,
188. Dr Burton states, with reference to the health of the institution during
the year, that it " had not been so good as last year, there having been 2-'>
deaths. This had resulted from severely protracted and intractable cases of
dysentery; also the admission of cases in a most debilitated condition, and of
an advanced age, and the natural consequences of long-continued chronic
diseases. In our experience of public hospitals for the insane at home and
abroad, the two causes above stated, of increasing their mortality, are generally
prevalent ones; dysenteric attacks of a remarkably uncontrollable type, resist-
ing all ordinary treatment, are their bane. As a class, too, the insane do not
bear active treatment; and when the subjects of bodily disease the least acute
in character, they very rapidly sink under it, be the appliances used as they
may. And, as regards the admission of previously debilitated, in fact, com-
pletely prostrated constitutions, such are too common, and a source of much
annoyance; being sent, as it were, merely to die and be buried at the public
charge.

A change in the dietary in use in the Maryborough Asylum, it would appear
from a special reference to it by Dr Burton, has been suggested by the Com-
missioners of Lunatic Asylums, and certainly we would say that one on a more
liberal and nutritive scale would be a vast improvement, and greatly tend
towards promoting the general health of the inmates. We are fully aware,
on this head, however, that the medical officers charged with the care of the
insane experience much difficulty in persuading boards of the absolute neces-
sity there exists of having the standing dietary of a full and nourishing kind,
, the disease they are the subjects of being for the most part one of atony and
debility, and requiring accordingly every care especially in their dietetic treat-
ment. Here is the dietary as at present existing. Breakfast, one quart of
stirabout, made of 8 oz. of oatmeal; one-third quart of new milk. Dinner, for
four days, 12 oz. bread for males, 10 oz. for females; one pint buttermilk or
skim milk: ditto for three days, one quart soup, made of half-a-pound of beef
and bone, or beef-heads; bread the same. Supper, 6 oz. white bread, and one-
third quart of new milk. The cost of this diet is estimated at 3id. per diem.
The employment of the patients, male and female, appears to be very fully
provided for and attended to; a statement is given of the produce of the farm
during the past year; the saving to the public, caused by the male patients'
labour in tilling it, being ?138 3s. 5d. The work executed in tailoring and
shoemaking is very considerable, to say nothing of the useful and profitable
avocations of the females, as duly tabled in the report. Some of the routine
practice of the institution is thus set forth, which speaks for itself. " The
patients, male and female, alternately take daily exercise on the land and gar-
dens, which are tastefully planted, and laid out with cheering walks. In wet
weather, they exercise in the day-rooms, corridors, and walking-sheds. The
patients frequently amuse themselves at ball-playing, dancing, music, reading,
fancy-work, &c. In the winter months, lights are provided and fires kept up
in the day-rooms and corridors, for the employment and amusement of the
patients, till the regulated hour for retiring to bed." The cost of maintenance
during the year amounted to ?3086 12s. 9d.; the patients supported being
192; making the cost per head, on the gross expenditure, ?16 Is. 6d.
Having given the above abstract of the Maryborough District Lunatic
Asylum Kcport, we have only further to add, that it occurs to us it would be a
very desirable change for the better were its form modernized, an improvement
for which, in common with that of the Limerick Asylum, already referred to,
there is much need. And, at the same time, if a little more of professional,
and considerably less of merely monetary, details were introduced, its value
psychologically would be greatly enhanced.

'We must not conclude the foregoing brief notices of the Irish district hospi-
tals and houses for the insane, without referring complimentarily to the able
and impartial manner in which the official duties connected with them on the
part of the Government Commissioners are performed, by Drs. White and
Nugent, both of whom, since their appointment to their high and responsible
office, have gained for themselves the most unqualified approbation of all par-
ties, for their able and impartial conduct, and the kindly and courteous spirit
by which they have been always actuated in carrying into effect the powers
vested in their hands. They have been the means of accomplishing many
most salutary changes and improvements in the Irish district asylums, which
bear so superior a character; /iud chief among them must be noted that of
medical men of station and experience being placed in their charge, and their
position in all respects duly attended to, than which nothing could be more to
the credit of those gentlemen, or be more to their praise.
