Derby County Asylum
====================

It appears from the first Report of this Asylum that, so far back as the year
1844, an estate consisting of seventy acres of land at Mickleover, three
miles from Derby, was bought, and designs were adopted and matured,
and every preparation made to accept tenders for the works. But as
there were reasons to expect the early appointment of a new Com-
mission in Lunacy, from which the committee might reasonably hope to
obtain valuable advice and facilities for effecting more economical financial
arrangements, especially with respect to the repayment of monies borrowed
on the security of the County Rates, they deemed it prudent to suspend
their proceedings until the Commission should be appointed, and they could
have the benefit of acting with and under it. However, an impression then
prevailed that a Lunatic Asylum might be erected for much the same cost as
a Union Poor-House, the essential differences between the two institutions,
and the capacity, habits, and necessities of the inmates.being considerably
overlooked. The plans submitted by the committee were the result of much
and anxious consideration, of personal enquiry made by three members of the
body who visited, for this special purpose, many of the best existing Asylums,
and of the advice and assistance of one of the ablest and most distinguished
managers of such Institutions. The plans were first laid before the new
Commissioners who made the general objection, that the estimate was too
high and the accommodation too great, but without stating or giving us any
means of judging what, in their opinion, would be a proper estimate, or a
proper number to be accommodated. This led to a long discussion and
correspondence, which ultimately terminated at the end of the year 1847, in
the adoption, by the Commissioners, of a design essentially identical in prin-
ciple with that first submitted to them, but with a reduction in the number of
patients to be accommodated from 360 to 300.

The Asylum, says the Report, is situated about three quarters of a mile S.W.
of the village of Mickleover, on an estate consisting of seventy-nine acres of
land, purchased by the county for the purpose of the institution, and stands, with
a southern aspect, on rising ground overlooking the rich valley of the Trent,
and commanding a panoramic view of the wide spread country beyond,
bounded in the extreme distance to the south, by the Charnwood hills, having
Needwood to the west, and the flats of Nottinghamshire to the east?perhaps
one of the most beautiful and varied views in the country. The property is
approached from the Uttoxeter road by a pleasant lane, which forms its
northern boundary, and in which, at the N.E. angle of the estate, are the
entrance gates with a lodge attached; a carriage drive, with turfed slopes,
leads from these gates past the eastern front, and along the south terrace
which stretches across the property from east to west, to the chief entrance
in the centre of the southern or principal front, the drive being continued
forward to the farm building at the 2ST.W. boundary. The farm is also
approached by a back road from the entrance lodge, which, striking the plan-
tation (about four acres in extent to the north,) also affords access to the
offices and back premises of the establishment. A kitchen garden (containing
about five acres) surrounds the building on the north, east, and west sides,
and occupies the remaining space enclosed by the roads before-mentioned.
The site of the building and exercise gardens covers a space of acres.
We regiet that we are, from *\varit of space, unable to extract more fully
from the minute account given in the document before us, of the general
arrangements of this institution. Dr Ilitchman's report is an excellently drawn up account of the medical progress of the Asylum since it was opened
for the reception of patients. He says :?

"On the 21st of August, 1851, the first patient was admitted into this
institution. The Asylum was in a very unfinished condition, but the various
parishes in the county having been led to expect its completion at that time,
and the Union of Belper being under the necessity of sending a patient to
London, if he could not be admitted into this Asylum, permission was given
for his reception, and he was admitted accordingly. Your physician was
informed that the patient had not been long ill, but he proved to be both
epileptic and paralysed, and required all the resources of a well-appointed
hospital. One ward in each wing of the asylum being completed and fur-
nished, other individuals were speedily admitted. It may be gratifying to
the committee to learn, that the first group of patients who were brought
from various workhouses and asylums, were delighted with their new abode,
and especially with the airing grounds; in these they spent much time,
pointing out to each other distant objects in the landscape, and gathering
enjoyment from the beauty, the quietude, and extent of the surrounding
scenery. The general expression of their countenances, and their language
indicated this, and none with greater force than a paralytic, who when
brought to the asylum was carried by an attendant from a eart to the wards,
being unable to walk from emaciation and debility, and from deep excoria-
tions, and sloughing ulcers on the hips, sacrum, shoulders and knuckles, pro-
duced by the combined effects of paralysis and mechanical restraints. This
patient was brought in a large and easy chair to view the scene; he was
apparently listless and stupid, and yet when he had been a short time in the
warm open air, surrounded by cheerful companions, and possessing a full
view of the green meadows, the distant hills, and all those varied hues of
light and shade which filled up the landscape before him, his mind awoke
from its lethargy, and with animated pathos, the poor fellow said, ' It is a
nice place, I hope I may live to enjoy it.' From this time he ceased to be
moody and became hopeful, his physical health improved, his wounds healed,
he became a useful member of the household, and continued so for several
months until a severe attack of apoplexy incapacitated him for exertion.
Other patients in their letters to their friends make frequent, and touching
allusions to the beauty of the spot on which the asylum is placed, and some of
the better educated attempt to embody in verse the pleasure it brings to
them. These facts are narrated to illustrate a principle, and to show the
importance of surrounding the insane with cheering and soothing objects."?
pp. 18, 19.

When referring to the form of the asylum, and after paying a just eulogium
to the genius of the architect, Mr. Duesbury, Dr Hitchman says,?" The
central position of the main offices, the entire privacy of each ward, which has
been secured by short and well arranged corridors of communication, the facility
of access and supervision, the arrangement of the sleeping rooms, the number
and character of the baths and padded rooms, the mode of warming the
galleries, the length and breadth of the wards, their cheerful character, the
perfect manner in which, by means of a large window at the end of each
gallery and the falling back of a ward, the pleasing features of the surround-
ing country are secured equally to the entire asylum, the height and struc-
ture of the building, and the arrangements of its walls and airing courts are in
greater harmony with the teachings of that distinguished philanthropist, than
are those of any asylum which preceded it, or indeed of any other, with
which your physician is acquainted."

In relation to the statistics of the asylum, Dr Hitchman observes,?
"Since the opening of the asylum in August, 1851, two hundred and
twelve patients have been admitted; of these, one hundred and sixteen were
DERBY COUNTY ASYLUM. 447
men, and ninety-six were women. The following- Table will show the rela-
tive proportion of single and married :?
Men. Women. Total.
Single  51 35 86
Married  51 48 99
Widowed .   12 12 24
Unascertained 2 1 3
116 96 212

" In reading the above particulars, it must be borne in mind, that no safe con-
clusions can be drawn from statistics embracing so small a number of facts.
Thus, the Table coincides with the deductions of large numbers, as regards
the relative liability of the two sexes to insanity, but differs from those which
have been obtained as to the comparative liability of the married and single to
this fearful malady.

" As might have been expected in a pauper class, the majority of the^
patients are uneducated. The following Table conveys an imperfect idea ot
the extent of this condition, because as in similar tables published at Hanwell
and elsewhere, every person is placed under the category of being able to
write, who can form writing characters, however slowly and imperfectly he
may write out a sentence; and among those who can read are placed, not
only those who do so with fluency, but those also, who can by prolonged effort
read a few sentences:?

Men. Women. Total.
Can read and write .... 61 32 93
Can read only  25 37 62
Unable to read  30 27 57
116 96 212
" The following Table will furnish a summary of the admissions, discharges,
and deaths, which have taken place since the opening of the asylum :?
Men. Women. Total.
Patients admitted 116 96 212
Discharged recovered   17 17 34
Improved. 1 2 3
Unimproved 4 1 5
Escaped 1 0 1
Died .   9 7 16
Out on trial 0 1 1
Total, discharged, escaped, and died . 32 28 60
Remaining in the asylum, 1st Jan., 1853 184 68 152
" Of the above two hundred and twelve patients, one hundred and eighty-one
were in a chronic state at the period of their admission, and among them
twent3'-three were epileptic, twenty more or less paralysed, and nine were
congenital idiots. Prom this collective number of 181 six only have been dis-
charged cured. Let us look at the other side of the picture. Thirty-one
cases uncomplicated with old age, epilepsy, or paralysis, have been admitted at
the onset of their mental derangement. Of these, twenty-eight have been
discharged cured, and two of the others have been a short time under treat-
ment, with every prospect of ultimate success. These facts speak for them-
selves. They proclaim with great force the importance of sending patients
for appropriate treatment in the earliest stage of their malady.

In reference to the general character of the patients admitted Dr Hitchman
says,?" The majority of the patients admitted have not only been in a chronic
state of insanity, but also in a feeble state of bodily health. In some of the
cases, the mental disease appeared to have been caused by the'want of a proper
supply of healthful nutriment to the brain. Two women who were admitted,
weighed only seventy-four pounds, and sixty-seven pounds respectively. The
lighter of the two died, the other recovered?the means of cure consisting
chiefly in the good dietary, the warmth, the cleanliness, and general cheerful-
ness of the establishment. It may be remarked here, that one of the most
striking incidents in the progress of the cases, which have become well, has
been the gradual increase in the weight of the patients as the mental
disease subsided. During the paroxysm of mania, no matter how voracious
the appetite, or how abundantly supplied, emaciation proceeded; but as con-
valescence returned, the individuals gradually increased in size and weight;
and this process has, in some instances, gone on, even after the patient has left
the asylum, so that as after an attack of fever, or other kindred maladies, the
individual has become stouter than ho had ever been before."

When speaking of the treatment of the epileptic patients, Dr Hitchman
remarks, " the tincture of sumbul, and the extract of the cotyledon umbilicus,
have been employed during the past year, as remedies in this malady, but with
no better success than usually attends a novel medicine in this disease. With
the use of each drug, the fits appeared, for a short time, to be less frequent
than before its administration ; but this effect was equally marked when any
medicine was given to them with an air of confidence. As a class, they are
fond of physic and hopeful of cure."

The medical officer pays a just tribute of praise to the humanity and efficiency
of the nurses employed in the asylum :?" Two female patients, in a state of
frantic mania, and in an advanced state of pregnancy, have been admitted, and
safely delivered of living children. These cases were full of embarrassment
and danger, and required the greatest courage, forbearance, and kindness on
the part of the nurses. From a combination of circumstances in one case,
such as profuse hemorrhage after the birth of the child, accompanied by
intense and prolonged maniacal phrenzy, the services of three nurses, and
sometimes more, were required for several days and nights in succession.
This case occurred during the time that Dr Hutchinson Ramsay had the tem-
porary charge of the asylum ; and your physician is happy to testify, not only
to the skill which was brought to bear upon this especial case, but also to the
very efficient manner in which the other duties of the asylum were conducted
during that gentleman's superintendence. Neither would he be doing justice
to his own feelings, or to those of Dr Ramsay, were he not to record the
devotedness, the energy and industry which were displayed by the nurses of
the establishment during these trying emergencies. Each nurse endeavoured
to excel the other, in their efforts to control the patient, and to render such
other aid by night and day, as the case required. Chloroform was, with great
advantage, administered to the above patient, under the advice of Dr Forbes
Winslow, who happened to visit the asylum at that particular period."
The following case will illustrate the effects of kind and skilful treatment:?
" T. G., removed from the custody of bis relatives by the order of the magis-
trates. Has been insane thirty-eight years, under the management of his
relatives, who have generally had him confined in an out-building. He is
stated to have been unclothed for many years. When brought into the
asylum he was naked, except that around his pelvis were the remains of an
article of dress; his hands were tightly bound to each other by ligatures
passing around the wrists. ^ "\\ hen in the cart he was covered with a blanket,
but this fell from him during his struggles on being removed, lie roared
hideously as lie was being conveyed to the wards. He is a person of lofty
stature and great size. Ill's head and neck are very large; one side of his
forehead is greatly disfigured by scars, and he has lost an eye. His ears have
been deprived of their normal shape, and their lobes much thickened by the
deposition of fibrine or other matter. His lips are large and pouting. His
beard has been long unshaven, but has been recently cut with a pair of
scissors. The bones and muscles of his arms are of great size?his lower
extremities are red, swoln, and 'pit,' under pressure; one of his toes is
deprived of its nail, and the whole foot appears to have suffered from the effects
of cold. He walks with a stooping gait, and appears unable to retain the erect
posture without support. He resists powerfully all attempts to clothe him ;
and appears to be entirely ignorant of the use of a bedstead. He whines after
the manner of a dog that has lost its home. He dreads all who approach
him; on being taken from his room in the evening, he hurried back to it with
all the haste he could, and on all occasions he shrinks from observation. He
is lost to every sense of decency; nakedness is congenial to him, but he will
sometimes coil himself in a blanket for the sake of its warmth. He is guided
by the lowest instincts only, and his whole appearance and manner, his fears,
his whines, his peculiar skulking from observation, his bent gait, his straight
hair, large lips, and gigantic fore-arm painfully remind one of the more slug-
gish of the Anthropoid apes, and tell but too plainly to what sad depths the
human being can sink under the combined influence of neglect and disease."?
Case Book, page 43.

Fifteen months have elapsed since the admission of the above patient?he
now walks about the galleries properly clothed, smiles when he is approached,
puts out his hand in a friendly manner towards those he recognises, sits regu-
larly at meals, is shaved at appointed times, carries himself nearly erect, and
looks as if he belongs to the children of men.

The "non-restraint" system of treatment, Dr Hitchman saj's, "has been
severely tested during the past year. Patients have been brought to the
asylum in every kind of restraint, and with most fearful characters; but no
amount of fury or of strength, and no description of character, however
terrible, have caused us to hesitate for a moment in freeing the patient from
his cords and fetters, and in no single instance has there been reason to regret
the proceeding. The case of T. G., confined for many years in an outhouse?
of A. G., and J. T., are illustrations; but the following particulars of a case
very recently admitted, will serve to illustrate the principle: ' Work-
house, December 18, 1852.?He has been with us about twenty-four hours,
and a terrible night we have had with him. He has been shouting ' Murder'
at the top of a stentorian voice, enough to alarm the neighbourhood for some
distance. One of his attendants he knocked down, and we found it to be abso-
lutely necessary to restrain him. Gloom and melancholy appear to be a
phase of his insanity, with alternate violence, and certainly at these times he
appears to have the strength of an elephant.' Such was the note of introduc-
tion which accompanied the patient. One of three men who brought him
stated that his finger had been severely crushed by the patient, who pi-
nioned him between the door and its post, ' and kept me there for more than
an hour.' [f ever ' restraint' was needful it was with this man. He is six
feet high, very muscular, and with a wrist which few persons can span. He
was brought to the asylum firmly pinioned by ropes and hand-bolts, and his
arms were sevex'ely bruised from this cause. In a few minutes all the manacles
were removed; he has had the perfect use of every limb since he has been in
the asylum, and has been fully controlled by moral means alone."

We extremely regret that our limited space compels us to omit several other
portions of this valuable report, which we had marked for insertion. We hope
all who feel interested in the progress of an enlightened treatment of the
insane, will piocure this report, and " mark,read,learn,and inwardly digest " its
contents. A\ e have placed as a frontispiece to this number of our journal, a
lithographic sketch of this institution.
