On The Intellectual And Moral Character Of The Age
====================================================

Art. IV.-
-
Tiie intellectual and moral development of the present age. What a
scene does this open! What a magnificent theme for a Herschcl or a
Chalmers, and yet how dangerous a one to any lesser intelligence L
How seductive to an unbridled imagination! How enticing to an
inferior mind fond of melodramatic effect, delighting in turgid ex-
clamations, mistaking sound for sense, and revelling in elaborate and
involved sentences. What more appropriate text could be chosen by
any one who mistakes the pomp and parade of mere words for eloquence,
or grandiloquent declamation for oratory! It is a subject sufficiently
difficult for any mind, however great its attainments, or profound its
judgment; and yet sufficiently easy to suit the purpose of the flimsiest
pedant. Like the science of astronomy, it may serve for the life-study
of a Newton, or supply a gaudy oration for the vapid declaimer of a
debating club. To whether of these categories does the book before us
belong ]* Is it the analysis of a profound thinker, or the plausible
oration of a declaimer ? Do we perceive in it the calm deductions of a
philosopher, or the special pleadings of the advocate 1 The pompous
phrases of the rhetorician, or the gathered facts and clear inductive
reasonings of a scientific man? We will deal faithfully with this
question. The book is small in size, but great in its pretensions. The
circumstances under which it was produced, the place in which its
contents were publicly read, the reputation, and dignified position of
the author, and above all the importance of the subject, claimed and
* " The Intellectual and Moral Development of the Present Age." By Samuel
?\Varren, F.R.S., one of Her Majesty's Counsel, and Recorder of Hull. Blackwood.
gained from us the most respectful attention. We opened its pages
with reverence, and expected much instruction. We have learnt that
the author in his first judicial visit to Hull as its Recorder, received an
unexpected and earnest request from the President and Council of the
Literary and Philosophical Society of that place to read a paper before
the society, upon any subject which he might select. He writes?

" After much consideration, I expressed my willingness to do so, and
chose the subject now before us. Some time afterwards I was honoured
by receiving a unanimous resolution of the President and Council,
soliciting me to take steps, by anticipation, to commit the paper to
the press, in order that it may be perused at as early a period as pos-
sible, by those who cannot hear the paper read, with a view to its
extended usefulness."?(page 2.) We, however, were more especially
interested in the work, because profound metaphysicians, "subtle,learned,
and original thinkers," had been consulted as to the present condition
of mental philosophy; and distinguished inquirers into physical science
had given up, " for the purposes of the paper," some valuable facts and
inductions, which were otherwise intended "for private circulation
only."

Moreover, the author assures us, that he uses the word, development,
in its strict etymological signification; that is to say, " an opening," a
" showing forth," " a displaying" of the intellectual and moral con-
dition of man in the present age. And you will say, is this to be done
in a single evening's paper 1 It sounds, indeed, as hopeless as the
notion of compressing the Iliad into a nut-sliell. Nevertheless, the
attempt must be made to survey this vast field, however rapidly, and
however hard it may be to know where to begin. The great object is
for the observer to select a right 'point of view. On that depends every-
thing ; for there is a point from which everything within and without
is order and loveliness ; and another from which all is contradiction
and confusion. There is a string which, untuned, Ave may well call out
fearfully,

" Hark, what discord follows!"?p. 9.
Prior to the selection of this point of view, the author had informed
us, that the paper contained some " of the results of nearly a quarter
of a century's observation and reflection," and that
"We cannot survey, for the purpose of practically estimating, the
intellectual and moral development of the age in which we live and are
playing our parts,?every man and woman of us having his or her own
responsible mission to perform,?without attempting gravely and
comprehensively to consider man in ordained relation to his power and
liis knowledge, his objects, his sayings and his doings, his position
past, and present, and his destiny  It will be necessary, with
this view, to soar liigli and far, but swiftly, into the stupendous starry-
solitude of space ; to descend, as far as man's limited means allow him,
into the interior of the earth ; and again, to travel all round its surface,
in order to ascertain what we know, or think we know, of the human
and animal denizens of that earth itself; and, finally, to penetrate,
as far as Ave may, and with tender respect, into that mystery of mys-
teries, MAN himself."

The paper achieving this, " somewhat modified and amplified, is now
presented to the public." There is no amount of verbal pomp too great
to usher in such a magnificent result. The highest ornaments of com-
position, the boldest apostrophes, the most sublime personifications, are
not misplaced in the opening of such an address. The severest criticism,
nay, the very shade of Swift himself, would recognise, for instance, the
chaste propriety of the following exordium at page 3?

" Be still, ye winds! ye zephyrs, cease to blow,
"While music most melodious meets my car,
the ' still sad music of humanity,' which may be heard echoing while
we fix our eyes upon MAN and his mysterious manifestations?in his
momentous relations to the Past, the Present, and the Future."
But alas ! despite these loud pretensions, this invocation to the
winds and the zephyrs, this determination to climb the starry heights,
to plunge deep into the abysses of the earth, and further, like Ariel
himself, to girdle the round world, to " scan its human and animal
denizens," and to penetrate " into that mystery of mysteries, Man him-
self," we gain very little by the marvellous tour. To all who have read
(and who has not 1) the masterly discourse of Herschel on the study
of Natural Philosophy, the recent treatise of the industrious
Astronomer at the Regent's Park Observatory, and Mr. Owen's pro-
ductions, the work will prove neither novel nor profound. It is
meagre of new facts, and offers no explanation to the vast intellectual
and moral development of the present age. Notwithstanding its pre-
tentious assumption of the philosophic spirit, it does not attempt to
generalize the borrowed facts which it has derived from the pages above
referred to. It stands in painful contrast to the beautiful essay of
Dr Channing " On the Present Age for although it glitters with a
formidable array of scientific facts derived from the sources above
indicated, yet, unlike the essay of Dr Channing, it is destitute of any
general principle, and fails to grasp the chief characteristics of the
present age, as distinguished from the ages which have preceded it.
Whenever the writer departs for a moment from the works and writings
of others, that moment he falls into error ; and this is nowhere more
conspicuous than when, with an affectation of philosophic caution, he
discourses on the progress of mental philosophy, and apostrophises

" The Intellect," with all the energy and force which the printer can
supply to him by means of exclamatory marks and notes of interroga-
tion. But we are forestalling our observations upon this subject. The
transcendant abilities of this author as a writer of fiction, entitle him
to be heard most fully, and with respectful attention ; and although a
careful perusal of the essay has filled us with intense disappointment,
yet gratitude for his past achievements prompts us to place statements
before our readers which, falling from a man of less renown, would
pass unheeded. The author first treats of English composition:

" I say these things only for the advantage of the younger portions
of this large audience, and of those who may hereafter think it worth
while to read what I am now uttering ; and to them would that I could
speak trumpet-tongued on this subject, which has always lain near my
heart. Let them believe the assertion, which -will be readily supported
by the greatest masters of our language, that to write English with
vigour and purity is really a high, and also a rare accomplishment:
much rarer, indeed, than it ought to be, and would be, if youthful
aspirants would only conceive rightly, and bear ever in mind the im-
portance of the object, and the efforts indispensable to secure it. This
accomplishment involves, in my opinion, early and careful culture, con-
tinued attention, and sedulous practice, familiarity with the choicest
models, and no inconsiderable degree of taste and refinement. One
thus endowed and accomplished must sometimes shudder at the extent
to which he may see our language vitiated by needless and injurious
incorporation of foreign words and idioms, and vulgar fleeting colloqui-
alities of our own viler growth, which are utterly inconsistent with
the dignity of high and enduring literature. Any man of talent, or
more especially of genius (a distinction difficult to put into words, but
real and great, and not in degree, but kind), who disregards these con-
siderations, offends the genius of English letters ; and, indeed, let him
rest assured, commits a sort of literary suicide. He may be uncon-
sciously disgusting thousands?nay, tens of thousands, of persons
competent to detect at an indignant glance these impertinent and
vulgar departures from propriety: familiar with the finest models of
ancient and modern literature; persons, in short, whose estimation
constitutes the true and only pathway to posterity. If their fiat, or
imprimatur, be withheld (and it is given only after a stern scrutiny),
the eager, ambitious traveller will by and by find out, to his mortifica-
tion, that he has started without his passport."?pp. 15, 16.
The italics belong to the author.

"VYe recognise the truth and importance of the idea which is sought
to be enforced by the above extract. Moreover, the passage itself is a
j>roof that " to write English with vigour and purity" is " a rare
accomplishmentand " Ave shudder at the extent" to which its purity
has been "vitiated by needless and injurious incorporations" of such
"foreign words and idioms" as " colloquialities," "fiat," "imprimatur,"
and the like. And we further think, that its "vigour" has been
diminished by a too redundant use of adjectives?the struggle to be
forcible is too conspicuous, especially towards its close; matter is
wanting, and sound is substituted ; and the energy, such as it is,
resembles the convulsions of disease or debility, rather than the serene
power of a healthy man.

The author expresses a fear that the number of writers in the
present day bear too great a proportion to the ? readers ; but thinks
that it cannot be denied, that the current of our periodical literature
is highly creditable to an accomplished age. We mourn over the
truth of the following statements:

" It is a fact, however, stated with concern and reluctance, that
there is a poisonous growth of libertine literature?if the last word
be not indeed libelled by such a use of it?designed for the lowest
class of society; supplied, moreover, to an extent scarcely equal to
the demand for it, and which exists to an extent unfortunately little
suspected. I know not how this dreadful evil is to be encountered,
except by affording every possible encouragement, from every quarter,
to the dissemination in the cheapest practical form of wholesome and
engaging literature. If poison be cheap, let its antidote be
cheaper."?p. 19.

He might have added, that vigorous efforts have been made to
supply the antidote ; and that great as are the exertions of the infidel,
they are equalled by the zeal and industry of the various religious
societies of "the present age." The British and Foreign Bible Society
is issuing its productions by hundreds of thousands ; and many minor
societies are actively engaged in the same holy undertaking. Indeed,
while we mourn the truth of the author's statements, we are cheered
by the conviction, that the evil to which he refers is diminishing, and
that socialism and its twin sister infidelity are not so vigorous as they
were a few years ago. Dr Yauglian, in his "Age of Great Cities,"
quotes the following:

" I think, and indeed I have very good reason to believe, that the
progress of socialism and infidelity has been effectually checked in the
manufacturing districts  In the houses of the needy and the
afflicted, I have often found the Bible the last piece of furniture
remaining. I have heard the miserable proclaim the patience they
have learned from its precepts, and the consolation they have derived
from its promises. If any man doubted the benefits which Christianity
has conferred on mankind, he could be cured of his scepticism by
witnessing its soothing influence on the distress and suffering in
Lancashire."

However, evil is an active agency; and it behoves all those who wish
well.to their fatherland, and to the highest interests of their fellow-
men, to do what in tliem lies to stem the torrent of unbelief, for with
it flows the germs of anarchy, degradation, and national ruin. And
this reminds us to observe, that the author has failed to make any
remark upon those Mechanics' Institutions which, springing up under
the genius of Dr Birkbeck and Lord Brougham, have now penetrated
into nearly every city and town of the United Kingdom. This is the
more remarkable, inasmuch as a deputation from the Hull Institute
afforded the author peculiar gratification by forming part of his
audience, " in pursuance of a liberal and friendly invitation from the
President and Council of the Literary and Philosophical Society." We
believe that valuable as have been the results of such institutions, they
have not been productive of unmixed good, and that to their operations
may be fairly ascribed some portion of the heterodox notions to which
the author refers. We hope not to be misunderstood, as being opposed
to the diffusion of knowledge among the operative classes. Far from it
be our every thought and desire. They are, however, human institutions,
and therefore cannot be faultless. In a friendly spirit, we desire to
point out some evils which we opine have sprung up under their
influence. We think, then, that the Mechanics' Institute has tended
unduly to exalt mere intellectual attainments, and to elevate secular
knowledge above that higher faculty of our nature, which enables us
" to eschew evil and to do good." It has, in many minds, kept back
that great and cardinal truth, that " the fear of the Lord is the beginning
of wisdom," and that " a right understanding have all they that do here-
after." Fascinated by the splendours of poetry, or by the useful results
which spring out of well-contrived mechanical adaptations, the ill-
educated mind has listened to the conclusion, that a magnificent poem,
a fine song, or a skilful invention, were ample compensations for a life
of debauchery and sin.

We yield to none in our reverence for great names ; and, least of all,
would we, with unhallowed hands, tear open the receptacles of the dead
to expose the failings and follies of those who moulder there; yet the
interests of truth compel us to state, that we have heard the names of
Burns, Byron, and others, pronounced with almost idolatrous homage;
and to pause for a single moment ere you joined in their unqualified
praise, was to call down upon your head the terms of " narrow-minded
bigot" and " stupid loonhowever gently you might hint that their
moral career was such as to dim their otherwise resplendent characters.
This incident is related not as in itself a fearful fact, but as indicating
by an example, the tendencies before referred to.

Moreover, the miscellaneous lectures popularly given, involving no
labour upon the hearers, produce in them a vain desire to be considered
wiser than their neighbours, and to dogmatize upon subjects far beyond
the comprehension of the wisest of men. An undue craving for know-
ledge was the crime which lost the world. Puny scoffers have sneeringly
asked, whether it was at all probable that Adam should have forfeited
Paradise and " brought death and woe upon all mankind " for the sake
of an apple, or any other fruit 1 To such petty garblings of Holy
Writ have men condescended to listen, overlooking the terrible tempta-
tion, " to be as gods." To possess mental power, to be endowed with
genius, to soar above our fellows in all that pertains to the intellect,
was, and is, the strongest temptation which can beset a lofty mind ; and
the inspired Record therefore harmonizes with every day's experience
of the human heart in describing. " Adam, the goodliest man of men
since born his sons," falling before the strongest of all temptations,
the acquisition of knowledge (power) and the indulgence of his affec-
tions. Let us not, however, be understood by the above remarks to
advocate the slightest restriction upon the acquisition of any knowledge
which it is permitted man to know. We do not, as many, dread the
advance of knowledge as conducive to infidelity; far from it; the Bible
is based upon truth, and, as it has been often observed, the words and
the worlds of the Almighty cannot contradict each other. Flimsy and
superficial acquirements may beget a giddy self-elevation, and engender
a vain conceit which lead on to scepticism; and partial knowledge
acquired at second-hand, and from compiled works rather than from
the monographs of original thinkers, tends frequently to the same
result. On the contrary, profound research and deep thought have
ever tended to fill the mind with holy reverence, and to imbue it with
an abiding sense of an all-wise and mighty Being, whose wisdom,
power, and love pervade and uphold all things. Thus, the poet Shelley,
the vulgar sophist Thomas Paine, and the witty Voltaire, could sneer at
Revelation as being inconsistent with the sublime dogmas of astronomy,
whilst Newton, who had investigated the movements of the celestial
bodies, who had, as it were, Avalked amongst the stars, measured their
magnitudes, predicted their movements, and discovered the-wondrous
law of gravitation, could proclaim with trumpet-tongue as the inspired
psalmist had done before him, " The heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament slioweth His handywork." It is so in all science?
the smatterers are vain, but the philosophers are reverential and lowly.
To revert briefly to our first observations upon this subject, we know not
why intellectual power should claim the idolatrous homage of mankind.
It has again and again failed in its purpose, when the indomitable will
has triumphed. Its results have been puny when compared with those
which have been effected by a high moral purpose. It was a moral
power which thrilled the hearts of our sailors when they nerved their
energies to the deathless sentence, " England expects every man to do
p 2
liis duty." It was moral power which actuated Howard and Clarkson
in their successful missions of mercy to the felon and the slave ;
which enabled Pinel to strike off the fetters of the maniac, and em-
powers his followers to mitigate the sorrows and heal the diseases of
this large class of sufferers ; and it was the like agency which triumphed
over the learning of Erasmus; defied not only the pope, but the demon
himself, and won its triumph in the Protestant Reformation.

It was the same influence which animated the soul of our greatest
warrior, and melted the hearts of his countrymen, as they stood around
his recent grave; this indeed it is, which fills our homes with peace,
upholds our laws, and spreads a glory over the length and breadth of
our fatherland. Not only have " Mechanics' Institutions" been wholly
overlooked in the essay especially devoted to the intellectual and moral
development of the age; but (what is more remarkable in an author
who takes great pains to show the orthodoxy of his faith, and almost
overloads one portion of his essay with scriptural quotations) no pro-
minent notice is taken of the marvellous spirit of missionary enterprise
which characterizes the nineteenth century. It is true, that in quoting
some singularly-phrased remarks from Chevalier Bunsen's recent work
(Hippolytus), we are reminded that Christianity is performing the glo-
rious mission of civilizing the earth, yet the great literary and scientific
advantages, Avhich have sprung out of missionary labours, are nowhere
referred to. Whatever opinion may be formed respecting the ultimate
result of these labours, and of the propriety of directing such energies
over so large a sphere of operations, rather than concentrating them
upon the heathendom at home, this much is certain, that missionary en-
terprise has extended the boundaries of knowledge, and aided the moral
development of the age. It has in many instances formed written lan-
guages?in hundreds, extended and improved the languages already
existing?it has discovered countries, it has instituted laws?it has
exerted a moralizing influence, even where its especial objects has
failed, such as in abolishing the Suttees of India, and mitigating the
general abominations of heathendom. It has taught useful arts to the
Hottentots, to the Esquimaux, and to the South Sea Islanders it has
abolished the migratory habits of many tribes, and implanted the germs
of civilization, by teaching uncivilized nations to cultivate and store up
the most valuable of the cereal grains, and be thus enabled to possess
" a local habitation, and a name." It has added to the stores of literature
directly, by bringing new languages and dialects before the Philologists,
and science is indebted to it for a vast amount of its ethnographical
knowledge. Balbi, speaking of the collection of materials for the com-
parison of languages, states,?

"In this-field, along with many other very useful labourers, the
ministers of Christianity have occupied the first rank. To the zeal of
the Moravian, Baptist, and other protestant missionaries, as well as to
the members of bible societies of all Christian sects, ethnography owes
its acquaintance with so many nations hitherto unknown in India, and
other regions of Asia, and various parts of America, and Oceauica, along
with the translation in whole or in part of the bible, :in more than a
hundred different languages."*

At the present time the British and Foreign Bible Society lias trans-
lated the Bible or portions of it, into nearly two hundred languages, its
volumes embracing dialects of Western, Northern, Central, and Southern
Europe; Asia, Africa, North America, and Polynesia formed not the
least of the marvels of " that true wonder of our time, that visible and
profoundly suggestive epitome and sum of man's doihgs since he was
placed on this planet, the Great Exhibition of 1851."

We might add, also, that our Embassies have gladly availed themselves
of the services of missionaries as interpreters of languages, and that
learned societies have expressed their obligations to such men as Ellis,
Morrison, Gutzlaff, Carey, and others, for information imparted to them
on various occasions. In short it is a mighty agency, calling forth the
energies of hundreds of able men, and the charities of tens of thousands
more, expending, as it does, nearly two-thirds of a million sterling in its
beneficent operations?to use the beautiful and philosophic language of
Dr Channing :?

" Call it pretension, or enthusiasm, or what you will, the fact remains;
and it attests the diffusive tendencies of our times. Benevolence now
gathers together her armies. Vast associations are spread over whole
countries for assailing evils, which it is thought cannot be met by the
single-handed. There is hardly a form of evil which has not awakened
some antagonist effort. Associated benevolence gives eyes to the blind,
and ears to the deaf, and is achieving even greater wonders; that is, it
approaches the mind without the avenues of eye or ear, and gives to
the hopelessly blind and deaf the invaluable knowledge which these
senses afford to others. Benevolence now shuts out no human being,
however low, from its regard. It goes to the cell of the criminal with
words of hope, and in labouring to mitigate public punishment, to make
it the instrument, not of vengeance, but reform. It remembers the slave,
pleads his cause with God and man, recognises in him a human bro-
ther, respects in him the sacred rights of humanity, and claims for him,
not as a boon, but as a right, that freedom without which humanity
withers, and God's child is degraded into a tool or a brute. Still more,
benevolence now is passing all limits of country and ocean. It would send
our best blessing to the ends of the earth. It would make the wilder-
ness of heathenism bloom, and join all nations in the bonds of one
holy and loving faith. Thus, if we look at the religious movements of
* "Atlas Ethnograpliique." Paris, ]826.
the age, we see in tliem that tendency to diffusion and universality,
which I have named as its most striking characteristic."*
We think further, that the present postal arrangements, as devised
by Rowland Hill, have been highly conducive to the moral development
of the present age. By it the domestic and social virtues are kept
alive, and a ready interchange of thought and argument can be main-
tained by scientific men, who are located at great distances from each
other.

We are living too near the era of extensive fiscal changes to estimate
their effects with accuracy, yet without entering upon the stormy and
dangerous sea of modern politics, and least of all assenting to the general
justice of the sudden repeal of the corn laws, we are bound to confess,
that the improvement in the physical condition of the labouring classes
has greatly aided in the diffusion of knowledge, and the advancement
of public morality. The condition of our workhouses, the comparatively
empty state of our gaols, and the general contentment and cheerfulness
which pervade the operative classes of this kingdom, may be fairly as-
cribed to the abundance of employment, and of food ; whether that
abundance be ascribed to recent legislation, or to the contemporaneous
discovery of gold in Australia, and the extensive emigration which has
sprung up in consequence thereof.

These great facts are not once referred to, but our limits will not
permit us to supply the many defects of the author, in treating upon
the intellectual and moral characteristics of the present age; and we must
limit ourselves to the facts and opinions contained in the work before
us. Having made allusions to the number of elementary works and of
" sermons and religious publications," of which " he reads and always
did read" largely, the author proceeds to allude to biographical writings
of which he thinks " a sort of deluge is precipitated upon us," and asks
the following pertinent questions:?"Does an indolent and prurient love
of gossip vitiate the taste of both readers and writers of biography ?
encouraging the latter to trifle with the memory of the dead, and the
intellect of the living]"

The force of the following remarks must be felt by all readers:
" I have heard an eminent person say, when conversing on this subject,
(the rash publication of private letters.) ? For my part, I now take care
to write no letters that may not be proclaimed on the housetops; and
am very cautious whom I take into my confidence.'" Is this unreason-
able, or unnatural 1

We think this a crying vice of the age; and notwithstanding this
effusion of private correspondence, we are more deficient in good bio-
*.Charming on " The Present Age," p. 13.

graphical writings than those of any other character. We want works
which shall give us a full and succinct portrait of the individual whose
life is attempted to be unfolded; mere extracts from journals, and a
heterogeneous mass of unimportant letters, no more indicate the man to
the every-day reader, than do the disjointed, broken, and scattered
fragments of fossil bones reveal the form and size of the " iguanodon,"
until brought together, compared, and arranged by the genius of a
Buckland or a Mantell. How few biographical works of the present
age can be compared with Boswell's Johnson, M'Crie's Life of Knox,
or the charming portraits of Donne, Hooker, and Wotton, by the honest,
quaint, and truthful Isaak Walton?

The essayist thinks it impertinent on the matter of prose fiction " to
criticise contemporaries" byway of either censure or praise, "for certain
reasons of his own," and therefore limits his observations to a eulogy of
Sir Walter Scott; expressing a doubt whether "sufficient pains have
been taken in the present day to construct a fiction on a durable basis ;
and whether there are many that have sufficient vitality to bloom in the
atmosphere of the next succeeding century." (p. 33.) This is cautious
criticism; "many" is a safe word to use upon such a subject. It is
indeed such platitudes as these that constitute the basis of the work
before us, and so bitterly disappoint its readers, who expect to gain
some information from a book, on whose covers are emblazoned, with
all the pomp of capital and gilt, the magic symbols of a Queen's Counsel,
and a Fellow of the lloyal Society; to say nothing of the fact, that a
philosophical society had requested that steps might be taken " by
anticipation to commit the paper to the press" (page 2).

Surely there are writers who symbolize the ?immediate age, with
greater exactness than Sir Walter Scott1? And was it to be expected
that in treating of the prose fiction of the age no elucidation should be
given, or offered, of the wondrous circulation and thrilling effect of
" Uncle Tom's Cabin?" Was not a prose fiction which has roused the
feelings of millions, from the highest aristocrat to the lowliest peasant
in the old and new world, worthy of a passing notice? Would it have
been inconsistent with the dignity of the author of " The Diary of a
Physician," in an essay upon the prose fiction of the present age, to have
analyzed a book which is unparalleled in the number of its readers, and
the extent of its circulation, by any work of the imagination that has
ever preceded it?

We are informed with all the energy of italics, that " poetry is not
dead in the present busy practical age; but her voice is heard only
faintly and fitfully, like the sounds of an iEolian harp in a crowded
thoroughfare." Why, there is poetry in the above sentence. Senti-
ment, pathos, original metaphor, and ideal fiction are there. The
sentence that mourns its decadence enshrines the hope of its resur-
rection. Poetry cannot die. Nay more, it cannot sleep, for even in
the wild blasts of winter its sublime voice is heard, and night with her
sable clouds, or gorgeous canopy of stars, calls up its presence to the
hearts of men. Spring may no more spread its sunshine over the
earth, nor summer clothe the forest, brake, and dell in the rich garni-
ture of leaf and flower; but so long as love throbs in a human heart,
and the soul has its aspirations of hope and joy, its moments of
bereavement and sorrow, so long will the voice of poetry be heard, not
only " fitfully," but continuously, and musical as the air which wraps
the earth, and fills the listening ear with an ever-varying, but never-
dying song. We think, indeed, that the " present age,"?the age
which includes Sir Walter Scott as the representative of prose fiction,
has been, and is, especially cdive with poetry. Poetry not dead indeed!
Her voice heard " only faintly and fitfully !" Does the writer expect
poets to spring up as abundantly and regularly as mushrooms in
autumn ] What Avere the graphic descriptions and gloomy moralizings
of Clxilde Harold, Manfred, and the Corsair1? We say nothing of the
lyric strains or passionate songs of Burns. Was there none of " the
transcendent and glorious faculty," in the rich and glowing eflusions of
Shelley and Keats 1 In the wild tale of Thalaba?the philosophic lines
of Coleridge, and the gentle lays of Wordsworth, does she sing "faintly
and fitfully 1" It needed not the energy and force of italics to assure
us, that the " Loves of the Angels" and the charming " Irish Melodies"
of Moore yet live ; and Ave rejoice to think, that the Author of that great
epic, " The Lily and the Bee,"?that marvellous poem of the marvellous
year of 1851, still lives to adorn and instruct the present age,?to
say nothing of such lesser poets as llogers, Wilson, Buhver, Montgomery,
Browning, Marston, Leigh Hunt, and Tennyson. The author states
that the " poetry of the present age is principally and elegantly con-
versant with sentiment, of which it is often a very delicate and beautiful
utterance," page 35. We cannot dissent from so general a statement.
No special sentiment is referred to, and the poetry of all ages is con-
versant with sentiment. The beautiful odes of Horace, and the spark-
ling poems of Anacreon possess this quality. It abounds in the odes
and choruses of the Greek plays, and flows in an endless stream
through the glowing poetry of the Hebrew Canticles. It shines in the
pages of Theocritus, and spreads its fascination over the Iliad. Where
is moro delicate " sentiment" to be found in the poetry of the present
age, and where does it possess a more " beautiful utterance," than in
Homer's description of the interview of Hector and Andromache 1 Is
there no sentiment in the CEdipus of Sophocles, where the blind father
implores Creon, that he might be allowed to touch his children. .

" Thou'lt be kind to them
For my sake, Creon; and (0 latest prayer)
Let me but touch them?feel them with these hands,
And pour such sorrow as may speak farewell
O'er ills that must be theirs ! By thy pure line?
For thine is pure?do this, sweet prince. Methinks
I should not miss these eyes, could I but touch them.
"What shall I say to move thee ?

Hast thou sent,
In mercy sent my children to my arms ?
Speak?speak?I do not dream!
Blessings on thee!
For this one mercy mayst thou find above
A kinder God than I have. Ye?where are ye ?
My children?come !?nearer, and nearer yet."
The poetry of every age is " conversant with sentimentand never
more " principally," or elegantly so, than when Pan rendered the
woods of Greece musical, and Naiads haunted the beautiful streams
of that lovely land. Was not Tityrus sentimental when, under the
wide-spreading beecli-tree, and by the aid of his rustic pipe (tenui avena),
or as Sidney Smith freely translated it, " with the aid of some thin
oatmeal gruel," he made the woods to resound with the charms of the
beautiful Amaryllis 1 Yes, that languid swain, like all his poetic
brothers, was full of sentiment, and, what is more, seemed conscious
of the fact.

" O Melibcee Deus nobis hec otia fecit."
The poetry of the past generation in our country?(to say no more
of classic ages?the poems of Ovid, or the love-songs of Tibullus), was
fully " conversant with sentiment," and found for it " a beautiful utter-
ance" in Pope's " Abelard and Heloise," and a conspicuous and pompous
display in the elaborate effusions of Edward Young. "VVe wished to
learn of some special characteristic, some defined peculiarity, which
should mark a distinction between the poetry of this age and the
ages which have preceded it, but we sought for it in vain in the essay
before us.

We are informed that the "philosophical literature of the age is of
a high order, as evidenced in the writings of Dugald Stewart and Sir
John Herschel, speaking at present, as far as regards style of compo-
sition," the author reserving his profound remarks on the "philosophy
of the age, for another portion of his inquiry. A string of queries
follows his observations upon this department of literature, as to whether
" we of the present day are pigmies or giants as compared with those
who have gone before us." Giants figure largely in this essay, as
becomes a gigantic subject and a great author. These prodigies are
brought forward in reference to the sermons of a past day, and are
named three or four times in the course of a dozen lines in some parts
of the work before us. It may be consolatory to the men of the
nineteenth century?to the contemporaries of Chalmers and Pusey in
divinity?of Adams, Le Verrier, and Herschell in astronomy?of Fara-
day, Davy, Berzelius, Liebig, Watt, and Wheatstone, in other depart-
ments of science, that none of those mighty questionings, big with
potent thought, are answered. They are left in that solemn majesty
and awful profundity which become the question and the questioner.
We are rescued from any deep sense of inferiority by the fact, that Sir
John Herscliel himself has stated that "the intellect of Newton,
La Place, or Le Grange may stand in fair competition with that of
Archimedes, Aristotle, or Plato; and the virtues and patriotism of
Washington with the brightest examples of ancient history."*
We have written " currente calamo," and have encroached too much
upon our space before entering upon the subject which is the most
deeply interesting to our readers. The author thus apostrophises the
intellect, and comments upon mental philosophy.

" The intellect ! But what is intellect 1 And in merely asking
the question, we seem suddenly sinking into a sort of abyss !"
" I asked him (an eminent metaphysician) whether he considered
that we were really any further advanced in admitted knowledge of the
nature and functions of the mind, than Aristotle was, that is, up-
ward of twenty-two centuries ago 1 He considered for a moment, and
replied in the negative ! I then asked the same question of my other
friend, and he wrote as follows: ' I am afraid very few substantial
advances have been made in psychology since the days of Aristotle.'
Here is a picture of existing metaphysical science ! It is, in truth,
only a reflection of some of the myriad dark shadows of all past specu-
lation ; and shall it be said that it bears a similar relation to the
future 1 Metaphysics are called a science, and yet its main questions
are?' What are the questions !' It deals with being and its conditions,
and yet cannot say what being is; and indeed I doubt whether it can
be truly given credit for possessing one single grand truth, universally
recognised as such A whole life of an ingenious rational being
may be occupied in those pursuits?however irritating it may be to
fond metaphysicians to say so?without the acknowledged acquisition
of a single fact, of one solitary, practical, substantial result
He has been floundering on from beginnings in which nothing is
begun to conclusions in which nothing is concluded," pp. 44, 45.
We have, however, omitted some important questions, and must,
therefore, re-quote our author :

" But you will reasonably ask, is it then really so 1 A few minutes'
conversation with the first professed or acknowledged metaphysician
whom you meet, however he may at first dispute it, will prove the
* "Discourse on Natural Philosophy," p. 40.

exisfenee of the fact, that the very elements of the science are floating
about in extreme uncertainty. Ask him, what he means by mind 1?
is it material or immaterial 1 What does he understand by matter 1
does it exist, or not 1 Is thought the functional result of physical
organization, or the action of a separate spiritual existence 1 If so,
how is it united with, or what are its relations to matter 2 How does
it stand with relation to the external world 1 Nay, is there any exter-
nal world at all % What is the nature of the mind's internal action ?"
page 42.

To the important query about an " external world,1' Ave have the
following " profound" foot-note :
" Bishop Berkeley, an exquisite metaphysical genius, brought pro-
found reasonings in support of his opinion, that our belief in the reality
of an external world is totally unfounded !" page 43.

We are among the "fond metaphysicians" who are "irritated" at
such pretended philosophy as the above?when it is paraded as philo-
sophy by persons possessing the social distinction and philosophic rank
of the writer. We are "irritated" to think that a literary and philo-
sophical society could patiently listen to such pedantic balderdash.
Yerily the " age" of gobe-mouches has not passed away. It is a vain
objection to mental philosophy, that we are uncertain as to the ultimate
character or quality of mind. It may appear philosophic to ask what
is mind, and because it cannot be accurately defined, to sneer at all
metaphysical research as empty and worthless ; but is not such a pro-
ceeding the result of affectation and ignorance 1 Our author exhausts
his great powers of eloquence, and becomes " dumb with wonder" as he
contemplates the agency of steam and electricity. But, what is elec-
tricity 1 It has been as eloquently apostrophized, and has remained
as dumb under the questionings, as has mind itself. Indeed, all nature,
all science might be sneered down, if such questionings were capable
of achieving such a result. If we are not to deal with any subject
until we know ivhat that subject is, in its ultimate essence, then fare-
well to all science; for what on earth, or sea, or sky, can we thus
comprehend 1

" This green, flowery, rock-built earth, the trees, mountains,
rivers, many-sounding seas; that great deep sea of azure that
swims overhead; the winds sweeping through it, the black cloud
fashioning itself together, now pouring out fire, now hail and rain ;
what is it 1 Ay, what 1 At bottom, we do not yet know; we can
never kno\v at all We call that fire of the black thunder-cloud
' electricity, and lecture learnedly about it, and grind the like of it out
of glass and silk ; but what is it 1 What made it 1 Whence comes
it 1 "W hither goes it 1 Science has done much for us j but it is a
poor science that would hide from us the great deep sacred infinitude
of nescience, wliitlier we can never penetrate, on which all science
swims as a mere superficial film. This world, after all our science,
and sciences, is still a miracle; wonderful, inscrutable, magical and
more, to whosoever will think of it."*

We cheerfully admit, that man's daily necessities have acted as a
stimulus to the advancement of physical science, and that the inductive
method has been from an earlier date more consistently and logically
applied to these studies, than to those of mental science, and that,
consequently, they have arrived at greater exactitude, and to more
tangible results. Mental philosophy, unfortunately, having, until
within the last century, been confined mainly to colleges and schools,
and even there been regarded as an " exercitation having a tendency
to sharpen the faculties," rather than as earnest and grave studies,
leading directly to greatly practical results ;?and, therefore, no more
to be charged with its present shortcomings than vaccination during
the life of Jenner, or steam at the age of Hero of Alexandria, of
Giovanni Branca, or the Marquis of Worcester. We would further
remind, or rather inform the writer, that the speculations of Aristotle
had as much relation to matter, form, and substance, as abstract specu-
lations, as to mind; and also, that the early history of the physical
sciences was fraught with speculations apparently as absurd as those
directly relating to ideas?although ultimately leading to great practical
results. Who could have imagined that the speculations of astrology
should have merged into the science of astronomy, or that the wild
dreams of the alchemists should issue in the practical facts of modern
chemistry ?

Mind is now, however, studied inductively, and with a view to prac-
tical results j and who beyond the range of the author's acquaintanceship
is ignorant of the vast good which has sprung up from the study of
psychology? Has not education been influenced by the opinions of
Gall and Spurzheim?modified, corrected and improved as they have
been by modern research? Has no light been thrown upon the motives
to crime, and the appropriate treatment of criminals by the psycholo-
gists of the present age? Has no " practical substantial result" been
" acquired by a knowledge of the deep and inseparable sympathy existing
between bodily diseases and mental impulses??Have not the insane
been benefited by the mental philosophy of a Pinel, a Charleswortli,
and other labourers in that great field of "practical" benevolence??
Most assuredly they have; and ignorance the most crass, or perverse-
ness the most stolid, can alone be blind to the fact, that modern psycholo-
gists no longer hunt the shadows of an abstract speculation, more than
do their contemporaries in physical science, but that both parties are
* "Carlyle, Lccturcs on Heroes," p. 12.

now carefully studying facts, and deducing from these certain " practical"
conclusions, having an immediate influence upon the health and happi-
ness of the human race. This journal is a " practical substantial result"
of the advancement made in metaphysics,?and if more satisfactory
evidence be demanded, Ave point to the efforts now being made for the
improvement of the criminal code?we refer to the system of education
now pursued; and triumphantly do we direct our author's attention to
the absence of all manacles, fetters, and dungeons, in the various lunatic
hospitals of this kingdom, and this " one solitary, practical, substantial
result" is entirely due to the inductive study of mental phenomena.
The intuitive genius of Pinel perceived in the first instance how greatly
the diseases of lunatics were aggravated by a scanty supply of food,
warmth, and other physical comforts, and subsequently rose to the
beneficent conclusion, that chains might be dispensed with in cases
where they had been worn for twenty years. With what subsequent
results, let the magnificent institutions which adorn this kingdom testify.
To be ignorant of the labours of Pinel and Esquirol, in France, and of
Ellis and Conolly in England, as regards the influence of physical causes
upon mental manifestations?to ignore the achievements of Gall and
Spurzheim in educational subjects?to forget the labours of love of others
who are effecting beneficent changes in medical jurisprudence, and to
overlook the facts which have been accumulated in this journal by
philosophic and pains-taking observers, may suit the purposes of a
declamatoi'y essay, but do not redound to the industry, penetration, or
accuracy of an historian of " The Intellectual and Moral Developement
of the Present Age." We do not presume to explain " how thought
is united with, or what are its relations to matter," more than we
pretend to unfold how life is so connected with organization. We rest
contented with the fact, and to use the language of Goethe, " learn to
know how to keep within the limits of the knowable." It may be stated,
that the " substantial results" to which we have referred, did not spring
from the study of " The intellect we contend that they have, as much
as the " mechanical power," which the author so eulogizes, has sprung
up as one of " the creations of pure intellect."

"No real advance in psychological science for ages," indeed! Do
the facts we have related indicate no advance upon the following?
"The advocate of the fearful theory, that insanity is spiritual in its
character may be represented by Luther, who said 'Idiots are men in
whom devils have established themselves; and all the physicians who
heal these infirmities, as though they proceeded from natural causes are
ignorant blockheads, who know nothing of the power of the demon.
Eight years ago, I myself saw and touched, at Dessau, a child of this
sort, which had no human parents, but had proceeded from the devil,
He was twelve years old, and in outward form exactly resembled ordi-
nary children. He did nothing but eat, consuming as much every day
as four hearty labourers, or thrashers could. In most external respects,
he was as I have mentioned, just like other children; but if any one
touched him, he yelled out like a mad creature, and with a peculiar
sort of scream. I said to the princes of Anhalt, with whom I was
at the time,?if I had the ordering of things here, I would have
that child thrown into the river Moldau, at the risk of being held its
murderer."*

It is, however, evident from that, and other remarks, that the writer
?on "the Present Age" has spoken positively on a subject upon which
he is less informed than the majority of his readers. We prefer the
opinion of one, who has at least read the authors upon whom he
presumes to speak.

" If we look back steadfastly upon the past history of philosophy,
we may see that it has ever been a progressive development; that each age
has contributed its portion, greater or less, and that the agitation between
the different schools has been as it were the pulsations of the forward
movement.

" Had Des Cartes moreover, or some equivalent mind, failed to point
out the new road, Leibnitz had never trodden it, and the German
philosophy were still but a possibility; and had Bacon never shown the
practical power of induction, Locke had never applied it to the study of
the mind, or Newton by its means furnished the key to the temple of
the universe. As the course of the vessel that makes its way against
the breeze consists of a series of movements, each one of which seems
to bear it away from its true direction, yet brings it in fact so much
further on its destined course; so the mind that can only view each
individual tack which the philosophic spirit takes, is apt to imagine,
that every such movement carries it further from the true mark, whilst
those who can take the whole course in at one comprehensive view, see that
these apparent deviations are all necessary to bring us nearer and nearer
to the centre of eternal truth."

We could further demonstrate the "substantial result" of modern
psychology in divinity, legislation, and the laws, did our space permit;
but must now be content to refer the author to the pages of Brown, of
Spurzheim, of Carpenter, and Holland, of Cousin, Baillarger, Esquirol,
Georget, and Parchappe, if he be really desirous to know whether he
was in error, when he said that " we have made no real advance in
psychological science for ages," p. 51. We deeply regret that the author
has joined in the vulgar habit of sneering at the " profound reasonings"
of Bishop Berkeley. Every " coxcomb," according to Pope, has thought
" to vanquish Berkeley with a grin ;" but alas I how few have conde-
* " Hitchman on The Pathology of Insanity."?Lancet, 184-7.
f Morell's " History of Philosophy," p. 18.

scended to read liis writings. Johnson could hardly have done so
when he spoke of refuting Berkeley by " kicking a stone/' and we are
sure, that Byron knew him not when he issued the immortal pun,
" "When Bishop Berkeley said there was no matter,
'Twas no matter what he said,"

inasmuch as Berkeley, when understood, teaches the very opposite
doctrine, for to use the Bishop's own language?" If by matter you
understand that which is seen, felt, tasted, and touched, then I say
matter exists: I am as firm a believer in its existence as any one can
be, and herein I agree with the vulgar." Although the writer has not
studied, or at least learned the " advances" which have been made in
psychology, he nevertheless consoles us by the assurance " that we have
?no authority from revealed religion for repressing what are called meta-
physical speculations, however little direct encouragement it may afford
them," p. 50. A Genius " of the present age" has confirmed the justice,
and therefore sanctioned the mercy of the olden time ! Shades of
Dugald Stuart, of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and of good Bishop Berkeley,
rest in peace! One of her Majesty's Counsel, a Recorder of Hull, and
a Fellow of the Royal Society, has made the discovery, and proclaimed
it to the world, that " there is no authority from revealed religion" to
" re-press metaphysics"?id est, for burning psychologists at the stake;
and we are, therefore, not now called upon to supply any defect of reli-
gious zeal on the part of our forefathers by dragging you from your
resting places, and burning your mouldering remains like those of a
Wycliffe, as a warning, or memorial to the daring psychologists of after-
generations ! Happy shades! Peace be with you.
