A Case of Lack of Speech Due to Negativism
============================================

:Author: Madella Rigby, Recorder, The Psychological Clinic,
University of Pennsylvania

There have come to the attention of the speech clinics of the
Department of Psychology an increasing number of cases wherein
no speech has developed. The acquisition of speech, like teething
and learning the technique of maintaining equilibrium in the hazardous adventure of walking, is generally considered a basis for judging the normal development of young children. Nurses and parents
wait for and carefully record the day of the first word and the day
of the first step. One child in the family is casually compared with
another in these achievements and thus an informal basis of comparison is developed in nearly every family. On the other hand
we have physicians and hospitals devoted to the scientific observation of mental and physical growth of infants for the purpose of
improving the methods of care as well as for growing the best possible children. From these statistical studies and from common
practice we know that when a child reaches three and one-half years
of age without speech, he is slow but the case is not by that fact
alone, hopeless. Parents who are alert in these matters and aware
of what constitutes normal development are coming in greater numbers to solicit the advice of experts in the case of retardation, and
it is the wise mother who early seeks the reason for delayed development.
Dr Twitmyer, who is the authority on speech defects in the
Department of Psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, has
studied the problem of lack of speech from the point of view of its
possible causes. From his practical clinical experience, he has differentiated four reasons why a child might not talk, namely, amentia, deafness, anatomical anamoly, and negativism. To this list must
also be added hysterical aphasia, although this term is properly
meant to signify loss of speech that had been acquired. This paper
is an attempt to illustrate by means of a case studied in our clinic
the dispositional disturbance called negativism. In the words of
Kraepelin it is "the instinctive resistance against every outer influence of the will.'' Negativism varies greatly in degree of severity
from the normal display of every child as it reaches the point of
asserting its independence of parental care in the development of
its individual personality on the one hand, to the point of hopeLACK OF SPEECH 157
less insanity as seen in cases of schizophrenic negativism. To one
who has not had the opportunity to see extreme cases of negativism
it may seem fantastic to suppose that a distorted disposition could
be the cause for the failure of a human child to develop one of the
faculties which set man apart from the apes and lower animals.
Yet in dementia praecox this negativism may be seen to drive a
patient to such extremes of resistance that he will not only refuse
to talk but will starve rather than accept food brought for him to
eat. Such is common enough in a pathological state. How much
of this active non-conformity of otherwise mentally normal children
can be blamed on training?or the lack of it, and how much is due
to a predisposition in the matter of excessive will power has not
been definitely determined. It is certainly true, however, that this
clinic has been receiving more and more cases of negativism so
strong as to interfere with the child's proper development because
it leads to social non-conformity.

There came to the Clinic during the summer session a case
demonstrating pure negativism with otherwise normal mentality.
It was a little boy, an attractive child with very blond hair and
blue eyes. His name was Rex. He was brought to the Clinic by
his father and mother because now, at the age of three and one-half
years, he has no speech. He said "Daddy" a year ago but has
dropped it. He has said, "Bye-bye" this year. Rex's baby sister,
one and a half years old, is already using words and phrases. In
desperation the parents have taken the boy to hospitals in the city
for physical examinations. He is under the care of the family
physician who sent him to us at the suggestion of a former member of the Clinic staff. There seems to be no significant medical
history in the case, although the laboratory tests were not all completed because of the inconvenience of bringing the child to the city
from his home in the suburbs. His eyes and ears were both examined.
The mother did not receive any written report of the findings because the tests were not completed; and she was not very clear as
to the meaning of the terms used. She told us, however, that one
doctor had hinted that the case was that of imbecility.

When Rex came into the Clinic he ran at once to the toys
spread out on the table. He played well and demonstrated that
he heard and understood speech by bringing toys to the examiner
as they were called for. His gait and general movements were
well coordinated. His behavior was purposive and he played sen 
sibly. He poured imaginary liquid from the coffee pot into the
cup and drank it. He was particularly pleased with the toy automobile and the gaily colored whirligig. His immediate response
to the cricket and the way he heeded directions given in an ordinary
tone of voice when the examiner's lips were hidden from his view
was sufficient evidence that he hears. That he played well and was
able to follow directions augured that his lack of speech was not
due to amentia. This possibility was further explored by trying
his ability to do formboards. He was successful with the ThreeBlock Seguin Formboard. He completed the Witmer Formboard
with instructions, within the time limit. Even though his performance was inferior to ninety-nine per cent of boys at the six year
level, his solutions showed good coordination, fair discrimination
of form, and fair distribution of attention. He presented the
typical infantile reaction, treating the test as a game and patting
the blocks as he put them away. There was no anatomical defect
apparent. So far he seemed to be a normal child.

At this point, with the possibility of negativism left to account
for the lack of speech, Dr Twitmyer proposed to make the child say
the words that he was reported to have said on previous occasions.
This demonstration was left until the end for it was believed that
it would not be possible to reestablish rapport once his confidence
in the examiner was shaken. The mother's consent to rough treatment was asked. Then Dr Twitmyer picked the boy up from the
floor where he was sitting playing with the toys. He was carried to the table and sat upon it facing Dr Twitmyer. He was
told to say, "Daddy." This was the word, you remember, that he
had said a year ago. Rex behaved very much like a balky horse.
He sat and looked at the ogre that was confronting him with this
absurd demand. He said nothing. The other word which was
contained in his vocabulary at a more recent date was tried. Rex
was told to say "Bye-bye." There was no greater success. The
command was repeated and emphasized by taking the boy by the
arms and shaking him. The child began to yell. Tears did not
come, there were no sobs, but there was an emission of noise that increased in volume as the command to say "Bye-bye" was repeated.
Rex was held tightly by the arm, raised from the table and put
down upon it again with some degree of violence. He stiffened
his legs and made his body straight at the hips, yelling all the while.
It is obvious that this stiffening is not part of the act of sitting
down. Rex's intention was to slide out of the clutches of his torLACK OF SPEECH 159
mentor. As long as Dr Twitmyer was going to hold him uncomfortably, it was the child's intention to make it as difficult as possible. Again and again Dr Twitmyer had to raise the boy as he
slid from the table, and the result was that he had to be held in
mid air with his stiff little body pushed against the table. Rex
was howling all this time. At last the unsuccess was so apparent,
the noise so distressing and the effort of holding the child so inefficient that Dr Twitmyer released him. Rex went right back to his
toys on the floor and began to play just where he was before being
taken to the fray. He did not even go to his mother for sympathy.
He had been disturbed by this stranger who had forced himself upon
the child's consciousness and had made unpleasant demands. The
demands had not been yielded to. Rex had vanquished the offender,
the affair was over, he went back to play, that was all there was to
it.

It was then that his mother called him to her to wipe his face
which was dirty from the tears that he had squeezed out in the
course of his session with the enemy. In the bustle of leaving the
Clinic the handkerchief was dropped on the floor. Dr Twitmyer
caught sight of it and told Rex to pick it up. The boy paid no
attention to the request, but Dr Twitmyer was not to be so lightly
disregarded. Mere words, however, had no effect. The examiner
had to take the child's hand and make him stretch out to pick up
the handkerchief. Then his fingers were held so that Rex had to
grasp it and carry it to his mother who took it and put it away in
her bag. This was the first encounter that Dr Twitmyer had won,
but Rex was not through. While the doctors talked with his mother,
he hung on her knees, he pulled at her skirts, he grasped her arms,
he whined all the while and tried to catch hold of her handbag. At
last Dr Twitmyer told her to let him have the bag. He took it in
his hands, opened the clasp, and took out the handkerchief. Then he
turned and threw the thing on the floor. A breeze happened to catch
it and blow it on a chair. Rex went after it at once. He snatched
the handkerchief off the chair, and threw it this time so that it floated
to the floor, then he turned and glared his defiance at Dr Twitmyer. He had won again.
This was a demonstration of purposive opposition to discipline
that involved an intelligent and complicated plan. This was surely
not the working of an ament. He had demonstrated abundantly
his intelligence?that ability to solve a new problem. His behavior
was the result of scheming of a high order for a four year old.
His efficiency in carrying through his plot against the disciplining
force was good. In the first instance his noise was so distressing
and his rigid little body was so difficult to hold that Dr Twitmyer
had had to give up and acknowledge defeat. He learned quickly
the most efficient way of not doing what he did not like to do.
Later his mother was so annoyed and harrassed by his clinging to
her that she could not talk to the professors with any comfort or
peace until she had given him his own way and allowed him to open
her handbag. In considering this case in relation to Dr Witmer's
Universal Categories of Human Competency, we can say there is a
decided deficiency in conformity to the generally accepted pattern of
behavior of boys three and a half years of age. His outstanding nonconformity?his lack of speech?was the reason for his being brought
to the Clinic. Right through the attempt to discipline in simple and
reasonable demands, Rex showed himself to be entirely out of control. Furthermore, the purpose motivating his conduct was not of
the sort that is acceptable to society. In fact, it was purely in defiance of social observance. He did not do as he was told, because
he was told. This is Negativism. It has been said that every child
shows more or less negativism in the normal growth and unfolding
of individual personality. But when this tendency to oppose is so
strong that it is an impediment in the acquisition of language??
which is onej of the abilities that distinguishes the genus Homo
Sapiens?there is manifestly something so far wrong in the line of
motivation and direction of energies and abilities that the individual
may come to be looked upon as non-social, abnormal?an idiot in the
sense of living a life apart. He got what he wanted but the trouble
was that what he wanted was not the acceptable thing to society.
This child's mother had been told at the hospital that he was a kind
of imbecile. Yet his behavior could not be called either feeble or
lacking efficiency. He demonstrated the will to see a thing through
to the finish. He did not give up until he had successfully defied
authority. The mother had to be told again that if this child is
not brought to terms, is not trained to respond to discipline, he will
amount to a case for institutional placement. He will grow so far
out of hand that he cannot be allowed the freedom of the city. On
the other hand with this boy's intelligence, efficiency, energy, concentration, determination, and discrimination, if he could be given
the proper motivation he might be able to make a real contribution
to the world's work.

A study of this child's home throws more light on the situation.
It seems that the father met with an accident which has made him
blind in one eye. As a result he cannot earn enough money now to
support his family and the mother of the boy has taken a job in order
to keep up the family income. With both parents working all day,
the child is sent to live with his grandmother. He sees his parents
only for the week-ends. The mother explains rather pathetically
that she does not want to be correcting and disciplining her son all
the short time he is with her, lest he come to dislike her. So she lets
him do pretty much as he pleases. She admits that it is difficult
for her to manage him. At his grandmother's he is terribly spoiled
by a grandfather and an unmarried uncle about twenty-one years
old. The grandmother alone tries to control him. The picture is
easy to imagine. The grandmother tries to make Rex obey her in
some little thing. He raises a protest. The call for help reaches
the ears of grandfather or uncle, both of whom are very fond of
the boy. They interfere in the disciplining, and Rex is saved the
necessity of submitting to anyone's orders. It is obvious that this
vicious home situation just aggravates the naturally strong opposition to discipline. It is easy to see that the lack of speech is only
one phase of the problem. Up to this time, age three and a half, Rex
has not felt the necessity for spoken language. He gets immediate
attention and his desires are gratified whenever he sets up a howl.

Articulation would not only be unnecessary but difficult.

The next consideration in such a case is the problem of treatment. At present he is not feebleminded. His retardation in talking is within the range of normality. But he must be brought under
control effectively and immediately. He must not be given his way
in a single thing. He must be brought to the state where he does
as he is told because he is told to do it. The method Dr Twitmyer
recommends for achieving this end is "protoplasmic discomfort."
Soft words and coaxing may seem to work but they are not the
essence of discipline. This boy is too shrewd to be allowed to get
away with anything more. Before long, at the rate he is going now,
he will run the family out of the house. Spanking is as poor a
method as compromise or coaxing. Military discipline is the quickest
way to bring him around. He may exhaust the disciplinarian in
a few hours but he must be attacked at the moment when he himself
is worn out and there must be 110 relaxing of the rule. It will be a
long task and a hard one, but only when this boy is obedient will
he be rescued from imbecility.
