Recording Emotional Qualities
==============================

:Author: David L. MacKaye
Educational and Vocational Counselor, Tulare Union High School,
Tulare, California

The conceptions of intelligence which lie behind intelligence
testing in modern education make inevitable a "differentiated"
education, one which is cut and trimmed, or elaborated and expanded in conformity with the needs of the individual student.
The techniques of this differentiating education never quite
catch up with our growing convictions of the differences among
pupils. They are, apparently, even more different than we at
first believed. It is hard to draw a line between those differences
which matter and those which do not. It is hard to devise methods
of measuring the differences, to escape the use of general terms.
It is not helpful to say, "John is so different!" If it is worth
saying at all, we must state the differences as precisely as possible.
At the present time education does this only with reference to the
intelligence. Psychology supplies some precise ideas relating to
behavior and personality, but they are not yet in a form useful
to education.

Progressive schools are accustomed to segregate children into
three, four, or five groups on the basis of intelligence or achievement tests, but no one supposes that such a segregation makes possible a more detailed attention to all the degrees of capacity and
types of aptitude?in brief, to all the differences?which exist
among children.

It is now commonly recognized that the direction which intelligence takes is determined in part by certain inherent qualities
which we loosely group under the heads of "emotional traits" or
"volitional power" or even more loosely under the heads of "character" or "traits." These qualities determine whether our subject is to be advised to try Hollywood or a plumbing shop, as much
as does the intelligence quotient. We should have a measuring unit
for these qualities, or at least a carefully standardized vocabulary.
Here are the difficulties. Emotional qualities are not simply
composed, to be measured on a single scale, and individuals cannot
be classified according to such qualities on a relative standing list
with "high" and "low" groups. There is not a "high" or "low"
group type of emotion in the sense of favorable or unfavorable
as in intelligence. The child may be inclined to secrecy, or even
be unconscious of his own characteristics so that the point where
the measurement should commence is difficult to find.

There are difficulties on the mechanism side. The criterion
which education applies to a device of measurement is its applicability in a system dealing with masses. There may be individuality
of work but there must be mass accomplishment. Methods which
suggest themselves are the observation of overt behavior, and the
individual interview. The first infers a teaching staff with expert
training in psychology which is not yet available. The second is
limited in usefulness by the fact that the time which counselors
may give to individuals is too little for real results. It takes time
to get at the core of the individuality present, further time to disclose its details and counsel with the subject.
It is the purpose of this paper, however, to suggest that the
personal interview will remain the best available method, and to
examine some methods of disclosing the emotional qualities of
most consequence without an unduly long investigation.

The Composition as a Guide to Placement. No real counseling
may be done with a pupil who presents himself to the adviser for
the first time, and upon whose self-evaluation the adviser is dependent. It is at least supposed that the latter has secured intelligence or achievement test results, but these need interpretation
on the basis of other data. He should have some knowledge of the
social and school history of the pupil and his economic situation.
Even this leaves out the essential datum. The counselor must
somehow secure an insight into the qualities peculiar to the individual which exist apart from any aspect of his history or accomplishment; somehow this datum must be on the record before
the interview.

An experiment which has become fixed in the system in which
it was introduced, and which was intended to serve the specific
purpose of supplying this essential datum, consists solely of a composition set by the counselor and given in the classroom as work
in English. It remained as part of the counselor's record, and in
a majority of the cases it gave the leading direction to the interview between counselor and pupil. In this specific situation the
object was to prepare for registration in and adjustment to high
school and therefore involved only eight grades.

The title originally set was "My Favorite Day-Dream." Apparently all children did not have definite day-dreams. There
was later added, therefore, "The Dream that Bothers Me Most,"
and "The Dream Which I Remember Best." The pupil was given
his choice of the three. The composition was assigned without previous notice and in words prepared as in the instructions for an
intelligence test, so that conditions in that respect were the same
in all class-rooms. It was a feature of the system that the counselor
had time with each class throughout the year to talk on various
matters; it had not been difficult to introduce the day-dream as
one of these and the counselor and children shared the happy secret
that all people had day-dreams, more or less. The children understood that they were writing for the counselor and there was no
want of frankness in any except a few.

The following study of 244 of these papers, of which 127 are
from girls and 117 from boys was made to crystallize the general
results of this experiment. The composition justified its use as
an expedient in the estimation of the emotional quality of the child;
the conclusions arrived at and conditions discovered through its
use were prepared as a "case report" and supplied to the high
school teachers and advisers. As these papers accumulated those
dealing with them learned to detect characteristic responses which
marked "types." It is an unfortunate word; nevertheless, it was
possible to erect, roughly, classifications whose members could be
depended upon to react to experience in much the same way. More
than that, individuals similar in these respects but from different
elementary schools, often found each other out in high school and
formed social groups. From the start these qualities, and not the
quality of the intellect, determined the social affiliations of these
children. The following analysis deals with two things, the emotional qualities as they were disclosed in a general way by these
papers, and the relation between this quality and the type of thinking.

Sex Differences
----------------

In these papers there is a sharp distinction in the quality of
response between boys and girls, so that it is possible in nearly all
cases to supply the sex, were it not known. Yet there are some
similarities. For example, there are as many "animal dreams"
reported by boys as by girls, and a few of them are of the same
type, that is, the common "pursuit" dream. The boy differs only
in that he records that he turned and defeated the animal; the
girl never completes the incident. A series of eleven papers written
by boys shade by degrees from the "pursuit" type to a pure daydream of hunting and trapping.
The emotional responses among the girls differ in quality from
those of the boys. There is, for example, nothing among the boys
corresponding to the religious responses from girls, and where there
is a similarity, as between the girls' music group (Nos. 20 to 22
below) and the boy heroics group (Nos. 23 to 26), the greater
range of specific interest in favor of the boys is immediately noticeable.
It is certainly descriptive of the papers being studied here to
say that subjectivity is a dominant note among the girls and that its
appearance among the boys is an oddity worthy of special attention.
The most striking aspect of this difference is in the appearance of
the travel theme, which is almost universal among the girls and
unexpectedly insignificant among the boys. The diffuse travel idea
among the girls' reports of their day-dreams is only one illustration of the difference between the papers of the sexes. It affords
a pleasant and lady-like way of centering thought on self and is
introduced for its own sake; the day-dream of teaching, nursing
and other employment is incidental to the day-dream of traveling
on the fruits of this industry. This is a strong contrast with the
boys' day-dream of travel, for here it is nearly always a means to
an end. "I dream of going to Egypt to excavate the pyramids,"
says one. The adventure motive is the nearest approach to the
characteristic feminine response. "I like to think of going on a
voyage on board ship. The ship would sink and all would drown
except me."

Travel in day-dreams is so obviously here the girl's expedient
for dwelling mentally upon herself and the boy's expedient for developing a situation for himself to conquer, that Hall's conception
?f the desire to travel as the last development of curiosity is made
to appear unconvincing.

The boy always appears under the necessity of thinking of
things; there must be an object ahead for him to attain. Twentysix per cent of the boys' papers are of day-dreams of their future
work, while through the whole group employment is as diffusely
incidental as travel is in the girls' group.

Sex and Mental Life: It was hoped, when this experiment was
begun, that some clues would be secured to those children who serve
as the foci of unwholesome sex stimulation in many schools. This
did not materialize. The only conclusion worthy of note was that
mental life centering around sex was revealed among girls, when at
all, and not among boys, who were either more successful in concealing it or had other things to report where girls did not.
Notwithstanding the barrenness of the papers in such data
there were cases in which groups of two or three girls were disclosed
(by a comparison of their papers and further investigation suggested
by them) in which there was an unwholesome association founded
on sex interest. In another case a group of papers from a single
class were so uniformly colored by over-stimulated sex thought, that
investigation disclosed the whole group sharing in an unwholesome
social environment after school hours.

The abnormal side of sex life could scarcely be said to have
been revealed by these papers, although some papers contained statements which would be construed as such evidence by some schools
of psychology. Further investigation may indicate that such would
be the correct construction.

Data on Mentality from Compositions
--------------------------------------

There was no intention, when this experiment was started, of
deducing anything from the composition as to mentality. The
matter suggested itself after an accumulation of evidence that a
certain quality of response nearly always predicted a certain place
on a classification list made from intelligence and other tests. Later
it was learned that in some cases the counselor could prepare himself to deal with the mentality in question much better from a
composition than from the results of an intelligence test.
The simple expedient of arranging a series of these compositions in the relative order of their writers' places on such a classification list presented, on each occasion when it was tried, the fact
that there was a clearly indicated "stepping down" in refinement
of idea and coherency of its expression from the top to the bottom
composition. This gradation was not so sharply defined, naturally,
that classification lists could have been made from the papers alone
but it was quite possible to segregate the children from the papers
into high, low and median groups. Ordinarily this amount of
segregation is all that is necessary.

The characteristics of these groups may be briefly described
and illustrated. The full flavor of the distinctions between them
could only be obtained from a larger number of illustrations than
space allows but as far as possible typical selections have been
made.1

High Type Group: Imagination. Imagination is not lacking
from the low type group, but is rarely present in the papers of
the median group. Its best expression, however, is the characteristic of the high type group, just as an extremely emotional response
if typical of the low group. Indeed, we are probably dealing with
.the same thing in both, refined by intelligence in one case and not
in the other. The stabilizing effect of what we call "intelligence"
on the inner life of the child would make an interesting field of
study. There must be, of course, the inner life and we can say it
is made up of the child's "compounded potentialities."
Nos. 4 and 5 below are from girls and No. 6 is from a boy.
(4) In my dreams one night I dreamed that I had taken a trip to the
moon to see the queer people that I heard so much about. I went up
in a whirlwind which carried me very swiftly. When I reached the moon I
found to my surprise that the people were about eight feet tall and were
so thin they looked like beanpoles.

(5) One night when I woke up the room was dark, the moon was shining. 1 looked at the little rocking chair where I had laid my clothes and behold, the image of a little girl was sitting there, holding my doll. The rest
of the night I could not sleep because I was afraid she had taken my doll.
(6) I am going to work in the field because I like to work with horses
where the air is nice and cool early in the morning, where the birds are
singing from morning till night in the fields of the farmers. There the
birds make anyone feel happy.

No. 6 is from a Portuguese boy much retarded in school because of language difficulties and with a low score in a mental test,
perhaps for the same reason, but with an excellent sense of values
and great adaptability to practical situations. This paper could
be duplicated in several papers from American boys scoring high in
1 Two factors appear in compositions of this type which, when casually
observed, seem to detract from the value here ascribed to them. In the
first place the children mix up day-dreams and real dreams; it is hard to
tell which they are reporting. In fact, however, they prove to be presenting
material which correctly indexes their mental life and the slight evidence of
artificiality need not be noticed. It would be hard to see how they could
invent material which would not correctly index their mental habit and outlook, except in cases of deliberate concealment which can usually be detected.
The second difficulty is that most ideas come from an outside source originally,
aQd it is important to know what selections they are making for their daydream life.
mental tests. There are no papers from girls with this note. The
distinction between Nos. 4-5 and No. 6 seems to be a sex difference.
Median Type: Mediocrity. The members of this group write
short compositions with such a tendency towards matter-of-factness
that there is an obvious difficulty in writing a paper on "dreams."
Of the five children who turned in blank papers, four scored in the
median group and one in the low group. Apparently it is not the
group which indulges in day-dreams to any extent. The unembellished day-dream of a job marks the boy of the group and lack of
ideation the girl. The word "uninteresting" applies to all these
papers.

The following three illustrations are all complete papers. No.
7 is from a boy and Nos. 8 and 9 from girls.
(7) The dream I rememer best happened several weeks ago. This
dream was that I won a Moon car, six passenger and had my folks in it and
were going to Detroit. Here we stayed and bought us a new home and store
and made my way through college and was to be a doctor.
(8) One night I dreamed that it was my birthday. My father bought me
the prettiest blue dress and a green hat to go with the coat. I put it on for
the first time. I wore it to town and it was raining and got all soiled and
I never wore the hat and coat anymore.

(9) Sometimes I dream if I will get a passing grade on my paper and
examinations and think about my studies and then I think of the good
times I have at school and wonder what I do if it were not for school.
The next example is from a girl in the last quintile of the
classification list which, while it has the shortness characteristic of
the median group, has the peculiarity which distinguishes the low
group.

(10) Day after day I dream of writing songs and some times it seems
as if I were singing to a large group of people.

This girl failed in the freshman year and left school.
Low Group. Special Aids to Estimates of Mentality. This composition series gave an immediate insight into the mentality of the
pupils in the lower range of the classification, such as a bare IQ
would not provide. Until the psychologists give us a clearer idea of
the factors which accompany what we call "low intelligence," our
picture must necessarily be that of a mental structure equal in size
but less elaborated in detail than the higher intelligences. This is
undoubtedly too simple a picture. The differences do not seem to
be in the degree of elaboration in the structure, but in the quality
of the elaboration and this quality is better disclosed by the comRECORDING EMOTIONAL QUALITIES 241
position test than the intelligence test. The degree of ideation is
involved in this difference.
The degree of ideation is low in No. 11 and fair in No. 12.
Both illustrations are from boys with group IQ's under 70. No.
12 developed in the Freshman year into a fair student and has
completed his sophomore year with but little less grade in scholarship, but No. 11 failed in half of the subjects in the freshman year,
and has been placed on a special schedule of vocational work, at
which he is successful.

(11) One night I was studying the preamble as I went to bed and
thought that I would say it over before I went to sleep and then I slept a while,
it seemed to me, and then I went back to sleep after a while and I woke
up and I was saying the preamble so I went to sleep again and was not very
long till dad said it was time to get up so he came over and said '' hay get up
it's time to milk the cows," so before I got up I thought that I would say
the preamble again before I got up.2

(12) My favorite day-dream is a dream wanting to go to pismo on Motorcycle and bicycle. When we are to start we are to pull the bicycle without motorcycle. And when we get in the mountains we aim to have the ones
on the bicycle to pedal so we can get over the sands and dig clams. And
cook them on a campfire.

No. 13 is also from the last quintile of the classification list.
No intelligence test would reveal the actual quality of its writer,
who was a failure by the test of school work as given by a harassed
country teacher, but a dreamer and a poet and a personality to
cherish. The IQ would have alarmed the faculty which received
him, but the composition enlisted their best interest, which is
something to be said in favor of the method:

(13) I wonder if I would like to be the thing that I wounded to be for
thinking of the things I would like to do in my work. It will be
years to come and years to go before I will be a man to do the work that
I Would like to do. And it will be years of training before I can do the
work that I would like to do. For am studying the plains for what I half
to do in my work before those years to come and go. For when I'm a
man I wounded to look you straight in the face and also make success of
my work of aernnotical engineer.

Data on Emotional Qualities from Compositions
Emotional qualities appear in the papers from the upper and
lower groups and are consistently absent from the median group
Papers, so that the latter is set apart in still another particular.
"The young gentleman's preoccupation is due to the fact that it is
Necessary, in California, to pass a test on the U. S. Constitution to graduate
*roin the 8th grade. He passed.

The term emotion is being used here to indicate any affective response in which the personality is obviously more borrowed from
than an objective situation in writing this assignment. It would
seem that the objective situation is specifically ruled out by the
nature of the assignment, yet it is precisely this, translated into
day-dream form, which the median group usually reports upon.

For this reason these papers afford a valuable insight into vocational interest; that is, the median group and other papers in
which this emotional quality is missing indicate a group of matterof-fact children seriously interested in the thing they describe for
its own sake. In the other group the child is interested in the thing
for the sake of his present reaction to it. It is almost certainly
ruled out from serious consideration in counseling, as meeting in no
ways the child's permanent interest or aptitude.

In the illustrations below the papers with vocational interest
are presented first; those purely emotional last.

Teaching and Nursing. The largest group of "vocationalinterest" papers from the girls are those expressing a desire for
training as a teacher or a nurse. Since this study was commenced
it has been learned that the "teacher-ambition" is the most unreliable of those recorded, and yet it is strong enough to lead the girls
to register in high school for this type of work.

These papers are most illustrative of the general rule that
when an emotional quality appears its expression may be designed
to conceal the real mental life as often as to reveal it. It is a
useful point to bear in mind in conference because the child will
often maintain the same camouflaging attitude in registering unless
closely questioned. In No. 14 below, the writer, an Italian, confessed in conference that she positively disliked children. The writer
of No. 15 left school in the freshman year to marry, apparently her
object from the first.

(14) We all have day-dreams and sometimes in the future they become
true. I have had one which I hope will become true. Ever since I started
to school until up to the higher grades I am always thinking of becoming
a school teacher. As I am always dreaming of it during the day. It seems
to me to be a school teacher is a wonderful way of doing good towards the
community. I know it will take many years of study but when you have the
study you have it forever.
(15) My favorite day dream is planning how I shall finish grammar
school and high school. Then I want to go to college at Berkeley. I want to be
a music teacher or a school teacher and teach the first and second grades. I
want to earn my way through life. At the end of each month I want
to put some money in the bank. When I quit teaching I want to draw my
money out of the bank and go to France, England, Japan, China, Portugal,
South America and several other places. Then I want to come back and
teach school again, if I can get the first and second grades to teach.
The complete lack of altruistic motive in this group of papers
is illustrated by the following extracts, typical of some expression
in almost every composition in this series.

(16) At the end of each month I want to be able to put a little money
in the bank. When I have saved enough money I want to travel about
the world.

(17) Then I thought of a foolish little sentence which my mother had
said. She said: "she wanted all of her girls to be teachers so they could
have lots of silk dresses."

(18) I want to enjoy life and get everything out of it there is in it.
There are some examples of the same quality in papers of the
nursing type, but they are rare, and a much more genuine note is
struck which is borne out by following up the girl's history. No.
19 illustrates these.

(19) I am helping with a hard, tedious operation. I work many hours
overtime, losing sleep but toiling on to save the life of this tortured person. When at last, at the dawn of a new day, this operation has been finished and the patient will live I am very thankful for my position although
it require lots of strength, both physical and mental. For I have helped to
save the life of a person who is dear to someone. Or often I see
myself sitting in a little cot where a little babe is tossing about in delirium.
It has nearly been given up by the doctors but my gentle and patient care
and by my alert and steady watch for every change of fever or actions
the child has been saved from entering the gates of death before it has
accomplished its purpose in life. Oh, that precious little child! The heart
aud hopes of a mother! The pride and joy of a father has been restored
to them. My favorite day-dream is the saving of a life that is needed
somewhere by some one.''

Music and Art: Music is, without exception, coupled with a
strongly egoistic feeling and is the motive of a typical group in
which there is so little deviation that the following are sufficient to
illustrate it.

(20) My favorite day dream is that I am on the stage as a concert violinist. I always see myself in pink with silver beads. The stage is big
Wlth all different colored light shining. I usually always picture myself in
Europe in one of the great shows. I can see my name on the outside in
colored lights.

(21) As I sit day-dreaming I dream of being famous. I dream of playlng on a pipe-organ. I dream of being very beautifully dressed in silks and
Precious stones.

(22) One night I played at a public building. My piano was on a great
beautiful stage and my piano was trimmed in beautiful gold. I was greeted
by all the people.

Only three papers bring in the art interest. In these the egoistic
motive is not so strong and conference shows that some slight contact or doubtful skill has been responsible for supplying the material for the day-dream.
Heroics. In such a set of papers one expects to find those
from the boys in which the hero theme supplies the thought and
there are, of course, a great many such. They are of no value in
guidance and are quoted here because they are the only ones supplied from the masculine side which duplicates the egotism of the
girls' music group. Such extracts as these are more common, undoubtedly, in boys' day-dreaming than the number of recorded
cases indicate, but in a majority of cases the boys have had something more substantial to draw upon for their assignment.

(23) My favorite day dream is that I wished I was a great man and
had saved someone from dying or other things. Of all the cheer I would get
and I would become a very famous man.

(24) I expect to be setting at the table of some great Business and be
making new things such as a clock that will speak the time in a human
voice every half hour.

(25) I have dreamed time after time of how I would like to be a great
man like Lincoln or Washington.

(26) I would try to make things that would be good for children like
castor oil without a taste. I would try to make a pill that would be
good for every ailment from rheumatism to a toothache.

The writer of No. 26, it developed, came from a home constantly experimenting with patent medicines.
Religious Influences. One of the most important uses of these
compositions was the insight into home conditions which they frequently provided; useful, because they made it possible to deal
satisfactorily with parents who may not have been too sympathetic
with secondary education. Papers disclosing religious influences, of
which there were many, were of this type. The emotional elements
which are worked up into the religious attitudes are probably not
peculiar to the children who recorded them, but the form they take
is due to the influences to which the child has been exposed, a major
factor in the continuing adjustment of the pupil.

These compositions fall into two classes, showing respectively
balanced and unbalanced social attitudes. In the first case the
prognosis for further education should be positive and in the other
negative. In the first case, also, as illustrated in No. 27 (in which
the phrases which reveal the religious background are in italics),
the religious attitude is only the background for other thoughts.
No. 27 contrasts with No. 28, in which the home religious life
proved to be less than balanced.

(27) My big aim in life is to be a teacher, when I am older and farther
advanced. I like the study of books in which we learn more about the
world and different people. About the way other people live and their
personality. Of course I could gain this knowledge without being a teacher.
But when I have received the knowledge I would like to transfer it to others,
thus serving the public or humanity at large, and gaining still more knowledge than either books or study could give me through the contact and near
communion with other lives. Then maybe some day I can visit some foreign
land which I have studied about and learn still more. Sometimes I may be
sent to some foreign country on a missionary trip.

(28) I am interested in Music, Latin, Spanish, housework and teaching.
I am especially interested in teaching because I would like to be with children and teach them things about the Bible and win them for Christ that
they may be worth something in this world and go to heaven when they
?lie If I decided not to be a missionary I would be fitted for some
other useful life.

The following illustrations are from the conventional to the
extremely unbalanced.

(29) Once when I was sick I dreamed I went to school and my teacher
was the preachers' wife. We had bible study every morning and church
songs. The teacher had just been telling us about the Day of Beckoning when
it seemed that the whole world was on fire

(30) After the ship had been sent on its way they joined hands and
danced around a pot of magic mutton placed there since the passover when
they put blood on the post to tell if they bore loyalty to Christ which was
cherished much by the dwarfs.

(31) I am most interested in the Lord Jesus Christ, my Savior. I am interested in getting souls saved for Christ. I don't want to be left here when
He comes to claim his chosen bride and I don't want anyone left here during
that awful tribulation. I want to be a messenger for Christ and go out and
tell others about this loving Savior. I want others to be ready to meet the
Savior the same as I do and the rest of his followers. Although they make
fun of me I am going to live my life for Christ and be ready when
lie comes. I wont be able to get what I want in high school even if I go clear
through and then go to college. What will come from Christ through the
Holy Spirit.

Worries and Abnormalities. A comparatively large number of
Papers disclosed maladjustments to school, home or the play group,
?r supplied the clue which led to the discovery. These papers ranged
from exhibitions of chronic worry habits to obvious abnormalities
and in all cases were more valuable in the individual conference
than any other available data.

The following group is typical of a large number of girls
worrying unjustifiably about school work:

(32) The next morning I went to school with terror in my heart, dreading to receive my paper.
(33) The dream that bothers me most is that I am not going to pass
into high school. I am afraid the dream will come true because I dream of it
every once in a while.

The boy, however, has more definite situations in mind when he
worries, as well as at other times:

(34) The first day I went to high school (in his day-dream) everybody
picked on me. The first I failed in English which made me feel as cheap as
a penny. The next year I got all my studies and went out for football.
I made the team.

No. 35, written by an Italian boy, proved actually an expression of social isolation which might not have been detected otherwise :
(35) My favorite day-dream is to sit on a chair and just think how nice
it would be to have a bicycle and what fun I would have with it, to ride
around with the other boys. Then I stop and think and say: "I haven't
the money and can't buy it." So I just forget it and go off to play.
The following revealed the only case of abnormal fear recorded
in three years of observation:

(36) When it gets cloudy and the wind blows hard and it thunders and
lightnings it makes me nervice so that I can't do anything.
The deviation from normal is obvious in the following group
of illustrations, several out of many, and the contributing cause
is appended in parentheses. It would be difficult to maintain that
the school has no interest in such qualities as are disclosed here,
and an understanding of them on the part of the teachers may be
expected to prevent reactions against the children which otherwise
may occur. The number of responses of this type precludes many
quotations from them.

(37) Day and night I am bothered by this dream which I know is not
true. While in my sleep I have often thought that I could see the phantom
hovering over my head. An unshapen thing it is and very white and
large. At other times in the night I often see, as through a mist, long
white bony hands ready to grasp my throat. (This girl has become parRECORDING EMOTIONAL QUALITIES 247
tially deaf as the result of scarlet fever, has been thrown in on herself and
taken to reading much cheap literature.)

(38) At night when I went to bed I dreamed that the teacher had taken
me down to the basement to talk to me about one of the monitors writing
my name in a book. When I was down there I threw her against a electric
board and killed her. This was the most terrible dream I ever had. (From
a hard-working Portuguese girl who had come to this country when nine
years old and completed the eight grades in five years. Her educational
career has been a difficult one.)

(39) One night I dreampt I saw a skeleton with a red lantern come into
my room. I wanted to scream and think I would scare Doris or my brother
who was in the next room. (An association test brought out the sequence:
Red lantern?blood?Wayne. Wayne is the brother with whom she had
quarreled violently just prior to the time she had this dream, she says.)

Conclusions
------------

Measuring devices used at present by education are not adequate from the viewpoint of predicting the distribution of the children ultimately throughout the social structure; the intelligence
data alone is not sufficient for this purpose. Within the group
having the same range of intellect there will exist certain emotional qualities having a determining influence upon the child's
choices, something which must be taken in consideration when
planning with him for future training. Compositions written for
3- teacher or counselor in whom the children have confidence, and so
assigned that they will be required to reveal a glimpse of their own
day-dream life, will supply data on this emotional quality, as well
as other useful data in making adjustments with the school.
There seems to be a fairly adequate proof that children may be
satisfactorily arranged in groups according to probable mental efficiency on the composition data alone, but the principal aid to
counseling is in arranging those within the upper and lower mental
classifications into sub-groups according to the emotional emphasis
their personality.

The group rated as median in intelligence tests are indicated
by the compositions to lack this emotional quality, with a corresponding lack of imagination, and a matter-of-fact point of view.
The value of the vocational interest volunteered by the pupil
may usually be checked for validity by the association in which it
occurs in the composition.

There is an indication, frequently important, of the home background of thought and emotional experience which cannot always
be detected even by a visit to the home itself.

Added to case reports on the children, the data supplied to
the teachers, induces a sympathetic and personal treatment of the
pupil for which there would be no basis otherwise and the adjustment of the child is therefore further advanced. This applies
particularly to children in the low ranges of the mental classification list who need an extra "pull" over the discouraging spots
of training life.
