James Mentally Deficient and Socially Retarded
===============================================

.. meta::
    :Author:  Arthur Phillips
    :Keywords: James, intellectual disability, clinical case, social retardation
    :Description: Prepared by the possession of two notebooks and a reader for real work, James presented himself (on the opening day of summer school at the University of Pennsylvania, July, 1929) to the department of diagnostic education of the Psychological Clinic.


:Author: Arthur Phillips
:Role: Clinic Teacher
:Affiliation: The Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania

.. Attention::
    
    Prepared by the possession of two notebooks and a reader for real work, James presented himself (on the opening day of summer school at the University of Pennsylvania, July, 1929) to the department of diagnostic education of the Psychological Clinic.

Upon an uncritical observer, James would make a favorable impression. Although not of athletic proportions, he is fairly well
developed. His smile is animated; his interest in his surroundings,
keen; his contact with individuals, agreeable; his conversation,
ready. Even to a graduate student, he might appear as a hopeful
clinic teaching case.

This was not his first appearance at the Psychological Clinic,
nor did he come for his first period of clinic teaching. On November 20, 1926, when he was one month short of ten years of age, his
mother brought him to the clinic for mental examination. He had
been referred by the Superior of a parochial school. Her brief
note stated, 

    "James has been a pupil in our first grade. 
    His conduct has been good, and while he attends regularly, he does not grasp the matter taught. 
    I hope that you may be able to improve the boy's condition." 

At the time, however, James, was enrolled in an Orthogenic Backward Class of the Public Schools, to which he had
gone from the parochial school which he entered at the age of
seven. He was presumed to be doing second grade work. His
conduct at the public school is again described as good; his work,
poor.

James is the fourth son in an average Irish-American family.
Of the seven siblings, three died in infancy?one of gastroenteritis, another of meningitis, and a third of influenza. The oldest
brother, then 26 years old, had finished high school. He was a
road constructor. The second son, age 24 years, had finished the
eighth grade. He was a printer. The third son had completed the
third year in high school. He was doing engineering work. Then
comes James. His medical history states that his delivery at birth
was difficult. He was breast-fed for about six weeks. At eight
months, he had gastroenteritis. 

A nurse came from a nearby hospital every week from that time on for four years with professional services. James walked at two years and talked at four
years. Up to his fourth year, he used sign language exclusively.
The physician who attended him in his first illness warned the
parents to expect about two years retardation. Measles is the only
disease recorded thereafter. The attack was mild. Tonsils and
adenoids have been removed.

Besides the retardation in talking, the boy was slow in learning
to take care of himself. He was six years old before he could dress
himself. His conduct as a child was in every way conformed to his
mother's wishes. Pie was not hard to discipline, was always obedient, never had temper tantrums, and ate with good appetite all
that was set before him.

At his first appearance at the Psychological Clinic, he was
examined by Dr Edwin B. Twitmyer. On the Binet-Simon, he
obtained an I.Q. of 70, which placed him in the lowest decile of
ten-year-old children. His memory span, audito-vocal?five, is the
score made by 40 per cent of boys at the ten year level who are
below the median, and superior to 10 per cent. His visual span was
five, which is the score of the lowest decile.

An inspection of the Binet-Simon record booklet, shows that
his basal year was four. Of the starred tests at five years, he
missed only the third?aesthetic comparison; at the six year level, he
failed only the mutilated pictures test; at the seven year level,
only in copying the diamond, at the eight year level, only in counting 20-0.
On the Witmer Formboard, a test passed by 50 per cent of
four-year-old children, his performance on first and second trial
judged quantitatively was not as good as the median six-year-old
performance. The cylinders, a six-year-old test, he failed to solve
on first trial. In the second trial, his performance was wholly
trial and error. He showed little ability to profit by his mistakes,
and unintelligently removed blocks correctly placed. His time was
280 seconds on this trial, not as good as the average six-year-old
time. Poor discriminating ability and low power of analysis were
shown. During the examination, his conversation revealed an infantile intellectual organization. No high degree of motivation was
displayed. His social conformity, ready smile, and pleasing manners were remarked. Although in the second grade, he showed no
proficiency in reading, writing and arithmetic.

Dr Twitmyer recommended an eye examination and a period
of clinic teaching to determine the limit of his educability. At the
close of the six weeks period of teaching, the results were summarized as follows: "James has a very low degree of trainability.
He learns the simplest things only after constant repetition. His
educability also is low. He is unable to grasp new ideas and associate them with material already familiar. He will probably
not be able to get beyond the second or third grade in school. With
careful individual teaching, he may be brought to read enough
to get along in the world."

James reentered the parochial school in January, 1929, in the
second grade, and there he remained, and there he was at the end
of the school year, 1929. His mother brought him to the summer
school with the urgent request that he be given help in reading
and arithmetic. He was assigned as teacher, a graduate student,
and was taught for an hour a day for five weeks. His teacher was
enrolled for the course in Clinical Field Work, Educational Guidance, conducted by Dr Lightner Witmer, under whose supervision
the clinic teaching is carried on at the University of Pennsylvania.
For purposes of comparison, James, was given another mental
examination. His I.Q. was found to be 59, a loss of 11 points.
His mental age was 7 years and six months, a gain of only six
months in two years and nine months time. His basal year changed
from the fourth to the sixth inasmuch as he had learned to distinguish a pretty face from an ugly face, and to note what was
missing in a mutilated face or body. At the seven year level, he
drew a passable diamond but contented himself with mere enumeration in the pictures?a test for which he received credit in the former
examination. He had not learned to count from 20-0 at the eight
year level. At the nine year level he had two credits?date and
months. At the ten year level, he scored through an increase in his
vocabulary, rating 30 as compared with 20 in 1926.

His auditory span had not changed. It was 5. His visual, 6, had
increased one. He gave a reverse of 2, with 3 on second trial with
the same series, which ranks him in the lowest decile of ten-yearolds. His time on the Witmer Formboard showed some improvement,
but did not change his decile rating. He used but one hand in this
test and showed only fair discrimination. His intelligence was
not adequate for a successful solution of the Witmer Cylinders on
first trial. With minimum instruction, he solved the problem in
typical trial and error fashion. Qualitatively, his performance was
somewhat better as no unintelligent behavior was noted. His performance on the second trial was at least 25 per cent better than
JAMES 189

in 1926, but not much better than the median six-year-old performance.
A comparison of the tests made in 1926 and 1929, thus shows
the meagerness of the gains that James had made. His retardation
had become accentuated as he had grown older. His mental age
and chronological age had increased in the ratio of 1:5. Analytically considered, the Binet-Simon shows some little advance. Aesthetic judgment has appeared, as well as "perceptual familiarity"
with the human face and form. His vocabulary has increased ten
points. His temporal orientation has improved. Beyond this, the
Binet tells us only that he can copy a diamond?and that not too
well. In the Formboards, there has been quantitatively and qualitatively some improvement. By the Binet, his performance level is
that indicated by an I.Q. of about 60, and a mental age of seven
years and six months. On the performance tests, his rating is hardly
superior to that of the median six-year-old child. His reverse
memory span which is especially diagnostic of intellectual capacity
and ability to make progress in school correlates closely with his
performance on the Formboards.

For further analysis of James' competency, an attempt was
made to teach him reading and arithmetic. In reading, a second
reader was chosen as presenting a problem difficult for this boy of
nearly thirteen years. His rate of reading proved slow as there
were many words which he did not know. In learning a new word,
phonic analysis was used to help him work out the parts of the
word. He knew the sounds of the letters, although he frequently
made many mistakes and could not discriminate between the long
and short vowels. "When the sounds of the letters were known and
correctly given, he could not synthetize the integral parts to form
a syllable or word. This pointed to a defect of associability, already
indicated by his specific memory span deficit. At this point the
difficulty was in the field of audition. He had correct auditory
images of letter or syllable sounds but failed to combine them to
form a more complex unit.

Visual imagery was next exploited. Words were presented
to James either on paper or on the blackboard divided into syllables
or parts; e.g., in vit ed. Each part would be recognized, and pronounced correctly, but James was never able to bring the parts
together to form a single word. When the syllables were sounded
for him closely enough together to approximate the sound of the
whole word, he achieved his only success. Repeated attempts to
get James to bring the sounds closer together by degrees resulted
in failure. After several attempts James would come out with
some such expression as this, "Honest, I don't know. You tell me."
The learning process was further impeded by defects in the
fields of attention and retention. In distractability, James is at
the top of the scale and, by the same token, in attention very near
the bottom. If interest in one's surroundings is a good thing, James
has such an excess of this quality, that it amounts to a positive defect.
If anyone entered the classroom during his lesson, James' immediate
concern was to find out who he was, why he came, what he was doing.
Often in the middle of reading a sentence, he would blurt out a
question such as these?"I'm a good boy, huh?" "Will you give
me your pencil?" "Where did you get your beads'?" "What
time is it?" In retention, his rating is equally low. When a new
word is drilled in, it does not stay long. Half a page away, it has
an entirely strange appearance to James. He learned proud in one
line. He could not read proudly in the next line.

His reading comprehension is of the same grade as his rate
of reading. Two pages an hour was about James' limit. What he
derives from his reading approaches the zero point. An illustration
or two will suffice. He read the sentence, "A bottle is empty when
it has in it.", the blank space to be filled in by either
"something" or "nothing." James chose "something." Again
he read, "A tree grows on the .", the space to be filled in
by "land" or "ocean." James selected "ocean." Any word at
all would have done as his usual method of reading indicates. He
would read along until he came to an unfamiliar word, guess at
it, making the substitution whether it was meaningful or not, and
then go on reading.

With arithmetic, the defects, so far enumerated, were combined
with the total absence of the concept of numbers. A unit means
nothing to James. In the Binet-Simon, at the eight-year level, he
failed in counting backwards from 20-0 after receiving help from
the examiner, who started him off with "20, 19, 18?now go ahead."
With such a handicap, it was especially difficult to make any progress
in either addition or subtraction. His arithmetic achievement consists in adding one to another digit, and in combining two like
numbers. Combinations such as 5 and 6, 3 and 4, 5 and 2, he had
not mastered at the end of the clinic teaching period of five weeks.
Ocassionally it appeared as if a particular number combination had
been drilled in, but his retention was so poor that there was no
assurance of his giving the correct answer a half an hour later.
James has been attending school five years. During that period
he has acquired a low second grade proficiency in spelling and writing, a first grade proficiency in reading, and not even first grade proficiency in arithmetic. He is not educable enough to learn any
method of analyzing new words, although he can be trained to recognize a few more words that he now knows. In arithmetic, he has
not sufficient trainability to learn the fundamental processes, nor
intelligence sufficient to apply them to the simplest mathematical
problems. He will never be able to make change readily, nor to
conduct his own affairs. He will always need supervision and direction and will never be mentally independent.
Socially, he has the orientation of a boy of ten. His conversation and actions are slightly infantile, but he is amenable, obedient,
co-operative. He presents no problem of discipline either at home
or at school.

The diagnosis of Dr Twitmyer as expressed in the summary of
1926 has been completely justified. With orthogenic individual instruction, during the past three years instead of the classroom instruction, he probably would have obtained a grade higher in proficiency in the three R's. However, what this boy needed was training in the manual arts. There are a number of useful arts in which a
boy with the competency rating of an eight-year-old might be trained.
He would probably never be able to learn anything well, but he could
learn to do several things with a degree of efficiency that would
enable him to make some contribution to society and be worth his
"board and keep."

The very qualities that appear like assets now, his amiability,
amenability, may prove his undoing once the discipline and guiding
hand of a devoted mother are removed. He has sufficient mentality
to know what other people consider to be right and wrong, but not
sufficient to make any independent moral decisions. His malleability will make him responsive to the influence of his surroundings.
The prognosis in this case depends 011 the kind of training James
receives in the next few years. A long apprenticeship in simple
manual occupations would be required to fit him for a place in the
world. He will always need guidance and protection to keep him
from becoming the dupe of the designing and the prey of the unscrupulous.
