Studies in Diagnostic Teaching Parker
======================================

:Author: Samuel Lipshutz and Lorraine L. McNally, Clinic Teacher,
University of Pennsylvania

Parker is a victim of disordered control, a small victim and a
pathetic victim. His disorder is so great that his distractibility is
at the top of the scale, and his attention somewhere near the bottom. He can neither sit still, nor concentrate, nor do any one
thing for even a short space of time?a much shorter space than
the word concentration implies.

His mother insists his trouble is due to a fall. She adds the
fact that about the time of the fall he had a touch of sleeping
sickness. No final diagnosis has yet been made, but, on the basis
of probabilities, the fall has most likely had less to do with his
present state than the encephalitis. And we have corroborative
evidence in the nature of his behavior to class him as a postencephalitic.
Parker gives the impression of abnormality on first appearance. He is short for his age, and underweight. He is stocky,
dark in complexion, and has dark hair. Throughout all his displays of interest, temper, apathy, and enthusiasm, his facial expression changes little, remaining almost fixed?a postencephalitic
characteristic. He is exceedingly active. When his mother brought
him to the clinic, she reported that he could not sit still for a minute,
and that if he did, he feel asleep in his chair. In view of his
unemotional appearance, his activity strikes the observer as being
almost febrile, and the general impression of even a slight observation is always disquieting.
Before proceeding upon a discussion of more specific details of
his behavior and lack of progress, it might be well to dispose of
the matter of preliminary information. Parker was born on September 13, 1915, and his age is, therefore, thirteen years and four
months. He was brought to the clinic by his mother and an aunt,
referred by the family physician, because of nervousness. His
father, a steamfitter, died a few months ago, and the family is in
poor circumstances. The father had been in good health before
his death and the health of his wife was given as excellent. Parker
was in the 6th Grade, with conduct reported as fair, and work as
also fair. We have found both these statements are slight exaggera270 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
tions. His work might better have been described as poor, and his
conduct as atrocious.

He had no significant medical history, beyond the obvious encephalitis, having had the usual children's diseases. He walked at
fourteen months, talked at twelve, and was clean at two years,
which performance is normal. The present health is described as
poor. He has three sisters and one brother, all younger. Since
the age of seven?the age of the fall and of the sleeping sickness
?he has been very stubborn; has had auditory hallucinations at
night, and has not played well with other boys.

To complete this thumbnail physico-psychological sketch, he
did the Witmer Cylinders first in 53 seconds, and, second, in 67
seconds. I may say here that this inferior second performance is a
great characteristic of all Parker's work. He has a visual memory
span of 9, and an auditory memory span of 7. The results on the
Dearborn Formboard corroborated these as did the Binet-Simon,
which gave him an IQ of 77, or, with a chronological age of twelve
years and eleven months, a mental age of an even ten years. Of
this Binet result I will speak later.

We have now, some definite picture of Parker, both psychologically and physically. On the structure of these figures must be
placed the individuating characteristics?those tilings which make
Parker precisely what he is, and which prevent him from being
considered as anything but a case of inferior control, coupled with
emotional deficiency. A more or less detailed description of
what he does, says, and is seems to be the only logical procedure.
The first time I saw him he entered the room with a dim smile
?he always has a dim smile at the commencement of hostilities
*?and sat down in the chair I indicated. In a moment he was up
and rambling about the room. He wanted to operate a typewriter
on a nearby desk, and was on the point of going off into a tantrum
when I refused to let him do so. He noticed a bookcase, and he went
to it and removed an armful of books, mostly primers. He
put these on the table, and without noticing me in the least, began
to turn pages quickly, looking at the pictures, but never changing
his expression in the slightest. I took the books away and drew him
into a conversation. In a few moments he indicated that he wanted
to be an aviator; that an uncle was going to take him to China;
that he liked school and his teacher, but didn't feel like doing any
work, and that he was going to quit school and get a job. He
spoke steadily, in an undertone (which he never raised in all my
knowledge of him). He contradicted himself shamelessly, and went
blithely ahead, piling improbabilities upon improbabilities, and giving any answer to any question. I do not mean to indicate that
he lied consciously?he did not. But he romanced; he saw himself
in glamorous situations; and he was a great victim of wishful
thinking. We spent the entire first hour in desultory conversation of a cross-examining sort: at the end of the hour I had a
pretty fair notion of what to expect. The second was no disappointment. Parker was always ready to talk; always ready to look
at pictures; always ready to jump around and take things apart?
but never ready to do any work. When work was suggested, or
when a question he did not like was put to him, he would sulk.
This sulk was one of the most complete I have ever seen. His
head would go down on his chest, he would start to cry, his face
would turn red, and his mouth would quiver open.

To illustrate his behavior in these sulks, only one sample need
be given. I asked him why lie did not do better work in school.
At once his head dropped to his chest?he was through. I repeated the question?he started to cry. I said: "Parker, don't
you want to answer me?" and the sobs grew greater. He said
something about not liking this place. He would answer no question, respond to no persuasion, but remained in his position. I
did then what I was to find worked later in similar situations. I
took a Witmer Cylinder Test and started to put the cylinders
in the holes, without paying any attention to him. Purposely I put
them in wrong. I seemed to be struggling with the difficulty of
doing the board. Finally, after I had two-thirds of the cylinders
in the wrong holes, I said, expansively, '' There!'and put the
board on the table in triumph. It was more than the boy could
stand. He snatched the board away from me and re-arranged the
cylinders. After that he remained amenable to reason.

We passed about two weeks in coming to know each other before I dared suggest any work to him. And when I did he had
the greatest morning of his career. I took out a book he had
always shown interest in?it must always be remembered that his
greatest joy in life is to turn pages meaninglessly and endlessly
?and asked him to read a paragraph on the habits of the ants.
He had seemed interested in the illustrations, and so I had chosen
that particular section of the book. He refused, flatly. I asked
him if he knew why he had come to the clinic. He said no. I
told him he had come to study?to learn, and that I was going to
help him. Again I asked him to read. He sulked?refusing to
answer. I felt that if I worked the cylinder trick again, we might
go on thus endlessly, and so I said, sternly, "Parker, you are going
to read!" He said, "You're not my boss. This is a free country."
The fact that it was a free country was always his battle-cry. He
started to leave the room. I pushed him down into his chair again.
He struggled. His face flooded with red, and lie snarled. I sat
back, wondering how long it would take him to decide to leave.
He got up, and waited to see if I would chase him. As I did not
he walked out. He left the building, and I pursued him, with the
help of one of the clinical assistants. We caught him about a
block distant. He picked up a rock and threatened to throw it,
but did not. Once we were certain he knew the way home, we
let him go, realizing that the morning was over.

And at the next hour he was back, with the same faint smile,
precisely as if nothing at all had happened. This, I think, is
characteristic of his abnormality. No normal boy would have returned. If he had returned, he would have returned with an
apology, or with a sheepish look. But Parker was quite placidly
happy, as ever.

It was then, hesitantly, that I started to give him the proficiency tests. I found?to my everlasting surprise?that he had
sixth grade proficiency in almost all subjects?and certainly in
arithmetic and spelling. But, as he said, in school he did not feel
like working. And that was that?perhaps a disorder in motivation as well as a disorder in control.
It was when I began to ask him what work he would like to
do that he really started to accomplish something in his hours at
the clinic. He indicated a preference for arithmetic, and said
that his school work was in decimals. We worked in decimals.
His concentration was not great, but it seemed, surprisingly, to
grow as the days passed. He learned arithmetic easily, acquired
new processes without trouble, and was very good at the basic
operations?the fundamentals. These results led me to doubt a
little his extreme deficiency as indicated by the Binet-Simon, and
made me interpret them in the light of his usual unwillingness to
perform. It is my belief?unfortunately there was never the opportunity to demonstrate it?that he would score from five to ten
points higher if he took the test with an examiner he had grown
to know and trust.

After a few weeks of the arithmetic he had had enough. I
tried him again on reading. He refused to read aloud. I believe
I have enough evidence, in respect to this matter of reading aloud,
to say that he must have been made ridiculous in reading before
a class to such an extent that he has developed a phobia on the
subject. Since he refused to read for me under any circumstances,
I made him promise to practice at home, before a mirror, if only
for five minutes during the day. He promised, but he was an easy
promiser, and never attempted to carry out his word.

It was obvious that teaching would do him no good. Leaving
school and going to work would do him less good. Distractible,
uninterested in the matter in hand, over-active, full of repressions
and minor phobias, he was as unsuitcd to the workaday world as
to the world of school. That he will get a job is inconceivable; that
he could hold one if he got it is even more improbable. Left to
himself at the clinic he would run around halls, take anything apart
he could lay his hands on, ring bells to make noise, waylay students
and aimlessly ask them for tickets to the football games. After
the hour in the clinic, he would never return to the school for the
rest of the day. He has a chip on his shoulder against the whole
world, and he has no apparatus for accomplishing something by
fighting the world. He refuses to be made to do anything; he
refuses to do anything; he refuses to be made to talk about his
defects. All of this is in -the line of the recognized postencephalitic
characteristics; that he will ever recover or progress very far is
highly improbable. The best thing for him, it would seem, would
be to be taken from the city, and farmed out somewhere, far enough
away from machinery not to hurt himself, and given enough work to
make him grow stronger physically. Provided he would stay on
the farm, and provided he would do the work, and provided he
would not find some ingenious way of hurting himself, good might
be accomplished. But it needs more than two hours a week of
clinic teaching. Were his family in better circumstances a full-time
tutor might be hired, and results might be obtained. But that is
out of the question. As a matter of fact, his mother looks forward
to his financial aid, not yet having reconciled herself to the fact
that he will always be more of a liability than an asset. That his future can in any way be made brighter, is I think, doubtful. Parker
is a human won't, full of aggravations against the world, determined that no one will boss him, physically inadequate to the struggle for existence on his own, and temperamentally unable to control
his actions.
