The Correspondence of School Achievement and Industrial Efficiency with Mental Age as Obtained by the Stanford-Binet
=====================================================================================================================

:Author: Catherine E. Chipman, Psychologist
Walter E. Fernald State School, Waverley, Massachusetts
Iii spite of our conviction that Mental Age and I.Q. are
a reliable indication of capability in school work, it must be
admitted that the measure is not infallible. We have within the
school a certain number of individuals whose actual achievement in
academic subjects does not equal our expectation, and this studywas undertaken in an attempt to determine the special abilities and
disabilities of this group as shown on the Stanford-Binet. As a preliminary investigation, a case study was made of two boys of the
same chronological age who, at the time of admission, had the same
mental age and I.Q. One of these boys was doing all the school
work of which we would judge him capable, while the other failed
to equal his mental age in any subject.

Leo, the more aggressive of the pair, is of average height and
weight with an expression on his heavy set face which gives him the
appearance of a potential trouble-maker. He walked and talked at
the usual time, had measles, mumps and in fact was not considered
peculiar by his family until he was of school age. Except for the
fact that he is left-handed, the physical history contains nothing
significant, but heredity and social reactions show a very different
state of affairs. Leo's paternal grandmother is a patient in the
Grafton State Hospital, his maternal grandfather was a chronic
alcoholic, his father notoriously sexually promiscuous, and there
are three mentally defective sisters at home. This home so-called,
is in an outlying section of the city, known as "Forky Pasture,
and consists of a tumbled-down house of three rooms with a ladder
leading to the unpartitioned attic where the nine members of the
family sleep. The father being away from home the greater part
of the time, Leo had free rein for his aggressiveness which he manifested in tormenting the children at home and in school. In the
face of this heredity and environment, it is not surprising that the
boy is described as "disobedient, resentful of authority, quarrelsome, stubborn, impulsive and unstable." He has continued in this
anti-social behavior since his admission to the institution, for the
physician and head teacher report that he is troublesome in class,
unreliable and a leader in mischief of all sorts.

Considering this background and character, the a priori judgment would be that this individual's school work would be on a
lower level than his mental age, but before discussing his actual
attainment, let us take up the case of James, the other member of
the pair.

James is a timid lad, slightly underweight and underheight, social by nature, always ready to follow the more dominant Leo, and
easily amenable to institutional discipline. His family history, while
not entirely negative, is far better than Leo's, containing as it does
only a rather abusive alcoholic father and a younger brother suffering from a tubercular spine. The home conditions in this case are
vaguely described as "very poor," with the addition of the information that the father intimidated James so that he dared not
"express himself." This raises the question of a possible shut-in
personality, but the probability is belied by the boy's bearing and
attitude. James is characterized upon admission as "well behaved
and obedient though rather talkative" and during the year he has
been in the school there has been no change in this attitude or behavior. His practical knowledge is good, he is amenable to discipline, popular with the boys of his own age and generally content.
On the basis of this history, one would expect James to be the type
of boy who works up to capacity in school work.

As a matter of fact, the opposite is true. James with mental
age 6-10 does first grade work in writing only, i.e., he can copy
single letters and figures. Leo, with the same mental capacity,
measured objectively, does first grade work in all subjects, he reads
simple sentences, counts by l's, 2's and 5's and knows simple
number combinations, spells man, book, sing and knows the use of
a capital letter and complete sentence.

This is a case in which mere statement of fact is of little value,
the difference in attainment is self-evident; the constructive course
is the investigation of possible causative factors. Prom the study
of these two cases, heredity seems ruled out, the boy with the exceedingly bad family history fulfills all our expectations; environment apparently has no bearing on the matter, and social adaptability is in inverse ratio to school success. The difference in actual
mental make-up which is not patent in the statement of mental
age may be the solution of the problem. It is another example of
the faulty diagnostic power of the Stanford-Binet in differentiating mental types; there is no indication of special abilities and disabilities, and detailed study of the examination itself is the only
method of discovering them.

Inspection of the psychometric test of these two boys shows
that both have a basal year of five with credits running up through
eight years giving them an equal range of success. The distribution
differs. Leo, whose school work equals his mental age succeeds on
those tests adjudged difficult for defectives, while James passes
those considered easy for them. In other words, James shows the
facility in the use of language characteristic of defectives in general, while Leo demonstrates a fundamental ability in conception of
numerical and spatial relationships. He succeeds in copying a
diamond, counting accurately and repeating a series of digits, but
fails the tests of vocabulary and descriptive ability passed easily by
James.

The conclusions to be drawn from this are alternative, either
the Stanford gives the verbalist a semblance of mental capacity
which he does not possess or else school achievement has little relation to native ability.
With this as a preliminary, the records of the school department were studied for the purpose of singling out those cases in
which school work does not equal mental age. The basis for this
selection was a difference of two years or more between M.A. and
actual accomplishment in at least two of the following subjects,
arithmetic, reading, spelling. Geography and writing were arbitrarily ruled out, due to the slighter emphasis placed upon them
in the institutional school system. There were 37 such cases, 30
boys and 7 girls, an unselected group comprising all those cases
which fulfill the conditions stated above. The Mental Ages range
from 7-0 to 11-4 and the I.Q.'s from 50 to 77. A second selection
was made to secure a control group of those whose school work was
on a level with their mental age. These cases were chosen arbitrarily so that for every member of the original group, there should be
an individual of corresponding M.A. and I.Q. whose school work is
satisfactory. The range of M.A. and I.Q. in this control group
coincides with that of the original, so the same scattering of success
is obtained?each group contains 12 cases with a basal year of 6 and
10 which show at least three months' credit at the twelve year
level.

Even with these precautions the groups are not directly com24 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC
parable, for the sources of error cannot be ruled out no matter how
sensible one may be of them. The personal element has a double
weight in this case, for the psychological and pedagogical tests have
been given by different examiners. In addition, varying degrees of
effectiveness in instruction, the presence of at last seven children
with special reading disability, unequal periods of training in the
institution and the absolute impossibility of determining the
amount of effort given by the children to mastering academic subjects all aid in the destruction of the homogeneity of the group.
The tests composing the Stanford-Binet from six years through
fourteen were tabulated, and the percentages of success and failure
within each group were figured for the tests individually. A discrepancy of less than 10 per cent between the original group and
the control was not considered a significant difference. Proceeding on this plan, study of the figures shows that the group failing
in school work fail the following tests more frequently than do
those who equal expectation on the basis of Mental Age.

Per cent Failed
Test Group A Control
VII-1 No. of fingers 15 0
VII-6 Copying diamond 20 4
YIII-2 Counting backward 45 26
VIII-5 Definitions (superior to use) 30 20
IX-1 Date 49 24
X-4 Eeading and report 81 67
XII-6 Repeating digits backward 90 78

These tests may be divided into two classes (omitting the question of "reading and recall" which is automatically ruled out by
the presence of non-readers), those which require associative memory and those dependent upon observation. To the first category belong counting and repeating digits backward, and definitions in
terms superior to use; and to the second, number of fingers, the
date, and copying a diamond. This list corresponds very closely to
Doll's selection of tests difficult for the feebleminded.

If these individuals failing to accomplish school work are unable to answer these questions, the natural inference is that their
credits are gained on the easier tests. The tests passed most frequently by the atypical group are as follows:

Per cent Passed
Test Group A Control
VII-3 Digits repeated forward 70 60
VII-5 Differences (simple) 100 90
VHI-1 Ball and field (inferior plan) 80 40
VIII-6 Vocabulary ^0 50
IX-3 Making Change ^4 24
"VIII-4 and X-5 Comprehension ^0 15

Inspection of this table indicates the greater proportion of successes
are in those tests dependent upon rote memory; facility in the use
of language, and ability to deal with a simple concrete situation.

This corroborates the findings of the preliminary study and
although the number of cases concerned is too small to warrant any
sweeping conclusion, it seems a concrete example of the criticism so
often directed against the Stanford-Binet, that it places too high a
premium upon mere language facility. This does not mean the
precise and accurate choice of words which is altogether admirable,
but the vague and inconsequential flow of language which often
covers a real ignorance of the essential fact.

The situation has an analogy in much college under-graduate
work. The judicious use of catch phrases and theories repeated
parrot fashion often results in a finished product far more impressive to the cursory glance than the awkwardly expressed out-come
of independent thought. Similarly, a defective with a mental age
of nine, may receive credit for a twelve year vocabulary, but if he
belongs to the group which does not succeed in school work, there
is a strong probability that the responses are of inferior quality
and the sum of real knowledge small.

This lack of correspondence between mental age by the Stanford-Binet and school achievement, even in the small group under
consideration, acquires real significance when their industrial and
social adequacy is compared with that of those individuals whose
academic work fulfills expectations. To this end the thirty-seven
cases of the study group were investigated from the point of view
of the etiology of the defect, social reactions as shown by conduct
before and since admission to the institution, and industrial efficiency as reported by the manual training department. It was hoped
that the comparison of this data with the results of a similar investigation conducted on the control group would throw some light on
the relative reliability of the psychometric test and school achievement as basis for prediction of social adaptability and industrial
efficiency.

Survey of the recorded cause of defect proved most inconclusive. Study and control groups contained equal numbers of intemperate or mentally irresponsible parents, and undesirable home conditions. Heredity and social background seem to have no direct
connection with the discrepancy between apparent ability and actual attainment.
The records of conduct before admission, being compiled from
the testimony of people ranging from trained social workers to almost illiterate parents, were very meagre and not directly comparable. In spite of this, some significant differences between the
groups do appear. Of those whose school work is markedly below
apparent mental ability, nearly 50 per cent have a history of dishonesty and untruthfulness serious enough to cause comment, as opposed to 20 per cent of the group who equal expectation. A similar
ratio is present in regard to stealing, 30 per cent of the study
group and 11 per cent of the control show this failing. The incidence of sex offences shows a positive correlation with failure in
school, 22 per cent compared to 6 per cent. The significance of this
is somewhat mitigated by the fact that the term covers various
manifestations of an undesirable reaction ranging from undue
interest in sexual matters to actual perversion. The presence of
destructive tendencies, also, is of interest on a comparative basis.
Nineteen per cent of the original group and 6 per cent of the
control are charged with this delinquency.

The conclusion to be drawn from these facts is purely descriptive. Those individuals whose academic work is unsatisfactory are
inclined to be asocial in their general reaction, i.e., they are unreliable, destructive, and what is vaguely termed "immoral." In addition, there is a strong probability that this group is more stubborn and disobedient, more resentful of authority and disagreeable
in disposition as well as more seclusive than the group which presents no academic problem. This is inconclusive, however, for the
argument moves into a vicious circle. Is the child failing in school
work because he is stubborn, disobedient and so forth, or is he exhibiting these traits as a defense against the humiliation he feels
at his inability to accomplish as much as his fellows'?

In any discussion of this sort, the question of interest in the
task at hand obtrudes itself at every turn, and always remains
unanswerable. No one has invented an ergograph for mental effort,
and until he does, this will remain an incommensurable source of
error. A rather makeshift arrangement is the comparison of
achievement in academic and industrial lines for each individual.

Ideally, the field in which greater efficiency is shown represents the
results of maximum effort, but in actual fact, attendant circumstances serve to destroy the truth of this theory. In default of
anything better, this procedure was followed and the findings tabulated for each case.
Using the scale of industrial possibilities grouped according to
mental age, it was found that in the study group twelve individuals
(nine boys and three girls) are failing to do manual work on a par
with their mental age. This constitutes 34 per cent of the group
and would seem a large proportion until it is compared with the
control which shows 33 per cent accomplishing less than would be
expected. No deduction can be drawn, therefore, regarding the
relation between academic success and industrial performance. The
relative numbers in each group showing unexpected efficiency are
not similar. Two boys only in the study group (6 per cent) accomplish more than would be expected in an industrial line as
contrasted with a group of five (three boys and two girls) which
compromise 14 per cent of the control cases. With so small a group
the significance of this discrepancy is of doubtful value, but it does
indicate that the group succeeding in school work is apt to be more
efficient industrially than those with an unsatisfactory academic
record. This contradicts the wide-spread and ever popular belief in
specialized abilities. It has long been the consolation of parents to
reflect that if a child fails in academic work, he will show a compensatory manual ability. On the basis of this work, one would conclude that intelligence is a general competence to deal with any
situation, rather than the sum of special abilities covering various
types of activity.

In comparing the quality of the work done by the two groups
it is interesting to note that 48 per cent of each are described as
doing "good work." According to the theory of distribution, one
would expect to find the majority under the heading "fair" with
a few '' good'' and a few '' poor.'' There is an explanation for this
apparent misplacement in the fact that the children attend those
manual training classes whose work they can accomplish satisfactorily. The statement that a child does good work means that he
is mastering the task set; not necessarily that the work is what is
expected of his mental level. As a matter of fact, however, and in
further support of the theory of the general nature of intelligence,
inspection of the records shows that the 48 per cent doing "good"
work are all found among those whose industrial efficiency is equal
to their mental age.

The lack of any means of predicting on the basis of etiology
of defect, environment or social reactions, the reliability of Mental
Age as the measure of future academic or industrial success would
seem to make the Stanford-Binet test a poor standard for prognosis, but the fact that the thirty-seven cases in the original group
constitute a bare 10 per cent of those enrolled in the grades, serve
to modify our judgment. The question of the atypical cases remains unanswered, but the accuracy of the measure in 90 per cent
of those cases in which it has been used, is sufficient justification
for its retention.
