Intelligence of Unmarried Mothers
==================================

:Author: W. E. McClure, Director, The Juvenile Adjustment Ag.ency,
Toledo, Ohio

Bronett Goldberg, Psycho-Clinician, The Juvenile Adjustment
Agency, Toledo, Ohio

Many unfortunate girls find refuge each year in homes where
they are cared for during the period of pregnancy. Every precaution is taken to give them the best of care, and furthermore, to
protect them from the altogether too unsympathetic public. Much
secrecy surounds their lives while in confinement.
During the past four years 87 girls from one of these homes
have been referred to the Juvenile Adjustment Agency for mental
examinations. Each girl was given the Stanford-Binet test by one
of the psycho-clinicians on the staff of the Agency.
Purpose of the Study

I. To determine the general mentality of unmarried mothers
confined in a home for unfortunate girls.
II. To analyze their intelligence in the light of the several
mental traits measured by the Stanford-Binet Scale.
I. General Mentality
Three of the girls had language difficulties so their test scores
are not included in the data presented in Table I.

Table I
INTELLIGENCE OF 84 UNMARRIED PROSPECTIVE MOTHERS
Number of girls tested   84
Range of I.Q.s  38-109
Median I.Q 76.
Mean I.Q 77.09
P.E. mn  1.057
Table I shows the range of I.Q.s to be from 38 to 109, and the
mean, 77. Thus, using Terman's classification, we find these girls
to range from imbeciles to normals in intelligence.
Table II shows the frequency of I.Q.s at each level from imbecile
to normal intelligence. This classification shows that only 16 girls
(19 per cent) are normal while the remainder are subnormal.

Table II
CLASSIFICATION OF THE I.Q.s OF 84 UNMARRIED PROSPECTIVE
MOTHERS
Classification of Intelligence I.Q. range Frequency Per cent
Normal  90-109 16 19.0
Dull normal  80- 89 22 26.2
Borderline  70- 79 20 23.8
Moron  50- 69 23 27.4
Imbecile  25-49 3 3.6

Although these 84 girls may not be representative of the total
number who become pregnant out of wedlock, yet the statement
may be ventured that they are more or less representative of the
type of unmarried mothers who come to the attention of social
agencies. If a general survey were possible covering all social,
economic and mental levels of population the results would undoubtedly show each class contributing its quota but with the preponderance of cases coming from the lower levels.
Another important question is: At what chronological age does
this problem become most acute ? Table III shows that the 87 girls
range in age from 13 to 41 and the mean age is 18.37 years.

Table III
CHRONOLOGICAL AGES OF 87 UNMARRIED PROSPECTIVE
MOTHERS
Number of girls   87
Range of Ages  13-41
Median Age   18
Mean Age  18.37
P.E. mn 265
Standard Deviation   3.672
These data indicate that this is a problem dealing largely with
adolescent girls; only 11 of them (13 per cent) are above the age
of 21. The standard deviation of 3.67 shows that the ages are
well concentrated around the mean.
The correlation (Pearson "r") between age and intelligence of
these girls is ?.21. This coefficient is too low to be very significant,
yet it shows, as far as this group is concerned, that the younger
girls are slightly more intelligent than the older ones. In other
words, the older the girls the less intelligent they are.

II. Analysis of Intelligence
One fault to be found with the I.Q. is that it hides one's true
mental picture by ironing out the irregularities of the various
phases of his intelligence. It is one thing to know the general level
of intelligence of a certain person; it is another thing to know how
well each trait of his intelligence has developed. It is a well known
fact that one may have a low I.Q. yet have an exceptional memory.
In an attempt to show this irregularity of development of the
various traits Dr Sullivan1 has devised what she calls, "A Psychographic Eecord Blank" to be used as a means of representing
graphically the results of the tests of the Stanford-Binet Scale. She
classified all the tests in this scale under 14 heads as follows:
1. Language Comprehension.

It could be said of most of the tests in the Stanford-Binet Scale
that they measure language comprehension because the subject
must first understand the directions before proceeding with their
performance. However, Dr Sullivan assigns a few definite tests
to this mental trait. The writers feel that language comprehension is not adequately measured by some of these tests because the subject may fail one or more of them as a result of
immaturity of some other mental trait involved, yet understand
very well the directions given by the examiner.

2. Spontaneous Interest.
This includes interest in self, in numbers, and in things.

3. Motor Coordination.
This includes coordination with visual impressions, with speech,
voluntary motor control, and association of muscular coordination with corresponding letters and words.

4. Attention.
This includes prolonged thought control and persistence of
purpose.

5. Spatial ^Relations.
This includes appreciation of the spatial relationships in drawing and spatial orientation in distinguishing right and left.

6. Discrimination.
This includes discrimination of form, symmetry and direction,
1 Sullivan, Elizabeth T., The Use of a Psychographic Representation of
the Stanford Revision of the Binet-Simon Tests. Jr. of Del. Vol. X, Jan.,
1926, pp. 284-285.
familiar names, quantity and number relations, facts or knowledge sensory impressions of weight and abstract terms.

7. Comparison.
This includes comparison of form, aesthetic impressions, perceptual idea and presentation, accidental distinctions, and fundamental distinctions.
8. Comprehension (of practical situations and how to meet them).
This includes comprehension of food, clothing and shelter, familiar expressions; social relations; social judgments; physical
relations.
9. Memory.
This includes memory of words, names of familiar objects,
digits, series of commands, recall of "free idea," series of acts,
rote memory, and visual span.
10. Orientation in Time.
This includes orientation in time with respect to day, month
and year.
11. Strength of Mental Imagery and Ability to Manipulate it.
This includes those tests in which it is necessary to form a
mental picture, to visualize mentally in order to pass them.
12. Maturity of Apperceptive Processes.
This includes word definition and growth of meaning, and quantitative number relationships.
13. Associative Processes.
This includes associations of familiar objects and names, names
with perceptual images of color, abstract ideas, "free ideas"
and perceptual presentation, ability to combine elements or
logical quality of association and rate of readiness of association
under the dominance of a guiding idea.
14. Higher Thought Processes.
This includes association of ideas on the basis of difference and
similarities, combinative or inventive power, critical judgment,
abstract logical reasoning, logical integrity of the processes of
abstraction, comparison and generalization.
Concerning these divisions Dr Sullivan says, "The fourteen
divisions appearing in the blank include all the tests of the scale.
Under each classification are listed those tests definitely discussed
by Dr Terman as being tests in whole or in part of the trait named
in the heading. There must necessarily be some duplication since
few of the tests can be said to be measures of any single trait. An
INTELLIGENCE OF UNMARRIED MOTHERS 123
absolutely true representation, therefore, cannot be expected at the
present time to secure a proper weighting of the several tests.''
The same classification was used to analyze the intelligence of
the unmarried mothers but not in the same graphical form described
by Dr Sullivan. The final scoring was done only for each of the
14 main traits. The sub-traits were not scored separately.
The standards for scoring the 14 mental traits are presented
below.2 By this method of scoring each trait is designated as
excellent, good, fair, poor, or very poor according to the number of
tests passed or failed above or below the chronological age level of
the subject.
Standards For Scoring Mental Traits
Chronological age 5 or 6 years.
l1/^ years or more below very poor
1 year to iy2 years below poor
Less than 1 year below fair
At age to 1 year above good
More than 1 year above excellent
Chronological age 8 or 9 years.
2 years or more below very poor
1 year to 2 years below poor
Less than 1 year below fair
At age to 1 year above good
More than 1 year above excellent
Chronological age 10 to 12 years.
3 years or more below very poor
11/2 years to 3 years below poor
Less than iy2 years below fair
At age to 1 y2 years above good
More than iy2 years above excellent
Chronological age 13 to 16 years.
4 years or more below very poor
2 years to 4 years below poor
Less than 2 years below fair
2 Devised by E B. Snow, Psycho-Clinician on the staff of the Juvenile
Adjustment Agency.
At age to 11/2 years above good
More than iy2 years above excellent
Table IV shows the frequency with which the 84 girls are classified as excellent, good, fair, poor, or very poor on each of the 14
mental traits.

Table IV
FREQUENCY OF SCORES MADE BY 84 UNMARRIED MOTHERS
Table IV
Scores
E
G
VP
OK
at
OK
at
10
No
Test
Traits
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Language Comprehension
Spontaneous Interest
Motor Coordination
Attention
Spatial Relations
Discrimination
Comparison
Comprehension
Memory
Orientation in Time
Strength of Mental Imagery
and Ability to Manipulate
Maturity of Apperceptive
Processes
Associative Processes
Higher Thought Processes

13
2
15
3
3
10
4
9
7
17
15
16
6
16
19
1
6
19
2
15
15
15
14
20
20
24
13
22
5
16
24
20
22
14
19
22
15
34
5
49
31
23
44
38
39
40
5
35
40
35
30
37
41
33
37
42
Total
44
117
159
216
448
74
33
85

Columns 6, 7, and 8, table IV, headed "O.K. at 9," "O.K. at
10," and "No Test" need to be briefly explained. For example
this table shows that on "Spontaneous Interest," 37 girls have a
score of "O.K. at 9," and 41, a score of "No Test." The highest
test measuring spontaneous interest (also true of "Orientation In
Time") with the exception of XVI, alt. 2, which was not used, is
located at year IX. Thus, the 37 girls who scored "O.K. at 9"
passed all the tests given to them up through the IX year level, but
their mental age levels are much higher. The 41 girls who scored
"No Test" have basal years above IX, so were given no tests measINTELLIGENCE OF UNMARRIED MOTHERS 125
uring this trait. The assumption is, of course, that a subject is
able to pass all the tests below his basal year. This being the case,
these 41 girls could have been scored "O.K. at 9" instead of "No
Test."

Table IV shows that on "Spatial Relations," 33 girls scored
"O.K. at 10." The highest test measuring this trait is located at
year XVIII, but the next highest is at year X. These 33 girls passed
all the tests given them which measure this trait up through the
X year level, but did not reach the XVIII year level.
It is assumed in this study that if the highest test within the
range of tests given which measures a certain mental trait is located
in a year level below the mental age, and if all the tests measuring
that trait are passed, the maturity of that trait may be considered
"at age." Furthermore, if the basal year is above the year level
containing the highest test measuring that trait, thus causing the
subject to be given no tests which measure that trait, the maturity
of that trait may be considered "at age." This interpretation,
which may be open to criticism, is the result of a careful study of
the way in which the Stanford-Binet Scale is constructed. As long
as the I.Q. is the only result desired, such an interpretation is not
necessary. But when one attempts to analyze the intelligence of a
group of subjects into separate mental traits, some kind of an
interpretation is needed.

On the basis of this interpretation one is led to the conclusion
that Terman believes that the traits "Spontaneous Interest" and
"Orientation In Time" reach their maturity at the age of 9 years
since no more tests measuring these traits are found on the scale
at a higher level except one alternate for "Spontaneous Interest"
which is not given except on rare occasions to substitute for another
test of this same year level.

It follows from the above discussion that the score "Good"
should be substituted for the scores in columns 6, 7, and 8, Table
IV, which are "O.K. at 9," "O.K. at 10," and "No Test" respectively. This is true because the STANDARDS FOR SCORING
MENTAL TRAITS show that "Good" is the score for all traits
with "at age" maturity. The data in the following tables are
based upon these substitutions.

The scores made by the unmarried mothers range from "Excellent" to "Very poor" on nine of the traits and from "Good" to
"Very poor" on the rest, according to Table IV (after transferring
the scores in columns 6, 7, and 8, to Column 2). On motor coordination 13 girls scored "Excellent," while 15 scored "Excellent" on
spatial relations. It should also be noted from Table Y that the
standard deviations for these two traits are greater than for any
of the other traits.

Table Y shows the mean score for each trait. In computing
the mean the mid-point of the lowest interval was represented by
the score "Yery poor," the mid-point of the next was represented

Table V
MEAN SCORES OF 84 UNMARRIED PROSPECTIVE MOTHERS
Traits
Mean
Score
Standard
Deviation
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Language Comprehension
Spontaneous Interest
Motor Coordination
Attention
Spatial Relations
Discrimination
Comparison
Comprehension
Memory
Orientation in Time
Strength of Mental Imagery
Maturity of Apperceptive Processes
Associative Processes
Higher Thought Processes
1.011
.706
1.479
1.121
1.512
1.060
.975
1.169
1.209
.142
1.305
1.159
1.023
1.241
.078
.054
.114
.086
.117
.082
.075
.090
.093
.011
.101
.089
.079
.096

by "Poor," etc. If the true mean fell anywhere within the class
interval represented by "Good," then "Good" was considered to
be the average score for the group on that praticular trait.
Table V shows that these girls average "Good" (normal maturity) on only two traits, "Spontaneous Interest" and "Orientation In Time." This results from the fact that the Stanford-Binet
Scale contains no tests which measure either of these traits above
the 9 year level. On the trait''Spatial Relations" the average score
is "Fair" while on each of the remaining traits it is "Poor." The
score "Poor" represents a mental retardation of from 2i/? to 4
years according to the STANDARDS FOR SCORING MENTAL
TRAITS. The average mental age of these girls is 12.32 years
which is a mental retardation of about 3.68 years. Thus, these
data indicate that the degree of maturity of 11 of the 14 traits is the
same as the maturity of the average general intelligence, e.g., from
3 to 4 years retarded.

Table VI shows the average maturity of traits for each mental
group from the normal to the feebleminded.

Table VI
Classification
16
nor
22
Dull
nor.
20
Bdr.
line
26
F. M.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Language Comprehension
Spontaneous Interest
Motor Coordination
Attention
Spatial Relations
Discrimination
Comparison
Comprehension
Memory
Orientation in Time
Strength of Mental Imagery
Maturity of Apperceptive Processes
Associative Processes
Higher Thought Processes

F
G
G
G
G
F
F
F
G
G
G
G
F
G
P
G
P
F
G
P
P
P
P
G
F
P
P
F
P
G
VP
P
F
VP
P
P
VP
G
P
P
VP
P
VP
F
VP
VP
P
VP
VP
VP
VP
F
VP
VP
VP
VP

Summary of Findings and Conclusions
1. The mean I.Q. of the unmarried prospective mothers is
77.09 and their median is 76. They range in intelligence from
normals to imbeciles.
2. Their mean C.A. is 18.37 and their median is 18. Their
C.A. range is from 13 to 41.
3. Most of them are adolescents, 87 per cent being below the
age of 21.
4. The coefficient of correlation between their C.A.s and I.Q.s
is ?.21 which shows that the older girls are slightly less intelligent
than the younger girls.
5. Their average score on each of 11 traits out of the 14 (Table
V) is "Poor" which shows a retardation in maturity of from 2]/2
to 4 years.
6. This study does not reveal any highly developed trait
common to the group.
