The Play Hour
=============

:Author: Ruth Bernice Bush and Madella Rigby
Recorder of the Psychological Clinic, University of Pennsylvania
The play hour is not so much an analytic study of the individual child as a study of his reactions in a socialized group. He
is no longer a single unit but part of a small community; and
although he is expressing himself in a world of play, he is living
life to the fullest then, and his whole experiential background will
have the tinge of playboy carried on through life and colored by
his first years of social mixing and self-expression.

The playing we have done has for the most part been spontaneous, and done according to the earnest needs or wishes of the
group. Sometimes, however, I have led them and tried to cultivate
their interests, for example dancing to the music box. Our first
effort was to put to music a short story or idea. This dancing
was interpretative or pantomimic. The children were markedly
unself-conscious and did not hesitate to sway in rhythm to the
music, although their knowledge of the steps was limited. I did
not try to teach them any steps since that would introduce a conscious element that I felt should be lacking in this type of dance.
Pierre was fondest of this dance and often asked for it, while
Spencer who is older and feels such dancing makes him a sissy, on
several occasions declined to participate, or else would drop out for
certain parts of it. I never insisted that he do it when he felt
that he did not want to. On the other hand, I tried very urgently
to have David, age 5, join in, since his negativism is built on lack
of confidence, rather than an emotional dislike of appearing overly
childish. The socialization motif may be predominant in managing
such a group, but every reaction on the part of the child is a personal, selfish one, and must be handled separately.
Besides our dancing to stories we also attempted rhythmic
exercises, such as stretching the legs straight out to music, raising
hands in time, bending, walking like soldiers, etc.

Another part of the play hour has been devoted to story telling
or reading. One of the first primers we read has tales that point
practical morals and we have discussed them quite a bit deciding
how to protect against mosquitoes, what to do about flies, etc.
Story telling leads right into telling of stories by the children and
while most of their material has been anecdotal or personal, ocTHE PLAY HOUR 45
casionally I have had them repeat parts of a story they have heard.
Marilyn, age 6, and Spencer, age 7, especially like this because they
do not feel as embarrassed as the younger children. The most
rampant and delightful imaginations are those of the Brook children, Pierre, age 6 and Francis, age 4, and the most refreshing
thing is their co-operation with one another in telling the most
gargantuan tales they can devise. They love to tell how their father
saved a cow from a railroad track by shooting her off on his bumper.

I became all excited at this heroic gesture only to find out that the
cow was a cellulloid one and the train a part of a toy set. Two days
ago Francis announced, "Our favver killed a man, he did, he did."
When I remonstrated, he turned to Pierre for corroboration. Pierre
started to support him but I told them that was impossible. Then
they both lapsed into temporary calm and sulkiness. Pierre declared, "Well then it must have been two other fellows." By that
time their injured dignity wrould not permit them to tell me
whether it was two other fellows that their father had killed, or two
other fellows who had killed the first victim. So I dare not doubt
them or I will lose their confidence, and in the meantime, if I do
not watch out, I find myself as gullible as the youngest of the group.
Games are used as a means of keeping the children active and
in socialized grouping as well. I taught them London Bridge which
they liked, and '' All Around the Mulberry Bush,'' but we are rather
restricted in playing these games because, to be effective, the number should be larger. As an exercise I recently taught them
"Simon Says" and for some time we played Peanuts,?a running
and counting game. The more play there is the better the children
like it, and I find that they enjoy it better playing by two's against
each other than having each one run separately. Occasionally for
exercise we have stiff-legged races, skipping races and hopping
across the room. The competitive spirit is enough to make a game
out of the simplest exercise for the children, and I think it is better
not to encumber them with too much formality.

Besides the reading and telling of stories, I sometimes have the
children act them out. So far we have done "The Billy Goats" on
several occasions with different parts taken by each child. Spencer
makes a very fine villain, and usually chooses that part because of
its dramatic quality. He has a flourish for living in the part he
assumes and can translate his imagination into action, while Pierre,
with much more imagination is too volatile to come down to acting
his part. Between these two and Marilyn there is a constant
struggle to act the lead. Sometimes the boys object to having a girl
assume the lead in a manly part, but they do not hesitate to play
Goldenlocks with all her lovely curls and timid manner.

Very little needs to be said of the traits or characteristics of
each child except as they apply specifically to the play group. At
first, I found Spencer to be the least likable child of the group. He
had several mean, nasty little habits. For example, he would shove
and push another child when he thought I was not looking. He
would even pinch the children, especially Pierre because he knew
Pierre would be quick to fight him back. They exchanged some
good blows the first month, but after I had reprimanded Spencer
for it once severely, once nicely, and once by keeping him out of
the game, I have not been annoyed with this trait again. I explained to him that as the oldest boy I expected him to help me, not
to make it harder. Since then he has offered to bring up chairs,
open the door for youngsters, take them to the bathroom, or get
them a drink. Once when Marilyn spoke in an imperative little
manner to me, Spencer politely remarked, "Marilyn, say please,
please." Spencer's environment outside the Clinic is not so fine as
that of the other children and I think he may bring in nasty words
sometimes, but he has shown himself most co-operative for some
months now and most desirous of affection and praise.

The Brook children are a delight. Chubby Francis often gets
"thleepy" and drops out, but Pierre will be active and make comments to the last minute. The two always rush in to me excitedly
with a tale of the latest exploit of their dad, his lallapaloosa or what
not. They keep the group in turmoil with their vitality.

Vincent, age 5, is most liked by all the children, I think. When
he is absent they will inquire specifically about him, although they
seem indifferent to anyone else once he or she is out of their sight.
Marilyn is especially interested in Vincent with an adorable combination of an Amazon and a mother hen. She ruffles over him,
speaks up for him, corrects him, prods him along.

I am glad five year old Felicity has joined the class now, because she is a fine foil for Marilyn. She is much more the young
child than is Marilyn who has a certain maturity and poise in her
young person. Felicity is equally bright and her naivete is refreshing.
David presents the most serious problem of all with his language difficulty, his sensitiveness and his youngness. While adults
may look on and observe the cause of his not mingling with the
group, to him it is a deep wound, and rather than overcome it, he
retires into his shell. I cannot cajole or force him to do anything
since I must not single him out for the marked attention of the
children that correction of his particular maladjustment would require. For a while I tried to take him aside while the others were
playing with the blocks to teach him the things they knew so he
would catch up. His motor co-ordination is not adjusted for
skipping. I have shown him the hops, the foot changing, everything
connected with skipping, yet he cannot get it. He is too tense, too
conscious of his inability to have the verve and heedlessness that
makes a skip come so naturally. David has the great misfortune
to be an only child.

This group of irrepressible, irresponsible, and irrestible youngsters is possessed of a vitality and activity that keeps me constantly
on the alert. As time went on I began to feel that greater cooperation and democracy were needed. I observed a certain
tendency to clique, to express a conscious superiority either on the
basis of social standing or mental accomplishment. Marilyn exemplified this best when she announced to Vincent who was trying
to help her with the cylinders, "You don't need to help me, Vincent, I've been in this University longer than you have." Spencer
with a sense of inferiority, I think, tried to dissemble it by carrying
his actions to the extreme of pettishness, while Pierre, with total
lack of self-consciousness, was so much himself that he endangered
the safety of the others. In all, then, what these children needed
was a greater self-expression, but expression in a more socialized
conformity.

Charlie, age 5, came to the fore in story-telling, showing a
responsibility and an ability to throw himself into another character to a degree unusual in a child of his age. I feel he is even more
spoilt and babied than any of the others. He will whimper and
come close for fondling as soon as he feels his mother is out of sight
and that he must act independently. But once his mind can be
diverted to something else, he instantly throws himself into the part,
and assumes a role of leadership. It will be rather difficult for
Charlie to overcome this habit of crying and getting sick of selfpity, I feel, because he is a lovable little boy. The maternal instinct
he naturally arouses in teacher tends to encourage rather than discourage this overgrown helplessness. He needs someone who can
ignore him or deal strictly with him.

The story-telling that grew out of the reading was to test the
retention of the youngsters and give them opportunity of dramatic
self-expression. Spencer, who had shone at first, seemed to have
lost his grasp. His manner was haphazard and indifferent. He
adopted an "I don't care" attitude, occasionally punctuated by
knocks and pinches when he thought I wasn't looking. On the
other hand there would be days when he would go to the other
extreme and most punctiliously bring a chair for little Patsy, or
take Eddie by the hand. Marilyn showed the most superior ability
of this group and gave the whole class a decided impetus when she
was with us.

The development of the dancing and music phase of our work
was a decided surprise to me. Time and again I have heard the
thesis that children are just little well-nurtured animals in whom
the sense of rhythm is inherent and that if left untrained, they
react to music with the utmost elasticity and relaxation. Time and
again I have tried to discover my vivacious group getting the
"feel" of music and not once have I discovered it. A colored boy
came into the room one day when the children were not there, and
with the greatest sensuality and abandonment to the music he threw
himself into the negro steps, clogging, stamping, buck and wing. It
was very clear that his zest was the primitive zest of feeling himself
one with the music. He was not Johnny Jones dancing to music,
he was the lilt and the blues of the music itself. Similarly the
overly plump, tow-headed boy of low mentality that used to come
in and hang around the fringes of the class had a most natural and
unconscious reaction to the music. He would sway with his hands
raised, no training, no grace but the rhythm came out in spite of
that, and one could see that he was allied to the spirit of the song.
But not so these youngsters. Patsy does a crude patter of her
feet that is rhythmic in the simplest sense, but Pierre and Francis
are in such a hurry to do something that will show they are trying
at least, that they lose the very relaxation the music is to give them.
They almost contort. Pierre especially goes through these acute gyrations that are more like a Robot than a boy. Felicity has the grace
and lightness of a dancer, and her dancing classes have given her
the background to slip readily into the simple steps I give the group.
But close observation shows that, as with so many of us, when she
dances, she dances not to music but for dancing's sake, and if she
is ahead of the beat, so much the better because it shows enthusiasm
and success in mastering the step. With Priscilla on the other hand,
I have difficulty in having her take the first step. She hangs back,
hesitates, and I believe is not sure of herself because she cannot see
far enough, and with a natural slowness is always getting bumped
by Pierre or Felicity.

As a whole it seems to me that the more gifted these children
are, the greater the number of factors that enter into their reacting
to music. Charlie will say of a sad or slowly beautiful melody,
"Aw, take it off. That's too slow." Pierre will prance around in
double quick time regardless of the beat of time, and Francis will
come tumbling after. These children who are half way between a
trained consciousness of what music means and says, and the
primitive who has the basic conception of music, are not the music
lovers popularly held to be found in childhood.

We did some work in clay and I only wish we had devoted
more time to it before the youngsters jumbled it past recognition.
It is an unusually effective medium both for hands and imagination.
We made snakes with great success, in all shapes and sizes. Funny
faces came next on the list, and some of the grotesques would have
been worthy of Notre Dame. I made no pretence of having the
children do any polished piece of work. If the results did come out
laughably I wanted them to feel that was the purpose of their
amateur art. In this work Priscilla did quite well and Patsy determinedly made her little clay balls and wound out her snake. I
would suggest that another year the children make cups and saucers
and dishes, as I did when I was a child. Mme. Montessori has said
all I would care to say on the subject, but I would not be surprised
if somewhere even in our little group there is the seed of an architect or sculptor from the very way in which they run to the building blocks or clay when they think they can work undisturbed by
teacher. Such correct ardor at the wrong time ought to bear some
fruit.

The favorite games continue to be Peanuts and Going to Jerusalem. In themselves they are fun to play but they reveal a woeful
lack of sportsmanship in the young child. In that respect surely,
he recapitulates the early race history. Self preservation and Imust-win are his first considerations. Sometimes I look over the
group tugging for first place in a race and say jokingly, "Well,
now look around. Who do you think will win?" And they one
and all look around at the others and then speak for themselves,
"I'll win." Pierre is loudest in this. "Gimme, I wanta be Jack
and the Beanstalk," he'll say. I have called their attention to the
selfishness of this, usually after one of them has assumed the lead
and then not done so well as he might. For a second they are
abashed, but the same egocentricity crops out the next time. There
are, however, sparks of generosity that are as sudden and as unexpected, and I am pleased to say they attach as little importance to
this occasional magnanimity as they do to their selfishness. Thus
Pierre, as an older brother, will give up anything to Francis,?if
his attention is called to it. Spencer will move the whole building if
I look at him and then at Patsy or Eddie implying that they are
tots and need big boys to get them chairs.

Another prominent, though unplanned, phase of the hour is the
conversational period during dancing or story-telling. Here I try
to give them something new, pertinent to what we are doing. For
example, one day during gymnastics I asked casually, "Now who
knows what a lunge is?"?We were doing a lunge at the time and
I hoped they would catch the inference. But, no! A streak of
lightning passed between Pierre and Francis and I knew the thinking machines were working. Then came the answer, "A lunge is
where you take your sandwiches and papers and go into the woods
to eat."

Each one of the children could have a whole paper devoted to
him alone but I must not enlarge too much on my impression of
the youngsters. Pierre seems to have either a very acute scientific sense, or good hometraining in observation. Vincent, too,
speaks with greater authority than the others on horses and flowers.
Probably their summer vacations aid in this. Felicity is now progressing rapidly to the "smart alec" stage. She giggles, preens,
goes in for echolalia of syllables that catch her fancy, and in
general shows all the possibilities of that debatable quality, the
eternal feminine. Her fondness for Vincent is most marked. But
then, who does not like Vincent? He is one of those children who,
without being the best behaved, or the brightest or the most outstanding in any field, yet wins universal affection through some unknown quality in his make-up. He could hardly be said to be the
type that radiates personality. He has a quiet, attractive glow of
his own that draws one somehow. He is the most lovable of all the
youngsters .... just because.

In closing, I am much reminded of the soliloquies a certain
father is fond of making (when he is sure he can be overheard).
'' I gave my quota of two children to the race, and set myself out to
raise them in my home experimental laboratory. I've used the best
of precepts and training. They've had the most scientifically sound
theories to aid their upbringing all along the line. But somehow,
the more I look at them, the more certain I am that I raised them,
not as a scientist, but as a humanist and father.''

I feel very much the same way. Experimentally these youngsters have been a revelation of the problems of childhood. They
can't be resolved down to their constituent elements and then built
Up again. Diagnostic education, even at its best, it seems to me is
risky business. I'd rather play with gunpowder than the irrational
element that makes a child a child. That's what I say, but then
each time an addition comes into the class, I welcome the newcomer,?the humanist and the experimenter in me aroused. Like
Oliver Twist, even though I'm afraid of the consequences and my
own capacity, I say, '' Give me more, please.''
