The Report of the Joint Committee on
=====================================

The whole of the Report of the Joint Committee of the Board of Educa-
tion and the Board of Control has now been published, and it is a great advan-
tage to be able to view the Committee's conclusions and recommendations in
respect of both children and adult defectives. The Report, as now published,
appears in three small volumes. Volume i consists of Parts I and II, Part I
being a general introduction to the whole Report and Part II dealing with the
problem of the mentally defective children. Volume 2, which consists of
Part III, deals with the mentally defective adults; whereas Volume 3, contain-
ing Part IV, is the report of the special investigation of the incidence of mental
deficiency made on behalf of the Committee by Dr E. O. Lewis.

The Committee was, in the first place, appointed to advise the Chief
Medical Officer of the Board of Education upon certain specific problems in
regard to defective children, but at an early stage of its deliberations it became
clear that it was necessary to consider not only the problems of the defective
children but also those of adults, and thus the inquiry became a most compre-
hensive one. Mr. A. H. Wood, C.B., who was at that time the Assistant
Secretary in charge of the Medical Branch of the Board of Education, was
appointed Chairman of the Committee, which included amongst its members
persons who had expert knowledge of the administrative, medical, scientific,
social and educational aspects of the problem of mental deficiency.

In the initial stages of its deliberations the Committee decided that it
was necessary to make an investigation that would enable it to assess anew the
magnitude of the problem. The only previous investigation on a large scale
into the incidence of mental defect in this country was that of the Royal Com-
mission on the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded, 1904-1908. It was
thought that the legal and administrative provisions for the mental defective
which resulted from the Report of the Commission and the important advances
made in the scientific approach to the problem of mental defect during the last
twenty years would enable a more reliable estimate to be made of the numbers
of defectives. Therefore the incidence of mental defect in six typical areas,
each with a population of about 100,000, was ascertained and the data thus
obtained proved the wisdom of the Committee's decision.

In Part I of the Report a chapter is given to review the legislation respect-
ing the mental defective and in Part II another short chapter deals with the
legal measures relating specially to adult defectives. These two chapters con-
tain a concise but very clear summary of the most important provisions of
Acts which apply to mental defectives in this country and of the principal
methods devised by the legislature for dealing with these persons. The Com-
mittee discusses the legislative provisions in the light of the experience gained
in applying them. Careful study of this discussion is essential if the reader is
to appreciate the reason for some of the general recommendations which the
Committee has made.

One important legal ambiguity which is treated with much frankness
and with considerable insight of the difficulties it has presented to Local Auth-
orities and Medical Officers, is that involved in the definitions of " mentally
defective children " in Section 55 (1) of the Education Act, 1921, and of
" feeble-minded children " in Section 1 (1) (c) of the Mental Deficiency Act,
1913-1927. The definition in the Education Act stresses educational defect,
whereas that of the Mental Deficiency Acts places the emphasis upon failure
in social adaptation. The groups of children to whom these definitions apply
are by no means identical. There are many children who are defective educa-
tionally but not socially, and there are some, a smaller number admittedly,
who though not educationally defective prove to be conspicuous failures
socially. It is the discussion of the disparity between these two definitions that
gives point and force to many of the statements in the chapter which deals
with the " nature of mental defect." The Committee urges the importance
of having a single criterion of mental deficiency, namely, the social one, and
defines " a mentally defective individual, whether child or adult, as one who
by reason of incomplete mental development is incapable of independent
social adaptation."

The discussion of the effectiveness of the powers and duties allocated to
Local M.D. Authorities deals with vital issues. The Committee reached the
conclusion that the intentions of Parliament, when it passed the 1913 Mental
Deficiency Act, have not been realised. This is attributed chiefly to the fact
that Local M.D. Authorities' powers of ascertainment were limited to those
defectives " subject to be dealt with." The chief source of ascertainment,
namely, the notification of mentally defective children by the Local Education
Authority, has been most disappointing, largely because of the limited num-
ber of Special Schools established. The special investigation revealed that no
fewer than 77 per cent, of the educable mentally defective children in the six
areas were in attendance at ordinary Public Elementary Schools. The other
factor that has up to the present restricted considerably the scope of Local
M.D. Authorities' activities in respect both of adults and children, is that Poor
Law Authorities have power to maintain defective persons by outdoor or in-
door relief. Over 40 per cent, of the whole number of adult defectives ascer-
tained in the investigated areas were being dealt with by Poor Law Authorities
and were thus for practical purposes outside the scope of the Local M.D.
Authorities, and of the defectives receiving assistance from public funds no less
than 75 per cent, were assisted by the Board of Guardians either in Poor Law
institutions, in mental hospitals or by way of outdoor relief. These findings
and conclusions obviously rendered it necessary for the Committee to make
certain far-reaching recommendations for the modification of the present statu-
tory powers of the Authorities that deal with mentally defective children and
adults.

Before passing to these recommendations, we shall give some of the more
important estimates of the number of mentally defective persons in England
and Wales, based upon the findings of the special investigation. The total
number of children between the ages of 7 and 16 who are mentally defective
within the meaning of Section 55 of the Education Act is approximately
Io5>ooo, that is, three times the number actually ascertained and certified by
the Local Education Authorities. The number of imbeciles and idiots under
J6 years of age is estimated to be at least 30,000, whereas the total number of
adult defectives of all grades is certainly not less than 150,000, making a total
?f 180,000 which is again three times as great as that given in the returns sub-
mitted to the Board of Control of defectives of all ages brought to the notice
?f the Local M.D. Authorities. The Committee makes another important
estimate, namely, that of the total number of persons in England and Wales
who are mentally defective in the sense in which this term is interpreted in
the M.D. Acts, that is, of social inefficiency due to incomplete mental develop-
ment. This number it estimates to be at least 300,000, which is equivalent to
an incidence of about 8 per 1,000 of the population.

These figures show that mental deficiency is a problem of much greater
magnitude than most persons had hitherto realised, although the numbers will
not surprise those persons who have been in intimate touch with the work
during the last twenty years. The Chairman in his letter accompanying the
Report when it was submitted to Sir George Newman and Mr. L. G. Brock,
the Chairman of the Board of Control, refers to mental deficiency as one of
the major social problems of our time, and in the light of these estimates this
claim is not too extravagant.

Children. We will first outline somewhat briefly the recommendations
of the Committee in respect of the educable mentally defective children. The
members of the Committee were obviously much impressed by the good work
already done by the Special Schools and their recommendations are framed so
as to extend considerably the facilities for similar educational provision. They
were of the opinion, however, that a careful survey of the facts relating to the
special system of education proved that it cannot well be extended appreciably
beyond its present limits as long as the statutory conditions remain as they are
now. There are large numbers of children in the ordinary Elementary Schools
who require the form of educational provision given in the Special Schools,
but for one reason or another do not receive this or any corresponding pro-
vision. The Committee recommends that a new educational unit, to be
known as the " retarded group " of children should be formed. This group
would comprise children hitherto known as educable mentally defective
children and also those known as dull or backward children. For administra-
tive purposes this new group should be regarded as part of the Public Elemen-
tary School system and Local Education Authorities should modify the organ-
isation of the schools in their areas so as to provide suitable education for the
whole group. The Committee recognises that no single form of provision
will suit all areas and that the greatest elasticity, consistent with efficiency,
is desirable. In the large towns the Committee's recommendations will make
it possible to develop considerably the Day Special Schools already established,
but in most of the provincial towns and rural areas probably provision in
separate departments or classes will be found most suitable.

The admission of children to these new schools, departments or classes
will require no special certification as is now the case with children admitted to
Special Schools. Medical Officers and teachers who deal with educable men-
tally defective children will no doubt welcome this bold recommendation. It
would not be too much to say that certification in the past has kept many more
suitable children out of the Special Schools than it has enabled Authorities to
place in these Schools. The removal of certification will necessarily mean
that the Local Education Authorities will lose their special power to insist that
children should attend this particular type of school. This, however, is a
question that bears closely upon the whole organisation of educational pro-
vision in the future, if the recommendations of the Hadow Report arc adopted.

The number of cases in which parents and children will refuse to conform
with the allocation of the Local Authorities will no doubt be small, but even
so the Committee thinks it will be necessary to give Local Education Author-
ities a general power to enforce attendance in the last resort of individual
children at a school regarded by their Officers as best suited to their educational
capacity.

To persons interested generally in the practical problems presented by
the mentally defective, the Committee's recommendation of the formation of
a new educational unit and its corollary that educable mentally defective child-
ren of school age should no longer be certified unless they need the special
protection afforded by the M.D. Acts, suggest important questions. It is in
the large towns where the Special Schools have been established that Local
M.D. Authorities have been able to function most efficiently, and this is to
be attributed largely to the fact that their work has been based upon that of
the Local Education Authorities. The teachers and doctors and administra-
tive officers who are directly concerned with these Special Schools realise that
most of the pupils will require some form of care or supervision by the M.D.
Authorities after they leave school and therefore take steps to ensure that most
of the children shall be notified either during school life or on leaving school.

What will be the result of the change of status of these schools upon this link
so essential to the efficiency of the work of the M.D. Authority? The propor-
tion of children in the " retarded " schools or classes who will require perm-
anent care and control will be the minority and not the majority as in the
Special Schools now existing, and there is the possibility that teachers and
Medical Officers will minimise the importance of notification. The Joint Com-
mittee obviously realises this danger and therefore has placed much emphasis
upon the importance of the Local Education Authority fulfilling its duty of
notifying all children who will require the protection of the Mental Deficiency
Acts when they leave school or even before they leave, if this be necessary.
Another recommendation relating to the " retarded " group of children
is that the schools, departments or classes should be organised on a primary and
post-primary basis in accordance with the scheme outlined in the Hadow
Report. The experience of some of the largest Local Education Authorities in
this country has proved that this form of organisation is most admirably suited
for dealing with educable mentally defective children. This dual basis should
facilitate considerably the organisation of provision for retarded children as an
integral part of the public Elementary School system of the future.

The workers and members of Voluntary Associations will be particularly
interested in the Committee's recommendations concerning the provision to
be made for those mentally defective children who are too low-grade to attend
the classes for retarded children. These will be notified to the Local M.D.
Authority as at present, and this Authority will be financially responsible for
.any provision made for them. The prospect of suitable provision being made
is, however, greatly enhanced by the Committee's recommendation that it should
be the duty of Local Education Authorities in return for payment by the Local
M.D. Authorities, to provide facilities for training in occupation centres of all
lower grade children between the ages of 5 and 11 who are capable of attending
the day class, and that the same Authority should have the power, at the request
of the Local M.D. Authority, of making similar arrangements for children of
this grade of defect who are over 11 years of age. Such a scheme as the Com-
mittee outlines we believe would begin a new era in the development of occupa-
tion centres. The transfer of the organisation of these centres to the Local
Education Authorities should go far to assure that all children suited for the
type of training given in these centres would be provided for, and the securing
of efficient trainers, suitable premises and an adequate supply of apparatus and
material should no longer present the difficulties they have hitherto.

One other general principle as to the allocation of responsibility of men-
tally defective children which the Committee enunciates is that residential
provision should generally be made by the Local M.D. Authority. At the
same time the Committee recognises that there will also be instances when the
Local Education Authorities will have to provide boarding schools for selected
" retarded " children who are not likely to require permanent care and con-
trol. Again, with regard to the admission to these residential institutions,
colonies and boarding schools, the Committee pleads for elasticity and urges
that it should be open to either Authority to send children for whom they are
responsible to institutions provided by the other Authority.

Adults. In reading the section of the Report that relates to adults, we
realise how unfortunate it was that the completion of the Committee's delibera-
tions practically coincided with the passing of the recent Local Government
Act. Had this part of the Report appeared a few months earlier it would
probably have influenced materially those sections of the Act relating to the
mentally defective; or, if on the other hand, the Committee had been able to
write its report in the light of the new legislative conditions consequent upon
the passing of this Act, it would have been able to give further valuable guid-
ance to Local Authorities concerning the new statutory conditions.

Notwithstanding this unfortunate synchronisation, Local Authorities
will find that the Report contains much that is most applicable to the admin-
istration of mental deficiency in work in the near future, for the simple reason
that the Committee has laid great stress upon the principle which, to say the
least, is implied in the Local Government Act, and which this Act, for the first
time, makes it possible for Local Authorities to adopt as a basis, namelv, the
unification of responsibility for adult defectives. The Committee " considers
it to be a fundamental condition of any comprehensive scheme for the care,
training and control of defectives that every practicable step should be taken to
concentrate all existing powers in regard to adult defectives (as well as lower
grade and other notified mentally defective children) in the hands of a single
Authority, namely, the Local M.D. Authority." The repeal by Section 14 (4) of
the Local Government Act, 1929, of the latter half of Section 30, Proviso (ii) of
the M.D. Act, 1913, removes the chief legal obstacle that stood in the way of
the unification of responsibility, and Section 5 of the Local Government Act
carries the process one step further as it empowers County and County Borough
Councils to declare by scheme that any assistance that can be provided either
by way of Poor Law relief or by virtue of the M.D. Act, 1913, shall be pro-
vided under the latter Act. It is to be hoped that this principle will be
adopted as the basis of schemes formulated by the Local Authorities. The
figures of the special investigation indicating the incidence of mental deficiency
prove that the problem is one so large and important that it should be dealt
with by a single Authority. It is inconceivable that this problem, which is so
vital to national welfare, should in the future be dealt with by the piecemeal
and somewhat chaotic statutory methods that have hitherto prevailed.

Most of the other recommendations relating to adult defectives depend
upon the adoption of this fundamental principle. Thus, a general scheme of
institutional administration comprising a central colony, hostel branches and
simpler institutions, each suitable for some particular class of defective is out-
lined, based upon the assumption that in the future there will be a system of
unified control for all mental defectives requiring institutional care. The Com-
mittee emphasises the great and urgent need for additional accommodation
in institutions. The investigator in his Report (Part IV) points out that most
of this new accommodation is required for the children and younger defectives.
He also gives detailed calculations (Tables 25-27) of the relative numbers of
each group of defectives requiring institutional care for the urban and rural
areas respectively. Local Authorities will find in these Tables the most reliable
data available for calculating the institutional accommodation they should pro-
vide for defectives in their respective administrative areas.

There is one picturesque phrase in the Report which suggests that the
Committee envisages the institution of the future as one that will be much
more intimately associated with the general administration of mental deficiency
than has been the case in the past, namely, that " the institution should no
longer be a stagnant pool but become a flowing lake, always taking in and
always sending out." Adopting this view of the function of the institution the
Committee has given much attention to the question of licensing defectives
from the institutions, a question which bristles with difficulties.

One of the most suggestive and helpful sections of the Report is that which
deals with the care of defectives who remain in the general community. The
Committee obviously realises that this aspect of the problem is second to no
other in its importance. It is estimated that there will be at least 175,000 defec-
tives of all ages in England and Wales living in the general community. If a
scheme of unified control is adopted it is obvious that the number of defectives
who will require some measure of care, training or supervision by the statutory
authority will be considerably increased. One large and important new group
will be the defective adults who are at present in receipt of outdoor relief. The
Committee have made very interesting suggestions that additional powers be
given to Local M.D. Authorities to enable them to give financial assistance in
cases to which the present conditions of guardianship can scarcely be said to
be applicable. For instance, it recommends that (i) power be given to Local
M.D. Authorities to grant financial assistance to defectives placed under super-
vision, and (2) that the magistrate, when making an order on petition, should
be enabled to place a defective under the guardianship of the Local Authority,
that the Authority should be given the power to exercise its guardianship
through specially trained and appointed guardianship officers, and that these
officers should be responsible for making all arrangements subject to the
direction of the Local Authority for the care of the defective while at home or
boarded out or when living with other people. These powers would greatly
enlarge the scope of the activities of the Local M.D. Authorities in regard to
defectives outside institutions and would enable this branch of the work to
take its place as one of the foremost of all social services.

In this discussion of the care of defectives living in the community, the
Committee emphasises two points in particular. The first is that the guard-
ianship and supervision officers of the Local Authority and the officers em-
ployed by Voluntary Associations should (a) be trained social workers and (b)
subsequently have special training for and experience in this particular work.
The second is the importance of making adequate provision both for the train-
ing and the occupation of defectives. Authorities are urged to make the pro-
vision of Section 30 (cc) of the M.D. Act, as amended, a reality by seeing that
so far as it is practicable no defective under supervision or guardianship is left
without suitable training or occupation.

The Committee makes one general recommendation concerning the co-
ordination of the mental health services. "With a view to the ultimate con-
centration of responsibility for the care of all forms of mental ailment, whether
mental deficiency or mental disorder, we suggest that further consideration
should be given to the question of the amalgamation of the functions of Local
Authorities, visiting and M.D. Committees and of the institution of a post of
specialist officer of mental health in each area." The adoption of this recom-
mendation would obviously carry the unifying process one step further and if
this could be done much of the overlapping that now exists in our methods of
dealing with the mentally unfit would be obviated.

The last chapter of the Report consists of a very interesting though some-
what academic discussion of mental deficiency as a genetic and social problem.
The Committee makes it clear that it knows of no preventive or ameliorative
panacea. In one of the earlier paragraphs of this chapter it is stated " that in-
asmuch as mental defect is in the main due to germinal variation, its elimina-
tion or even its appreciable diminution must be a very gradual process which
we certainly do not claim to have found any effective means of accelerating."
It is urged that sterilisation, segregation, and other methods that have been pro-
posed, if they are to be effective preventive measures, would have to be applied
not only to persons who are mentally defective but to the whole marginal
group of sub-normal persons from which group the large majority of the
mentally defective spring. When discussing the sterilisation of mental defec-
tives from the standpoint of enabling as many as possible of them to live with
the general community, the Committee states that it is " not prepared to deny
that this measure might, under adequate safeguards, prove of value in a very
limited number of individual cases selected from among the most stable type
of defective with no anti-social tendencies." It then proceeds to state that
" there is not sufficient evidence at present to justify the general adoption of
sterilisation of defectives and that even if it were adopted, no great alleviation
of the burden of mental deficiency would follow." The members of the Com-
mittee obviously have more faith in the efficacy of the segregation of certain
types of defectives, in the efficient training, care and control of those living in
the general community and in the gradual raising of the cultural level of the
sub-normal group of the population by improved educational treatment and
social care of the group of children classed as dull.

In this review we have endeavoured merely to focus the reader's attention
upon some of the general recommendations of the Joint Committee. No
attempt has been made to criticise or even to comment upon these recommend-
ations because wre feel it is impossible in the limited space given to this review
to discuss critically the many important issues raised by the Committee's pro-
posals. The Committee has dealt with the problem in a comprehensive
manner but at the same time there is abundant evidence in the Report that the
members were thoroughly conversant with the practical difficulties and with
the details of the work relating to the mental defectives in all its aspects. Some
of the more important recommendations, especially those dealing with child-
ren, will require new legislation before they can become effective, but there
are many recommendations and suggestions v/hich could be adopted by the
Local Authorities without delay. From this point of view alone the Com-
mittee's Report is a document of no small importance and one that may well
lead to many and great improvements in the provision for the care of defectives.

In two respects, however, we believe that the publication of this Report will in
the future be regarded as one of the landmarks in the history of the mental
health services of this country. First, because it contains a full account of an
investigation into the incidence of mental defect which was probably more
thorough and within its limits more complete than any which has been prev-
iously made in this or any other country; and secondly, because the Com-
mittee's Report contains an ordered review of the situation in regard to the
problem of mental deficiency in this country as it is in the third decade of the
twentieth century, a review v/hich, whatever may be its immediate results,
must serve as a stepping-off ground for future enquiries and for future legisla-
tion and administrative action.
