Central Association for Mental Welfare
=======================================

[INCORPORATED]
The following Resolution was passed by the Executive Council of the
Central Association for Mental Welfare at a meeting held in Caxton Hall,
on Monday, 8th July, 1929, and has been forwarded to the Prime Minister,
the Minister of Health, the President of the Board of Education and the Chair-
man of the Board of Control:?

THAT the Council of the Central Association for Mental "Welfare,
having considered the Report of the Joint Departmental Mental Defic-
iency Committee of the Board of Education and the Board of Control,
and in view of the large number of defectives shewn to exist in die
country, of their increasing cost to the community, and of the insuffic-
iency of the existing provision for their proper care, training, supervision
and control,

UNANIMOUSLY RECOMMEND:?
-----------------------

(1) THAT, as for certain types of mentally defective persons the only
effective means of care and prevention which is at present practicable,
is by segregation of urgent cases in Institutions, Local Authorities be
urged to press on the provision of suitable accommodation of this
kind.

(2) THAT a Royal Commission be immediately appointed to make full
enquiries into the causation of mental deficiency, into its relationship
to other abnormal mental conditions and social problems, and into
any measures, including both segregation and sterilisation, by which
it might be prevented.

In connection with the above Resolution, the following letter appeared
in the Times on 22nd July, 1929, and is reprinted here by courtesy of the
Editor.

To the Editor of The Times.
Sir,
Since its formation in 1914, the Central Association for Mental
Welfare has on numerous occasions drawn public attention to the social
problem presented by mental deficiency and to the grave consequences
and serious cost entailed by the presence of mental defectives in the com-
munity. These views have received full and striking confirmation in the
Report of the Joint Mental Deficiency Committee of the Board of Educa-
tion and the Board of Control which has just been published.

This Pveport emphasises the fact that the essential criterion of mental
deficiency is the social one and that " if a person is suffering from a degree
of incomplete mental development which renders him incapable of in-
dependent social adaptation and which necessitates external care, super-
vision and control, that such person is a mental defective."

The Report further shows that the number of defectives, and con-
sequently the gravity of the position, is very much greater than has hither-
to been thought. Whereas in 1908 the number of defectives was estimated
by the Royal Commission on die Feeble-minded at 4.6 per 1,000 of the
population, equivalent to a total of approximately 150,000 defectives in
England and Wales, the number ascertained to-day is not less than 8 per
1,000, corresponding to an approximate total of 314,000 defectives in
England and Wales. Doubtless to some extent this increased number is
due to more complete ascertainment and to certain other factors, and
the Committee are obviously cautious in making a comparison and draw-
ing conclusions; they nevertheless state it is hard to believe that there
has not been some increase in the incidence of mental deficiency during
this period."

It is of great importance to realise that although since the Report of
the Royal Commission in 1908, the Mental Deficiency Acts have been
passed and the education of defective children, formerly optional, has been
made compulsory, the conditions, in view of the increased number of
defectives now revealed by the Report of the Joint Mental Deficiency
Committee, show very little improvement upon those which existed
twenty years ago. With regard to children, it is estimated by the Com-
mittee that at the present time there are approximately 105,000 in need
of, and capable of profiting by, special instruction. Of this number, only
33,000 have been " ascertained " by local education authorities, and
educational facilities have been provided for only half of those ascertained.
With regard to adults, the Committee estimate that there are at least
175,000 defective persons needing, and who should be definitely under,
the care of local authorities. The total number of persons receiving this
care by way either of institutions, guardianship or supervision, does not
amount to 40,000, i.e., less than one-fourth. These figures fully justify
the Committee in saying " The provision made by authorities for the care
of defectives, whether in the community or in institutions, is by no means
sufficient even for the relatively small number who have been ascertained
and is totally inadequate when compared with the far larger number of
defectives who, as our investigator has shown, require care and protection
under the Mental Deficiency Acts."

It is clear that the problem is much more serious and pressing than
has hitherto been thought, and we urge that a vigorous effort should
be made to grapple with it without further delay. Its solution naturally
falls under two headings and to these we desire briefly to direct attention.

(1) The Care of Existing Defectives.

The presence of mental defectives in a community and their train-
ing, care and supervision, must inevitably be attended with considerable
cost, but we are convinced that, in the long run, it is much more expen-
sive to neglect them. There is abundant evidence, based on records
covering many years from After-Care and Mental Welfare Associations,
that, whilst untrained and unsupervised defectives are in some way or
other maintained in large numbers by the public without any economic
return, and often under conditions which entail no little menace to the
well-being of society, yet a large proportion of those who have received
suitable training can subsequently make a material contribution to their
maintenance in institutions or colonies, or even in the general community
if under proper safeguards. In addition to these economic arguments,
the proper care of these defectives is also deserving of consideration on
grounds of humanity. We therefore urge that immediate steps should
be taken to provide suitable educational and training facilities for all
mentally defective and mentally subnormal school children, and that
local authorities should, without delay, provide suitable and sufficient in-
stitutions and colonies for those needing this form of care, and proper
supervision and control for those capable of being left in the general
community.

(2) The Prevention of Mental Deficiency.

This is obviously a much more difficult problem. The segregation
in institutions of defectives who are likely to propagate offspring and the
prohibition of the marriage of defectives, would undoubtedly have some
preventive effect in cutting off that proportion, probably small, of defec-
tives who are the offspring of defective parents. We therefore press for
the adoption of these measures as matters of urgency. Whilst the steril-
isation of certain defectives would also have some preventive effect, it is
the opinion of the Council of this Association, based on the extensive first-
hand knowledge possessed by its members of all aspects of mental defic-
iency, that this preventive effect would be comparatively small and might
easily be counterbalanced by resulting disadvantages. But the whole
Council is convinced that before any preventive measures of real value
can be taken, it is essential to have complete and accurate data regarding
the many factors concerned in causation.

The matter of prevention is undoubtedly one of great importance to
the community and we therefore urge that a full enquiry, by a Royal
Commission or other suitable body, should be made into the causes of
mental deficiency, into its relationship to other abnormal mental con-
ditions and social problems, and into the value of the above-mentioned
and other measures by which it might be prevented.

Whilst we consider such an enquiry for the ascertainment of the
right methods of prevention to be essential, we desire to emphasise the
urgent necessity for the adequate training, supervision, care and control
of all those defectives who already exist. Segregation and efficient super-
vision are not only necessitated by the social incapacity of these persons,
but these are also preventive measures which are of most practical value
in the present state of our knowledge.

We are, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
Leslie Scott, President.
Burnham
Cyril Burt
Ida Darwin
Norah L. Cooke Hurle
W. R. Inge
F. C. Shrubsall
F. Douglas Turner
H. B. Brackenbury, Chairman, Education Committee
F. E. Fremantle, Chairman, Parliamentary Committee
A. F. Tredgold, Chairman, Medical Committee
May Hope ) rT ~
F J Willis J * YC&stiYCTS
Letitia Fairfield, Hon. Medical Secretary
Evelyn Fox, Hon. Secretary
Central Association for Mental Welfare,
24, Buckingham Palace Road, S.W.i.
\ Vice-Presidents
