British National Conference on Social Work
===========================================

HARROGATE, APRIL 1950

It was impossible to believe in a fundamental
opposition between statutory and voluntary bodies
when some 450 representatives of both could meet
and mix for public discussion and private exchange
of views in a markedly friendly and pleasant
atmosphere. No doubt Harrogate contributed
with its flowers and excellent facilities, but most of
us already worked through co-operation between
the official and voluntary organizations, and many
had shared the same training or comparable social
work experience.

Professor Nicholson of Hull took the Chair for
five general sessions of uniformly high excellence.
His opening reference to our need to view facts with
insight and seek for a social pattern unbiased by
our personal make-up gave a central theme to which
with unostentatious skill he led the speakers, and
coaxed even sporadic questions in discussion to fit
into this scheme.

For Mr. Roger Wilson the pattern of the history of
social work showed the change from almsgiving
to " imaginative surgery in human relations
Such of his telling phrases as, " houses don't solve
the housing problem " pricked our minds towards
more effort of thought and perhaps less " busyness "
in our offices. He spoke of the slow retail peddling
of ideas and gave us a sense of time and space for
developing our work

Lest we became too involved in individual
problems, came Dr Alice Stewart's description of
some of the aims of the Oxford Institute of Social
Medicine. Her field-work study of a " population
at risk such as the Northampton boot-trade which
has a high incidence of tuberculosis, showed that for
the purposes of the survey, the individual becomes
but a cell in the blood count. Social Workers must
seek out the significance of such methods in relation
to their own work and above all, search their records
to see whether new guiding ideas, or some change of
manner of recording might enable them to contribute
from their vast resources of human material something of value to social medicine.

Professor Spence turned us back to the study of
the individual and perhaps we felt more at home with
his observations on the effect of the child on the
mother, as well as of the mother on the child. In
spite of her instinctive response to her baby, he
pointed out how amazingly easily she is dominated
by technicians and amongst these might be
mentioned the social worker. She must guard her
ways, for mere watching is in essence interference.
An enormous map of the "conurbation" of the
Birmingham district, acted as background to MrPaul Cadbury's talk on " Town and Country
Planning ". Again we were swept out of the home
into the community. We must shape our schemes
on social requirements and each area be instantly
ready to voice its local needs or the rapid developments which are occurring now will set the pattern
for future community living in an unwished
form.

Looking at the individual, back at society, then
again at man in relation to the world, we heard
Mcleod of Iona call for a recognition of the fact that
the body was dead without the bloodstream of the
Spirit. The split between faith and works had
brought us to our present loss of direction and he
challenged social workers to believe that the only
human relations were spiritual?or to perish with
their works.

These inspiring addresses alternated with the
division of the Conference into five " commissions "
which discussed " Child Welfare " Social Aspects
of Health " Social Adjustment " Community
Services" and " Social Aspects of Town and
Country Planning and Housing." Ninety-two
Preparatory commissions had sent in reports on the
Work of their study groups which were ably summarized in material sent round before the conference.
The Harrogate commissions varied in size from
seventy to twice that number, they attempted to
comment on these summaries and each presented a
report which was discussed by the Conference.

. It was agreed that the groups were too large and
'mplied that the subjects were too vast. In spite of
the heroic efforts of the chairmen and the miracles
Wrought by Rapporteurs in presenting a coherent
Report, the results were nebulous and unconvincing,
"ere was no advance by a group which had become
a corporate unit, but a skilful collection of fragments
which could be made into a non-controversial
Pattern.
The commissions were useful in allowing many,
who would have remained silent in the large theatre,
t? express their views, and they furthered new
acquaintances which are of the value of such
Conferences, but they might have done something
more. For instance in the Child Welfare Commission there were present a large number of Children's
Officers who are the most important newcomers to
the Social work field. Their work brings them into
contact with most other branches of social work and
they are still working out the limits of their function.
Here was a lively chance of discussion but it was
largely lost in a group too numerous and various to
foster personal give and take.

Another experiment was tried in a symposium
in which a representative Youth Leader, Women's
Institute member, Community Centre Leader and an
Assistant Director of Education took part. These
were the only " social workers " who made speeches
from the platform. Each was a good representative
of his or her special work, but in their few minutes
talk could add little to the pattern that was emerging
from the whole conference. The speaker from the
Local Authority compared the " immeasurable "
and the " measurable " aims of voluntary societies,
but we felt that we were being led through the
different sessions to see how they intermingle and
that there is no opposition.

No social worker was chosen as the main speaker.
This is a criticism not of the conference but of the
profession. It is hard to imagine better addresses for
our purpose than those that were given. We need
ordered thought and aims and methods and whether
we have a university background or not, it is the
professors and those who can stand aside and evaluate who are the inspiration of our work.

Social workers have not yet thrown up the thinker
or writer who can take this lead, but are too often
buried in the wealth of their material. Such
experiences as this conference which embraced and,
to a greater or lesser extent, moulded each one of us,
may leave an impression on the future of social
work.

Robina S. Addis.
----------------
We have to make artificial opportunities for social intercourse for various
groups of people?the aged, the deaf the blind, the troublesome, the lonely. In
more genial days, the general zest of society must have carried all these people
along, and no one seems to have been the worse. Now we withdraw our
garments and fear to be bored or distressed.
Lancet. " Day Hospitals." 1.4.50.
