Psychiatric Community Care
===========================

News and Notes

In the Lancet of February 4th, there appeared
an informative article on " The Future of
Community Caredealing with the Scheme
so successfully carried on by the National Association and brought to an end with the withdrawal of
the Ministry of Health grant on the coming into
force of the National Health Service Act in July, 1948.
To emphasize the effect of the cessation of this
Scheme before Local Health Authorities are themselves in a position adequately to undertake the
work, the writer quotes a statement made by Dr.
Louis Minski in the annual report of the Belmont
Neurosis Hospital, Sutton, for 1948-49 :

" One great difficulty which social workers have
found since July 5th, 1948, is the obtaining of
social histories in respect of patients living in
distant parts of the country. This work was
formerly undertaken by psychiatric social
workers from the National Association for
Mental Health and in most cases they have now
ceased to function. Nowadays there is often
no psychiatric social worker available in the
district where the patient lives and the local
M.O.H. has to be approached. He may have
no one on his staff with experience of psychiatric work and the report is often of little
or no value. Similar difficulty is also being
encountered in arranging after-care for patients
because of the lack of psychiatric social workers.
In some districts, after-care consists in referring
patients to a psychiatric clinic which may be
the last thing which is required. I am afraid
after-care as understood by us in the hospital
has almost ceased to exist."

In conclusion, it is suggested that the Service
might again be made possible through the help of
" one of the rich voluntary funds "?at least until
there is something else which can take its place.
Social Workers in the Mental Health Service
The Committee on this subject set up in July,
1948, under the Chairmanship of Professor J. M.
Mackintosh, M.D., F.R.C.P., issued, in April 1949,
an Interim Report, which it was hoped might have
been made generally available. It has, however,
been decided to publish only the Final Report,
and meantime the Ministry of Health has sent to
Regional Hospital Boards, Hospital Management
Committees and Local Health Authorities, a
circular giving the Committee's short-term suggestions on methods of dealing with the present
situation arising from the acute shortage of trained
workers.

The recommendations are as follows :
1. Fuller and better use should be made of married
psychiatric social workers in part-time appointments.
2. The recruitment of men into the Mental Health
Services should be encouraged.
3. The term " psychiatric social worker " should be
restricted to those persons who hold a University
Mental Health Certificate.

4. Efforts should be made to economise in the use of
the services of fully qualified workers. It is
noted, for instance, that they could be freed from
a good deal of clerical and office routine work,
which could be assigned to clerical assistants,
which could be done by clerical assistants.

5. Efforts should be made to develop the joint use
of senior qualified workers by agreement between
Regional Hospital Boards, Hospital Management
Committees and Local Health Authorities.

We understand that the Ministry is not drawing
attention to other recommendations made in the
Interim Report dealing with the possibility of
helping to meet the shortage by instituting an
emergency scheme of training, by reason of the
fact that they would entail some expenditure which
at the present time cannot be sanctioned. In view
of the desperate need, and the fact that lack of
workers seriously militates against the efficiency
of the Mental Health Service in its social aspects,
this is surely to be regretted.

World Federation for Mental Health
----------------------------------
A generous donation is being made towards the
budget of the World Federation by the Josiah
Macy, Junior, Foundation of New York. The
donation will be ?15,000 a year for the next three
years, though for the second and third year it is
conditional upon the Federation raising from other
sources at least ?60,000 annually. An anonymous
British donor has given ?7,500 to be used during
the next three years in meeting the salary of a
Director.

Generosity on this scale is enabling the Federation
to make a start with its work, but the question of
how to place it on a permanently satisfactoty
financial foundation, with an adequate office in
Geneva, is causing considerable anxiety : it is
estimated that a sum of approximately ?30,000
per annum is needed if the organization is to pull
its weight in world affairs. At present thirty-three
countries are represented in the Federation and
there are sixty-two member societies from whom
some help may be expected. Individuals wishing
to be kept in touch with the Federation's activities,
are recommended to subscribe to its Bulletin
(5s. per year) to be obtained from its London
office, 19 Manchester Street, W.l.

On February 17th, the British Standing Committee
of the Federation arranged in London, an " International Symposium " on " Mental Health within
the Family and the School " when the speakers
were : Dr A. Repond (Switzerland), Professor
W. Line (Canada), Professor Fr. H. C. Rumke
(Holland) and Dr J. R. Rees (Director of the
Federation) with Professor J. M. Mackintosh in
the chair.

Third Annual Meeting, Paris
Attention is drawn to the Third Annual Meeting
of the Federation to be held in Paris, by kind
invitation of the Ligue d' Hygiene Mentale) from
Thursday, August 31st to Thursday, September 7th,
1950. The main topics to be considered (mostly
*n small working groups) are : " Mental Health in
Education " Occupational and Industrial Mental
Health", "Mental Health Problems of Transplanted
and Homeless Persons " Problems of Leadership
and Authority in Local Communities."

The meetings are open to members of memberassociations of the Federation and full particulars
jflay be obtained from the Secretary, 19 Manchester
Street, London, W.l.

Leeds Regional Psychiatric Association
Professor T. Ferguson Rodger, Department of
Psychological Medicine, Glasgow University,
addressed a meeting of this Association held in
Leeds General Infirmary, in November.

Professor Rodger described his experiences as a
Member of the Sub-Committee on Mental Health of
the World Health Organization and discussed the
Principles for mental health organization which this
Sub-Committee had formulated. The Committee
J^as representative of psychiatry in Britain, U.S.,
China, Czechoslovakia, Brazil and India. The
facilities for psychiatric treatment throughout the
^'?rld were generally inadequate to meet the
demand?grossly so in Asiatic countries. The need
for preventive measures was paramount ; yet even
ln the advanced countries prevention was a relatively
new field. The most suitable field of development
?f preventive services is the Public Health Service
Which must establish an organization equivalent to
that which it has provided for dealing with the
Problems of communal physical health. Such
Mental Hygiene Departments would require the
distance of research workers in sociological and
Psychological aspects of the work. The International Sub-Committee regard mental health work
among University students as of great importance
as these individuals would in the majority undertake
responsible positions in the community.
In discussion members emphasized the importance
oi instruction in the aims and methods of psychiatry
tor influential laymen such as industrialists, trade
union officials and teachers. The importance of
the Health Visitor, and her part in imparting to
Parents knowledge on the management of children
Was also urged.

Scottish Association for Mental Health
c At the Annual Meeting of this Association, held in
Edinburgh on October 15th, 1949, it was decided to
substitute for " Mental Hygiene " in its title, the
term " Mental Health and a new Constitution
was approved. The crowded public meeting
which followed was addressed by Dr J. R. Rees,
who took as his subject " World Mental Health
Begins at Home
In the summer of 1949, a resident week-end
Conference was held at St. Andrew's University
on the work of Local Voluntary Associations for
Mental Health, attended by forty-five men and
women in key positions. In October, the Association arranged, in Glasgow, an eleven-day Training
Course for workers in the mental deficiency field,
and several members took an active part in the
Post Graduate Course for Medical Officers held at
Glasgow University in the same month.

At the request of the Scottish Council for Social
Service, the Association submitted a memorandum
on the welfare of the mentally handicapped, for
incorporation in a joint memorandum presented
by the Council to the Secretary of State's Advisory
Council on Disabled Persons. The Advisory
Council subsequently requested the Association to
submit another memorandum dealing with the
welfare needs of the mentally handicapped and on
ways of meeting them by voluntary effort.
At the Assembly of the World Federation for
Mental Health in Geneva, the Association was
represented by Professor T. Ferguson Rodger,
Chair of Psychological Medicine, Glasgow
University.

A new Local Voluntary Association for Dumfries
has been formed following on the holding of a very
successful meeting in November, 1949.
Miss Isabel Laird resigned her post as Organizing
Secretary of the Association during the year, and an
Interim Secretary (Miss Mary Baker) was appointed,
The address of the Edinburgh office is now, 41
Charlotte Square, Edinburgh 2.

Mental Health in South Africa
-----------------------------
In the current Annual Report of the South
African National Council for Mental Hygiene, some
interesting developments are recorded.
The Special Schools Act, 1948, is now in operation,
and under it, grants-in-aid may be awarded to
Clinics run by Mental Health Societies, which opens
up a new range of possibilities.

The training of Social Workers, particularly those
engaged in mental health work, is being actively
considered by the Council who have made
representations to the Joint Universities Advisory
Board and the Committee of Enquiry into the
Training and Employment of Social Workers. All
the Mental Health Societies affiliated to the
National Council now employ qualified social
workers, as a result of which marked progress has
been noted.

Shortage of institutional accommodation for
mental defectives and for mental patients continues
to be acute, but the opening of the Howick Institution for European defectives will bring some relief.
It is intended ultimately that this institution shall
provide for 1,500 patients, but at present only
400 males can be accommodated.

The Cape Mental Health Society, at the request of
the Council, is considering the possibility of opening
a Home for coloured mental defectives, as a " pilot
demonstrationThe need for establishing
standardized mental tests for assessing the
intelligence of non-Europeans, has been brought to
the notice of the Education Department.
A non-European Child Guidance Clinic has been
started in Cape Town, serviced by five psychologists,
two social workers, and several playroom assistants.
Connected with the National Council, there are
now seven local Mental Health Societies?in
Bloemfontein, The Cape, Durban, East London,
The Witwatersrand (Johannesburg), Pietermaritzburg and Port Elizabeth. A record of their activities
includes responsibility for Mental Treatment Clinics
and Child Guidance Clinics, After-Care of
psychiatric patients and mental defectives, Occupation Centres and classes for defectives.

This Report is indeed a record of solid achievements in many directions, and the appreciation of
the South African Ministry of Health (Dr the Hon.
A. J. Stals) is expressed in a message conveying his
good wishes to the Council of which he is Hon.
President.

The Council's address is : 426 Empire Buildings,
Kruiz Street, Johannesburg (P.O. Box 2587).

Child Care Courses
------------------
The University of London Institute of Education
and Child Health has recently organized a Senior
Child Care Course for the training of workers for
senior posts in the field of Child Care. This
Course is designed to equip men and women for
Junior Inspectorships, for supervisory and tutorial
posts in connections with workers in Children's
Homes, for supervisory or tutorial posts in connection with Day Nurseries and similar work.
The course includes lectures and seminars on
physical and psychological aspects of child care,
on educational aspects and recreational activities, on
homecraft and domestic aspects of child care and on
social services. Special attention is paid to the
needs of the deprived child and of the delinquent
child and seminars are held on religious education
and on tutorial methods. Visits to clinics, schools,
children's homes, approved schools and other
institutions are. arranged throughout the year.
Two months residential work in a Children's
Home and Reception Centre is undertaken during
the Course. Special observations and special
studies are made by the students and a careful
balance is kept between medical and psychological
aspects of child care and between practical and
theoretical work.

The purpose of the Course is to give those, who
are already qualified and experienced in some aspects
of the care of children a broader and more balanced
knowledge of the whole field of child care and to
deepen and widen their understanding of the
physical and psychological needs of children.
Applications may now be made to the Secretary,
Institute of Education, Malet Street, London, W.C.I,
for admission to next session's Course commencing
October, 1950 and finishing July, 1951.

Applicants should have had not less than five
years experience in the care of children and be
either certificated nurses, teachers or social workers
or possessing a University degree or similar qualifications. Candidates will be selected by interview.

Epilepsy and its Problems
---------------------------
In the Report on the Health of the School Child
1946 and 1947, there is an informative chapter on
Epilepsy which could well stand by itself as a
pamphlet on the subject.

In outlining the development of educational
provision since the passing of the Elementary
Education (Defective and Epileptic Children) Act,
1899, it is noted that since the opening of Lingfield
in 1905, Chalfont St. Peter in 1909, and Sass Moss,
Cheshire, in 1910, only one day special school (for
twenty-nine pupils) has been added to the list and
there are at the present time only seven boarding
schools in the whole country, with accommodation
for 696 children. Complete information as to
incidence is not yet available, but the probability
is that in the school population the proportion of
educable epileptics is 0.3 per 1,000, and residential
provision is needed for at least 1,500 of these. .
The great majority of epileptic children do well in
ordinary schools, and the fact that 80 per cent, of
those in Lingfield and Chalfont were reported in
1946-47 to be below average intelligence, shows
that the main need is for more schools for those who
are educationally subnormal.

In a discussion on the curriculum and organization
of residential schools, emphasis is laid on the
importance of providing facilities for activities out
of school hours?sometimes omitted owing to
shortage of staff?and on the value of sending the
children home for holidays, a practice not invariably
encouraged by medical superintendents. The
Report is uncompromisingly dogmatic on this
point :
"... the one massive, overwhelming argument in favour of sending a child home for
holidays is that he ought to maintain as close
a relationship as possible with his family and
so experience the intimacies and the ups and
downs of family life."

a plea which is equally valid for every other type of
handicapped child in a residential home or school.
The association of " behaviour problems "
with epilepsy has, in the past, been the subject of
over-statement, and it is noted that the inevitable
linking of the two was always deplored by Dr Tylor
Fox who used to express the opinion that he doubted
whether one in ten of epileptics living outside
institutions possessed the epileptic temperament.
One of the smaller special schools, it is true, has
said that 25 per cent, of its pupils were " difficult
to handle " but the writer of the chapter under
review, refers to the part played by "boredom in too
mstitutional an environment" in producing
Problems of the kind. The establishment of a unit
*n one of the schools for maladjusted epileptic
children is, however, a future project.
In addition to the educational aspect of this
Problem, this chapter of the Report gives a clear
summary of the different types of epilepsy on
Prognosis and on treatment, and it concludes with
a section on " Public Opinion and Community
Care touching on the question of employment
and on the community's attitude towards the
ePileptic.

There is thus an urgent need for a representative
National organization " to champion the cause of
toe epileptic "?the chapter concludes ; and we are
?lad to be able to state that plans for such a scheme
are now under active consideration. In them, the
Rational Association is co-operating and it is
h?ped that a preliminary conference may be called
shortly, to which further reference will be made in
?ur next issue.

Ascertainment of Educationally Subnormal Children
. In the Report referred to above, there is an
interesting chapter, written for the guidance of
Education Authorities and School Medical Officers,
?n this all-important question.
Stress is laid on the imperative need for a proper
selection of medical officers upon whom falls the
responsibility of deciding whether a child's " disability of mind " is such that he needs special
education or whether he must be pronounced as
ineducable within the school system. This work,
lt stated :

" calls for judgment founded on deep understanding and knowledge, reinforced by extensive
experience of children, both normal and
abnormal. It requires very special aptitudes
and attributes, particularly patience and a
capacity for friendliness with children."
^fpreover, to carry it out efficiently, a medical
?jncer should be acquainted with the various types
o* schools now provided so that he may fully
Understand the import of the recommendations he
make.

A warning is given against exclusive reliance on the
results of intelligence tests, and the need for allowing
sufficient time during the examination for gaining
llle child's confidence is pointed out. The
confidence of the parent must also be gained :
" ... it is their child who is being examined.
Therefore they have a right to be given sympathetic and friendly attention, partly in order to
obtain their co-operation but chiefly to give them
an understanding and appreciation of the
Problem which causes them much anxiety. . . .
Much unhappiness can be dispelled by a
straightforward and human approach with a
sympathetic understanding of the parents'
difficulties."

In a borderline case, where diagnosis is difficult, the
examining officer is urged to give the child the
benefit of the doubt, by postponing the making of a
decision until after a further period of observation,
or of trial in a special school, and the fact that no
special school exists in the area must never be
allowed to influence the final decision.
Another important point is stressed at the conclusion of this chapter?in the paragraphs headed
" Ineducable Children If a diagnosis of ineducability is made, Section 57 (3) of the Education
Act requires the Local Education Authority to
inform the parent in writing of this decision. It is,
however, urged that such a notification should not
merely be sent through the post but should be
delivered personally by a social worker, health
visitor, school nurse or some other experienced
welfare officer of the Authority, in order that the
matter may be sympathetically explained and
questions answered.

"On examining children ", we are told, '' whose
parents have appealed to the Minister against
the issue of a report, it has been found over
and over again that the parents do not really
contest the view of the Authority as to the
educability of the child, but owing to the
notice having been phrased in official and sometimes terse language, they fear that it presages
immediate and permanent removal from his
home and their care. This fear naturally
causes much distress and unhappiness."
This chapter is primarily concerned with " human
relations " and we welcome its warmth of tone and
sympathetic understanding.

Amending Regulations
In connection with this question of " ascertainment we draw attention to the recent issue of
Amending Regulations (Statutory Instruments,
1949, No. 1970) on procedure in cases of children
referred for examination by reason of educational
subnormality.

The original Form of Report (H.P.2) received
some criticism in that it had to be filled in exclusively
by the School Medical Officer and no provision was
made in it for the statutory services of an educational psychologist (where one is employed) in
assessing intelligence.

The revised Form now gives to psychologists due
professional status and Part II comprising not only a
record of the results of Intelligence Tests (including
performance tests) but also " general observations "
may be filled in and signed either by a psychologist
or by the School Medical Officer.

Cerebral Palsied Children

Those who are interested in cerebral palsied
children will be glad to know that in The Health
of the School Child (1946 and 1947), a whole chapter
is devoted to the subject.

Some information is given about experimental
research work now being carried on in this field
(e.g. at St. Margaret's, Croydon, and Queen Mary's
Hospital, Carshalton) and reference is made to
enquiries as to incidence which have been undertaken in Sheffield, Bristol and in Wiltshire, as well
as to American experience. It is emphasized,
however, that the study of the subject is still in its
infancy and that " we are only at the beginning of a
tremendous task the implications of which are
sympathetically outlined in this very human
presentation of the cerebral palsied child's urgent
needs.

These needs are also revealed in'a note that has
reached us from a mental health worker who
is employed by the Education Authority of a small
County Borough as a home teacher of six cerebral
palsied children all seriously crippled. Growing
out of this work is a social club for less handicapped
older children and a class to help them in subjects
in which they are backward at school. A Parent's
Association, affiliated to the British Council for the
Welfare of Spastics has been launched. The interest
of the local Scouts has been enlisted, and it is
hoped in time to start a special troop.
It is particularly interesting to know that these
activities grew out of an enterprising piece of
pioneer voluntary service, consisting of efforts made
to help an individual child, followed by a Saturday
morning experimental class sponsored by the
children's parents with the help of the Red Cross
car service.

Art and Music Therapy
---------------------
Readers who are interested in the use of art and
music in the treatment of mental patients, may like to
know that a report of a one-day conference on
" Art and Music Therapy " held by the British
Council for Rehabilitation in the spring of last year,
appeared in the October issue of the Council's
magazine Rehabilitation (32 Shaftesbury Avenue, W. 1.
Price 2s.). It includes contributions from Dr E.
Cunningham Dax (Netherne Hospital, Coulsdon),
on " Music Therapy Mrs. H. I. Champernowne,
on " Painting and Modelling as an Inner Process ",
Miss J. Guy on " Modelling and Pottery ", and
Miss N. Godfrey on " Painting " ; Dr W. J. T.
Kimber (Hill End Hospital, St. Albans) gave an
address on " The Patient with the Paint Brush ",
and an account of the Arthur Segal Method in Art
Therapy was given by Miss Elsie Davies, (Art
Therapist, City Sanatorium, Birmingham). Mr.
Adrian Hill, referred to the " giant strides " made
by Art Therapy since he first launched it as an
experiment at the King Edward VII Sanatorium
in 1942.

Forthcoming Conferences
-----------------------
The following Conferences?all of which have a
bearing on mental health?are amongst those taking
place during the next few months :
British National Conference on Social Work,
Harrogate, April 19th to 23rd. Subject :
" Social Services in 1950, the Respective Roles
of Statutory Authorities and Voluntary
Organizations." Particulars from Conference
Secretary, 26 Bedford Square, W.C.I.
Royal Sanitary Institute. Health Congress at
Eastbourne, April, 24th-28th. Subjects include
" The Administration of Care and AfterCare Schemes ", " The Role of the Family
in National Life ", " Administrative Problems
due to Vague or Complicated Legislation ".
National Marriage Guidance Council Annual
Conference, Rustington, near Littlehampton,
Sussex, May 6th-13th. Particulars from
Marriage Guidance Council, 78 Duke Street,
London, W.l.

International Conference on Social Work, Paris,
July 23rd-28th. Subject : " Social Work in
1950. Its Boundary and Content." At this
Conference, the conclusions reached at Harrogate will be presented.

British Social Hygiene Council's Summer Schools.
July 31st to August 14th, Seale-Hayne Agricultural College, Newton Abbot, Devon ; August
16th-30th, College Franco-Britannique, Cite
Universitaire, Paris. Subjects " Biology and
Rural Life" (Devon School) and " The
Welfare of the Family" (Paris School).

Particulars from British Social Hygiene Council,
Tavistock House North, Tavistock Square,
London, W.C.I.
Twelfth International Penal and Penitentiary
Congress, August 14th-19th at The Hague.
Particulars from John Ross, Esq., Assistant
Under-Secretary of State, Department of
Probation and Juvenile Delinquency, Home
Office, London, S.W.I.
Second International Congress on Criminology,
Paris, September 10th-19th. Particulars from
the Organizing Secretary in the United
Kingdom, c/o Institute for Scientific Treatment of Delinquency, 8 Bourdon Street,
London, W.l.
Psychodrama
The Theatre of Psychodrama, New York, is
holding weekly performances every Sunday evening
until the end of May.
The productions are spontaneous and unrehearsed
and result from the interaction between the stage
and the audience, and they are regarded as a social
experiment to demonstrate the possibilities of mass
therapy.
Further information may be obtained from The
Theatre of Psychodrama, 101 Park Avenue, New
York 17, U.S.A.
1
