Mental Hygiene in Public Health
===============================

:Author: P. V. Lemkau,
M.D. McGraw Hill Book (Jo. 38s. 6d.

This book cannot be over-praised, because it
opens a wide field for the activities of Medical
Officers of Health. It arises as a result of a series
of lectures given in an American University by a
Public Health Officer, who has had the vision to see
that mental health is as important as physical
health.

The new Health Service Act has laid much
stress on hospital and clinical care and treatment,
but the preventive side of medicine has been passed
by. It is very necessary that in the mental health
world every measure should be taken to prevent the
development of mental illness, or to arrest it as soon
as detected. This means that a Public Mental
Health Officer must be aware of the early signs and
symptoms of deviations from normal mental health,
and make arrangements for early treatment in the
community to prevent the development of the
illness to such an extent that the patient requires
hospital care. To this end he must understand
normal emotional development and the beginnings
of emotional abnormality. Lemkau's book gives
this understanding. He indicates the kind of
preventive mental health service that could be set up
and also describes the development of personality
so that a clear picture is given of the strains and
stresses that give rise to early mental illness.
A description is given of the various Mental
Health Services in the different States in the United
States, and one feels that although some of them are
ahead of us, others are not so well organized.
If Medical Officers of Health are looking for a
new field to conquer, they should buy this book
and use it as a text-book for the development of an
enlightened mental health service.
A.T.
