The Mental Health Services in 1948
===================================

Last year, for the first time, mental health was
included in the Report of the Ministry of Health
but not in that of the Chief Medical Officer to
the Ministry. This year it is included in both,
the administrative report covering the period for
the year ending March 31st, 1949, and the
medical report, that for the year ending
December 31st, 1948.*

The Chief Medical Officer begins his section
with a useful survey of the development and
practice of psychiatry in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries ; present-day problems
are then briefly noted, including the supply of
mental nurses (at the end of 1948 it was estimated
that 8,000 female and 3,000 male recruits were
needed), the use of physical treatment, psychopathology, out-patient treatment and psychiatric
social work.

The increasing use of mental hospitals by
voluntary patients has strained accommodation
to the uttermost and direct admissions have
risen from 39,223 in 1947 to 45,659 in 1948 :
in 1928, when certification was necessary
in all cases the comparable figure was only
20,774. It is suggested that there are three
main reasons for this increase : (1) that treatment is more effective ; (2) that patients seek
treatment at an earlier stage; (3) that the
type of patient entering hospital has changed.
The more rapid turnover does not, therefore,
represent an equivalent increase in the percentage
of the population under care (at a given moment
in 1948, 3-41 per 1,000 as compared with 3-57
in 1930).

In this section of the Report, half a page only
is devoted to mental deficiency which gives, we
venture to suggest, an unduly optimistic impression of the present position in regard to it.
Perhaps next year, however, we may look forward to a fuller discussion of the problems
involved in considering this " Cinderella of
psychiatry " and its far reaching ramifications.
Another noteworthy omission in the Report
is the absence of any reference to psychiatric
community care in the section dealing with
" Care and After-Care of Persons suffering
from Illness ".

Turning to the administrative report, we find
the Mental Health Services dealt with in the
fourth section of the chapter on the National
* H.M. Stationery Office, 7s. 6d.

Health Service which gives full statistical
information, supplemented by three statistical
tables printed as appendices.

Mental Disorder
----------------
At the end of 1948, the total number of
Cental patients under care was 145,779 of whom
5,884 were private patients (a decrease of 7,322)
138,911 were Health Service patients and 984
Were in Broadmoor. This total number represents an increase of only seven patients compared
with the previous year, but it must be
remembered that it relates only to patients
actually under care at a given date and does not
include the total number admitted during the
year, referred to in the Chief Medical Officer's
rePort noted above.

Of the patients under care on December 31st,
1948,14-9 per cent, were voluntary, 0*4 per cent,
temporary and 84*7 per cent, certified.
The overcrowding in mental hospitals persists
and increases, being 12*2 per cent, at the end of
1?48 as compared with 11*7 per cent, in 1947.
This makes it all the more unfortunate that there
Were on December 31st, 1948, still 3,034 beds
diverted for purposes arising from the war,
-,689 unoccupied owing to shortage of staff, and
2,694 out of commission pending structural
rePairs.*

Calculated on direct admissions, the following
figures are given showing rates of discharges
and departures from hospital :
Recovered or relieved .. 68-3%
Recovered .. .. 32 ? 1 %
The total absolute discharges and departures
Was 78-2 per cent. Before the operation of the
Rental Treatment Act, this last figure was
48-3 per cent., which gives an indication of the
great change in the situation during the last
twenty years.

Mental Deficiency
------------------
At the end of 1948, the total number of
defectives in institutions or under statutory
pare in the community was 105,398, a net
increase of 2,077. Of the 54,887 in institutions,
14 per cent, were under the age of 16. The
following table shows comparative figures which
are interesting :

In Institutions, Houses and
Homes provided under
the Mental Deficiency
Act, 1913
Under Guardianship or
Notified
Under Statutory Supervision
1939
46,054
4,841
39,009
89,904
1948
54,229
5,373
43,719
103,321
1949
54,887
5,724
44,787
105,390
Another Table gives the position with regard
to ascertainment :
On
Jan. 1st
Number
reported
whether
" subject
to be
dealt
with "
or not
Ratio
per 1,000
of the
population
Number
ascertained
to be
" subject
to be
dealt
with "
Ratio
per 1,000
of the
population
1947 ..
1948 ..
1949 ..
Increase
during
1948 ..
133,967
135,388
129,700
5,688
3-23
3-26
3-00
0-26
102,073
103,524
102,734
790
2-46
2-50
2-40
0-10

About these figures it would be helpful to
have more information, particularly in respect
of the 4,394 children reported by Local Education Authorities which are included in the
" subject to be dealt with " column.f How
many of these were school leavers, reported
under Section 55(5) of the Education Act, and
how many were reported under Section 55(3) as
being incapable of receiving education ? It
would also be of interest to know how many
educationally subnormal school leavers were
reported to Local Health Authorities for
voluntary supervision?and the extent to which
voluntary supervision is being provided for
other defectives not at present " subject to be
dealt with
We miss this year the detailed list of ascertainment rates of Local Authorities which were an
unvarying feature of the Board of Control's
Reports in former years, and hope that its
omission is not to be taken as a precedent.
2nn nnl? '"teres(ing to note that at the end of 1948, out of approximately 515,000 hospital beds in England and Wales,
>000 were for mental illness.

The comparable figures for 1946 and 1947 were respectively, 4,209 and 3,799.
Of the cases ascertained during the year,
1,047 were sent to institutions, 136 were placed
under guardianship, 4,306 under statutory
supervision and 182 taken to places of safety.
128 died or were removed to other areas,
whilst in 643 cases (10 per cent.) no action had
been taken at the time the returns were made.
In connection with accommodation, the
familiar story of long waiting lists, of beds
unoccupied owing to the difficulty of securing
staff, of lack of progress in building despite high
priority given to provision for low-grade and
difficult patients, has once more to be told. The
total number of beds available at the end of
December, 1948, was 50,069, representing a
small increase of 637, mainly due to the opening
of three new institutions?School Aycliffe
Hospital (Durham) Aston Hall (Sheffield) and
Holywell House (Elland)?and the approval of
four additional Approved Homes.

Some slight progress is reported in the provision of Occupation Centres of which there were
129 as compared with 100 the previous year,
together with 5 Clubs (an increase of one).
But in view of the fact that in 1949 there
was a leeway of 49 Centres and 8 Clubs still
to be made up before the total reaches that
of 1939 and that there were 235 fewer children
in attendance than was the case before the
War, the situation cannot be viewed with complacency.

Discharge rates from institutions were 846
and from Guardianship 134, representing a total
increase of 155 compared with the year 1947.
Now that the Mental Health Service is an
integral part of the National Health Service, its
report must logically be included in that of the
Ministry of Health, but if it could also be made
available as a separate reprint this would be a
great convenience to mental health workers,
members of Parents' Associations and others
for whom the subject is a main interest. The
list of mental hospitals formerly included in
Part II of the Board of Control's Report was also
an extremely useful adjunct for reference
purposes, whose disappearance we regret.
