The Background of Guidance
=============================

New Zealand
Council tor Educational Research. rp. izs.
6s.

This book gives an account of studies made
by the New Zealand Council for Educational
Research. It describes the organization of
education in New Zealand and the way this
organization works out in practice and thus
shows the general setting into which all educa-
tional and vocational guidance in the country
must be fitted.

After a short account of the types of school
available and numbers to be found in each it
describes the enquiries made by the investigators.
A study was made, for example, of the causes
which determine whether a child leaves school
finally for work at the end of the primary school
course or whether he passes on to technical,
secondary or other form of post-primary
education. Although in its official organization
New Zealand would appear to give somewhat
more " equivalence of opportunity " than this
country in that free places are available for all
reaching a certain standard of proficiency in
primary school, it is not surprising to find that
many of the same influences are at work in
New Zealand as are found in the mother country
in determining the choice of school or work.
Among these influences are the level of intelli-
gence of the pupil, success in primary school, and
the socio-economic level of the parents.

Other enquiries concerned the average age at
which children leave primary school (partly
determined by their success or failure and their
need to repeat a class); the distribution of good,
average and poor reports from head teachers of
primary school, occupational status of parents,
etc. Further, a study was made of the occupa-
tional intentions of the pupils in primary schools
together with the reasons for their choice; the
relation between this choice and the length of
stay in school, the age of leaving primary school,
parental occupation, etc.; also into the relation-
ship between the occupation originally intended
and the one actually entered. Research was also
carried out into the types of occupation available
and the various requirements for entering them-
The investigators, in emphasizing the need for
a thorough study of the individual as well as of
the environmental influences and possibilities,
conclude that much of the study should be done
by trained teachers rather than by the professional
psychologists. This is a conclusion which would
be fully supported by workers in other countries,
since it is obviously the teachers who have the
greatest opportunity for making a thorough
study of the child.

The book illustrates the necessity for a study
of existing conditions by all those undertaking
guidance work, but the actual results in the
figures given are of value only for those working
in New Zealand itself.
M.B.S.
