The Education of the Backward Child
=====================================

:Author: Mary Stewart, with a preface by Margaret
Cole. Fabian Research Series, No. 57.
Gollancz. 6d.

This 24-page pamphlet is part of a general
programme for post-war educational reform
(eventually to appear as a book) which the
Fabian Society is now publishing in sections.
It is the shortest and most lucid exposition
of an involved problem which we have met for a
long time, making use of both the classic and
the more recent surveys and researches without
lessening its appeal to the general reader. It is
0ne of the few expositions I have met which
approaches the problem from a humanistic and
educational viewpoint and yet is wholly con-
usant with the legal, administrative and
Psychological difficulties which stand in the way
?f implementing its recommendations.

The initial concern of the pamphlet is with
our feeble-minded children, only one-eighth of
whom are at present in Special Schools. The
Psychological problem of making teachers,
Parents and administrators aware of the advan-
tages of such special education for this type of
child, is a matter of instruction and propaganda
and of adequate training in these matters of
teachers and certifying officers, not to speak of
supplementary staffing arrangements both on
the medical and educational sides.

For the major administrative problem of
Providing special education throughout the
country in the many small areas large enough
t? supply adequate educational facilities for the
eeble-minded child, the solution may be in
Recognizing that " there is no hard and fast
distinction between the defective and the normal
. . . and that the lines of division between
the classes are arbitrary and the present ones
may not be the best possible places from the
educational point of view This opens up to
educators the choice of extending the facilities
of special education so as to include the larger
group realized by either lowering or raising the
I.Q. for educational certification.

" If there was a rigorous weeding out of all
elementary school children whose I.Q.s fall below
70, elementary schools would be relieved of a
considerable number of children who . . . were
unable to benefit by the education provided for
them.''''

Of the second group of children?the educa-
tionally dull?Margaret Cole has much to say
in respect of the organization of both their
elementary and secondary education, and though
she leaves the problem skilfully exposed but
unsolved, her solution is implicit in her plea for
a wider experimental attitude on the part of the
Board of Education and of Local Authorities.
" The ideal system will not be found without
experiment."
R.T.
