Central Association for Mental Welfare
=======================================

News and Notes

d\cal Officers' Course. The annual Course on
cn ? deficiency organized by the Association
?operation with the University of London Tutorial
passes Council, was held at the London School ot
"ygiene from April 18th to May 1st. Practical testing
rk was carried out in schools in Acton by kind
Permission of the Local Education Authority, and other
att Ca!10nal visits were paid. Forty-five medical officers
tended, from all parts of the country.

Teachers' Courses. At the request of the Nottingham
tducation Committee, a Course for Teachers in the area
fm n? 0rganized to take place in August. Teachers
allowed6 County would be admitted a,so' vacancies
u&"caJ!onaI Psychologists. Miss Gibbs and Mrs.
iripm f have been working in Staffordshire, givi g
SSf? ~ests in the schools. Mrs. Highfield has also
?ujd Ramsgate to carry out some investigation into
e incidence of educational retardation found on the
i :?Pening of the schools. Lectures have been given in
ondon by Miss Gibbs and by Miss Ruth Thomas,
" nS!i services continue to be extensively used by the
Under Fives " Sub-Committee of the Mental Health
emergency Committee. Two additional psychologists
r;Miss M. Proctor and Mr. G. Whitehead-have been
PPointed temporarily to the Association's staff to carry
sPecific pieces of work.

u!??sfels for Agriculturhl Workers. In addition to the
of ft1-at Hatherley Court, Gloucestershire, the opening
u ,lc-h was recorded in our last issue, two further
Cnci bave been opened?one at Denmead, near
CnJ)a? (under the Hampshire War Agricultural
MaSmi\tee) and a second one in Gloucestershire (Red
Cniirft ? satisfactory are the results that both the
s > ty Committees concerned are anxious that the
me should be extended and further developments
under consideration.

m^ence has shown that the success of these experi-
u al Hostels is largely due to the fact that before any
accepted he is seen personally at the Institution
m the application comes, by the. Association s
guardianship Officer, and a full report oh his conduct
to ,CaPacities is obtained. So far, admission is limited
Institutfo W^? bave already received training in an
as^We for difficult Children under Five. It is hoped,
0 ?n as the necessary premises can be acquired, to
Drnv ?ne or m?re Homes for children under five who are
ReJi"8 .to? difficult to fit into ordinary billets or
unHn,eutlal Nurseries. Some of these children will
defers dly be found, after observation, to be "^tally
unSTe 0r dull> but the majority will probably be of the
Such ; ' ? maladJusted type. A great need exists for
to py P?frlalized provision and every effort is being made
0 exPedite the scheme.

hlld Guidance Council
------------------------

ChiurLSe.rvices. Current Loan Services provided by the
Guidance Council have, for the time being, ceased.
The appointment of Miss Bavin as full-time Psychiatric
Social Worker at the Oldham and Rochdale Clinic was
confirmed at the beginning of March, and Mrs. Hard-
castle's services were transferred to the Mental Health
Emergency Committee as from April 1st. The Council
are particularly grateful to Mrs. Hardcastle for the
excellent work she did as liaison officer with the Mental
Health Emergency Committee during the past two years.
Fellowships. Two new Fellowships in Psychiatry have
been awarded, and the recipients started work in March,
Dr Joyce Marshal at the Tavistock Clinic and Dr.
Barbara Shorting at the Maudsley Hospital. It is hoped
to provide further Fellowships, both in Psychiatry and
Psychology, during the ensuing year. In the past year,
four Fellowships in Psychiatry were given, and?in
conjunction with the Central Association for Mental
Welfare?four in Psychology.

Clinics. The establishment of Clinics continues to
grow, and the following have recently been started:
Middlesex (Harrow), Surrey and Berkshire, while Great
Ormond Street Hospital Clinic has re-opened. The
following areas are actively interested in the formation
of Clinics: Preston, Lincoln, Bedford, North Riding and
Brighton. It will be seen that there is a distinct move to
provide for rural communities and the smaller country
towns, mainly reception areas, and it is hoped that this
will form a precedent for such services after the war.
Most of the Authorities are alive to the desirability of a
complete team in their clinics, and the Council appreciates
the efforts of the individual workers in emphasizing the
importance of this principle.

It is very gratifying that Her Majesty the Queen has
allocated from the " Bundles for Britain " Fund, not
only the ?2,000 recorded in the Mental Health Emergency
Committee's notes above, but also ?2,000 to the Children's
Hospital, Belfast, for the formation of a Child Guidance
Clinic, and ?1.000 to Great Ormond Street Hospital for
the future development of their own Child Guidance
Clinic.

Training of Workers. Through a Special Committee,
the Council .is actively engaged in discussing the future
training, status and function of workers in Clinics, and
it is hoped that a Conference of Psychiatrists, Psycho-
logists and Psychiatric Social Workers, will be called in
July, to exchange ideas and crystalize schemes to this end.

New Pamphlet. The pamphlet prepared for Teachers
and Nurses in Orthopaedic Hospitals has now been
published under the title, " The Mind of the Cripple
and is obtainable from the Council Offices, 23 Queen
Square, Bath, price Is. 6d.

National Council for Mental Hygiene
-------------------------------------

Annual Meeting. Owing to the change in the date of the
Council's financial year, will members please note that
the Annual Meeting this year will be held on Tuesday,
September 29th. It is hoped to have as usual a public
meeting afterwards, at which an address on a mental
health subject will be given. A notice of the meeting
and full particulars will be circulated in due course.
i? ?

Lectures for Civil Defence Personnel. There has been
an increasing demand for the Council's lectures for
members of the various categories of the Civil Defence
services and many applications for repeat visits have been
received. A number of meetings of Rest Centre workers
in Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire have been addressed
and a further tour by one of the Council's speakers is
shortly to be undertaken. Lectures have also been given
at First Aid Posts in parts of Yorkshire, and other places
visited include districts in Lancashire, Cheshire,
Buckinghamshire and Westmorland, and also Bourne-
mouth, Poole, Plymouth and Weston-super-Mare.

Mental Health lectures have also been included in some
courses arranged for Information Officers. At all the
meetings the discussion has been keen, and reports
received indicate that the problems discussed have been
of real practical value to those concerned and have given
them a valuable insight into the psychological aspect of
human problems of wartime.

Army Education Scheme. As a result of approaches
made to the Central Advisory Council for Adult Educa-
tion in H.M. Forces, applications for lectures on mental
health subjects are now being received from the Army
Education Authorities. The talks offered aim at creating
a balanced understanding of the individual's own attitude
towards life, and of his responsibilities as a citizen and
in relation to parenthood, etc. The Council welcomes
this new contact which it is felt should have valuable
repercussions in the years of reconstruction that are to
follow.

Rural Mental Health Education
-------------------------------

A preliminary report is now available on the progress
of this scheme, to which previous reference has been
made, and which is undertaken jointly by the Central
Association for Mental Welfare, Child Guidance Council,
and the National Council for Mental Hygiene, and was
made possible by a prize award of ?250 from the Central
Council for Health Education. The scheme provides a
series of four talks, entitled " Understanding Ourselves
and Our Children ", which is offered to local organiza-
tions in rural and small urban districts where services of
the kind are not available.

The campaign has been mainly concentrated in Civil
Defence Region 6 (Berks, Bucks, Hants, Oxfordshire)
where, as a result of contacts made by the regional
representative of the Mental Health Emergency Com-
mittee, a total of 47 talks has so far been arranged. These
have been given to Women's Institutes, Schools, Clubs,
Maternity and Child Welfare Centres, local groups of
workers, and other bodies. The comparative in-
accessibility of the places selected, with their difficulties
of transport, has imposed a heavy task on the speakers
who have visited them, but the venture has proved well
worth while as the lectures have not only been generally
welcomed but have aroused interest in the mental health
aspect of problems of everyday life which it is hoped will
be further stimulated by the setting up of local discussion
groups. Parents with adolescents were particularly keen
to have advice, and many requests for repeat visits have
been received. The need for inviting fathers to the
lectures has been stressed, a point which will be con-
stantly borne in mind but which on the whole has not
been practicable so far owing to the difficulty of holding
evening meetings.

Owing to the conditions prevailing at Maternity and
Child Welfare Centres, a talk of the length of 30 to 40
minutes is generally impossible, and the suggestion has
been made that periodic visits by a selected 1 ocal
speaker, who could talk with the mothers individually'
would be of special value.

Part of the grant received has been set aside f?r
preliminary talks in other Regions, and the series of four
talks is at present being given at Harrogate, where the
regional representative of the Mental Health Emergency
Committee has assembled an interested group from the
surrounding rural areas consisting of Billeting Officer5
and their assistants, Welfare Officers, Health Visitors'
voluntary helpers at the Infant Welfare Clinics, School
Teachers, W.V.S. and Club workers, Youth Organizers*
and also members of the local voluntary organizations-
This is to be followed later by a course at Wakefield which
will also bring in people from outlying districts.
In Civil Defence Region 7, arrangements are in progress
for holding lectures at Tiverton and Cullompton 10
Devonshire, and at Wotton-under-Edge, in Gloucester-
shire.

In all the arrangements, the joint Committee of the
three societies, which is carrying out the work, has beefl
greatly helped by the valuable co-operation of the Medici
Officers of Health and Education officials.

Owing to the limits of the grant it has not been possible
to accept all requests for talks, but the campaign is so
obviously meeting a public need that it is hoped further
funds will be forthcoming for its continuance, and
consideration is at present being given to this question
by the Committee concerned.

Mental Health Emergency Committee
-------------------------------------

Training Courses. A Week-end Course on the Mentaj
Health Services, for Welfare Workers employed by Loca'
Authorities for work amongst evacuees or in Rest Centres
and Air Raid Shelters, was held in London frofl1
February 13th to 16th. The Course was attended W
48 students from all parts of the country, and proved to
be very helpful to them.

A second Course for Matrons of Hostels for Difficult
Children was held at Gypsy Hill Training College in it*
evacuation quarters at Bingley (Yorks), from April 10th
to 17th, and was attended by 27 students from Hostel5
in the northern Regions.

Children under Five. The advisory work in connection
with War Nurseries continues to increase and there
now six workers engaged in it.

A Joint Committee consisting of representatives of the
National Society of Children's Nurseries, the Nursery
Schools Association and the Mental Health Emergency
Committee has been formed to organize and administer
this service, which is available both for Local Authorities
and for individual Nurseries. Applications should be
sent to the Secretary, Miss Ruth Thomas, 24 Buckingham
Palace Road, S.W.I.

Gift from H.M. The Queen. The Committee have
----------------------------------------------

great pleasure in recording the reception of a munificent
gift of ?2,000, allocated to them by H.M. The Queeij
from a sum of money generously placed at her disposa'
by the U.S.A. " Bundles for Britain " organization-
This splendid help will enable some constructive work to
be carried out for children coming within the Com'
mittee's province, and a detailed scheme is bein?
considered as we go to press.

Regional Work. The Committee now has Regiona'
Representatives in 6 Civil Defence Regions, and the#
AHnvis more and more widely appreciated,
^aditional appointments have recently been made n
th? urther Regions (9 and 12) and only 3 areas will
the* be left uncovered.

Joint Register of Foster-Homes
The Joim Register of Foster-Homes and Schools for
aifc ??US' Difficult and Retarded Children (under the
Co,f'C-n of the C.A.M.W. and the Child Gulda"^
En?,rCAhas received a generous gift of money from
kinri Pea^ing Union, made available through
ndness of a Canadian benefactor, Mrs. Sholto Smith.

This welcome gift will enable a beginning to be made
oblr Settin8 aside of certain foster-homes where skilled
Clfn and psychiatric treatment at a Child Guidance
of e can be provided for children presenting problems
in J?ecial difficulty. This is a much needed development
u Jf\ Work of the Register and will greatly add to its
usefulness.

defectives and Military Service
0lSe article on this subject by Dr Esher, published in
Dolt r lssue- ?an now be obtained as a reprint price 6d.
BurV- ,e- APPly to the Secretary, C.A.M.W.,
ucklngham Palace Road, S.W.I.

Staffordshire Study Week
-------------------------

AIJe Annual Study Week arranged by the Staffordshire
fr! ?ciati?n for Mental Welfare will be held in Stafford
m July 20th to 24th, 1942.

anlh? Course is designed for those employed in training
Cent aching defectives in Institutions, Occupa
centres, Special Schools, etc., and the curriculum will
include lectures on various aspects of mental deficiency
with practical classes in physical work, handicrafts and
speech therapy.

Further information can be obtained from the
Organizer of Centres, Crabbery Chambers, Crabbery
Street, Stafford.

Association of Mental Health Workers
---------------------------------------

The Annual Conference of the Association was held
at Wadham College, Oxford, from April 10th to'13th,
1942, and was attended by 54 members.

Addresses were given by Dr J. Christopher Penton, on
" The Possibilities of Implementing the Recommenda-
tions of the Feversham Report after the Warby
Dr C. J. Earl on "The Institutional Treatment of
Defectives in the New Order and by Dr Kathleen
Todd on "The Effects of Evacuation on Neurotic
ChildrenIn addition, a talk was given by Miss
Isabel Laird on the planning of simple occupations under
present conditions, and a discussion took place on the
question of whether Supervisors of Occupation Centres
should be certificated teachers. Visits were arranged to
Littlemore Mental Hospital, the local Hostel for Difficult
Children, and the Occupation Centre, and Dr Plewa, of
the Oxford Child Guidance Centre, gave a talk on some
cases treated during the year.

To the lecturers and to those through whose kindness
it was possible to arrange the visits of observation, the
thanks of the Association are gratefully given.
At the Annual Meeting held during the Conference,
the following officers were elected: Chairman, Miss
F. H. Tosh; Vice-Chairman, Mrs. Lucy Beach; Hon.
Secretary, Miss St. Clair Townsend; Hon. Treasurers,
Miss J. M. Mackenzie and Miss M. de Caux.
