Schizophrenia in Childhood
===========================

:Author: Charles Bradley, M.D.
T1 r*A 1QJ.1
New York ana London, ine iviaciiuuau x*-r?.
Pp. 152. 10s. 6d. net.

Although Schizophrenia is not a common diagnosis
in child guidance clinic statistics it is interesting to notice
that the numbers quoted by different authorities differ
considerably. This is probably due to the fact that the
limits of the condition are by no means clearly defined.
The schizoid type of child is by no means uncommon,
but the great majority of these never become psychotic.
None the less some observers will refer to the more
extreme examples of this group as schizophrenic while
others reserve this term for those exhibiting a definite
and pronounced psychosis.

Dr Bradley, who has had an excellent opportunity for
observing abnormal children in the Emma Pendleton
Bradley Home for difficult children, recognizes this and
seeks a more exact definition of juvenile schizophrenia.
He describes it as "a rare but severe distortion of the
personality, peculiarly distinguished by a diffuse retrac-
tion of interest from the environment
In accordance with the restricted development of the
child's mind, and the fact that mental development
continues throughout the disease, the appearance of
schizophrenia in the child differs from that in the adult.
It is specially characterized by extreme exclusiveness,
excessive day-dreaming, regression of personal interests,
and bizarre inappropriate behaviour. It may take an
acute or chronic course, but does not show types of
adult schizophrenia-hebiphrenia, catatonia and the
paranoid state. We may as well admit we do not know
the cause of this disease, that laboratory tests are not
informative, and treatment is very little use.
For the study of this depressing" disease?depressing
because we can do so little either to prevent a certain
number of schizoid children drifting into a psychosis,
or to cure them when they have got there, this volume
is invaluable for it is clear, systematic, and possessed
of a valuable bibliography.

Yet we must not be led to assume that every schizoid
or seclusive imaginative child is going to become a
schizophrenic for this is not the case, and many such,
because of, or in spite of, or just along with, out-treat-
ment become perfectly successful and valuable adults.
R.G.G.
