The Nurse as a Municipal Officer
=================================

The Psychological Clinic
Vol. IV. JSTo. 7. December 15, 1910.
:Author: Walter S. Cornell, M.D.
Philadelphia.

The art of Medicine today includes not only the healing of the
sick, but the prevention of disease by the early correction of physical defects and the maintenance of proper sanitary conditions. Preventive medicine, indeed, although of recent origin, bids fair to outrank corrective medicine by reason of its scientific basis and the
magnitude of its results. Impressive examples of its activities are
the extermination of yellow fever and malaria by the drainage
of swamps and the destruction of mosquitoes; the stamping out
of tuberculosis by providing fresh air, good food, and reasonable
working hours for the poor; the saving of infants by the forcing
of milk dealers and dairymen to provide pure milk; the prevention
of deafness, poor nutrition, flat chest, nervous exhaustion and acute
contagious diseases in school children by their systematic examination; and the preservation of the race from degeneracy by the
segregation of the feebleminded in custodial institutions. The
men who have directed the great federal, state, and municipal organizations safeguarding the health of the people have received
honor commensurate with the value of their work, and the names
of Reed, Waring, and Wyman in the national service, of Dixon
and ISTeff in Pennsylvania, stand favorable comparison with those
of any practitioner of clinical medicine or surgery, or any military
commander or any constructing engineer of the last two decades
in the United States.

Following the lead of the physician, his ally and helper, the
nurse, has also entered the field of preventive medicine, and modifying her activities to include social and administrative work as
well as the healing of the sick in their homes or in hospitals, has
proved herself as necessary in this field as she has always been in
that of medicine.
(iBi)

A review of the official work done by nurses in our large cities
shows that they are principally employed in the medical inspection
of school children and the reduction of infant mortality. A few
cities, notably New York, employ nurses in the fight against
tuberculosis, but in the majority of our municipalities this particular field is still supplied through volunteer private agencies
such as the Phipps Institute in Philadelphia. Social service
work in connection with the dispensaries of various hospitals, which
will be mentioned again in this paper, is at the present time not
a feature of any of the hospitals supported by the municipality.
Passing by the work of municipal nursing in New York City
with the statement that two hundred and forty nurses are there
employed in various ways in district work, a development far
ahead of any other city and an indication of the future extension
of the Avork in Philadelphia and elsewhere, we may examine in
detail the work done during the last year in our own city. Here
we find a corps of school nurses employed by the Board of Education and a second corps employed by the municipality.
The school nurses include one head nurse, Miss Anna L.
Stanley and nine assistants, with a clerical assistant to the head
nurse. Beginning in the year 1903 in a small way,?one volunteer
nurse sent into the schools by the Visiting Nurse Society,?the
work has steadily grown in scope and volume. The salary of the
assistant nurses is about seven hundreel dollars a year with a two
months' vacation, and a working elay beginning at nine in the
morning and ending somewhere between four and five in the afternoon.
The school nurses act as nurse, visitor, and escort. Originally
intended to treat school children afflicted with ringworm, pediculosis and like minor contagious diseases, and so save these children
from exclusion, they have now in our large cities become the
recognized agents for the carrying out of all the medical inspector's
recommendations for the correction of physical defects.
The work of the school nurse is in (1) the school, (2) the
children's homes, (3) the hospital dispensaries.
School Work. The nurse visits probably four schools a day, if
she is employed in the poorest districts of the city, but a larger
number in the resident sections Avhere few if any treatments are
given in school and the work is mainly that of home visitation. She
first reads over the medical inspector's daily record of physical defects and diseases encountered, and sends for the children whose
names are recorded. Those children whom the inspector has
marked for treatment are quickly disposed of, zinc ointment and
ammoniated mercurial ointment being dabbed on plentifully. In
each case the written recommendation of the inspector is followed.
Occasionally a ringworm is painted with iodine or a chronic eczema
stimulated with oil of cade or similar preparation.
In those schools where the nurse arrives daily before the
medical inspector, or where the medical inspector does not visit
the school daily, she rings an announcing signal 011 the electric bells
throughout the school precisely as does the inspector. This method
of course requires a good deal of initiative on her part, as many
minor cases of impetigo and eczema are seen by the nurse before
coming to the inspector. It is a safe procedure in these cases to
apply without delay any harmless remedy indicated. Boracic acid,
and zinc ointment are typical remedies. Personally I have seen
so many rather indefinite cases cured by this treatment that although science suffers thereby, confidence increases, and one comes
to agree with a well-known surgeon who said jokingly of skin diseases that they are divisible into two classes, those cured by zinc
ointment and those not. On the other hand the nu^rse must be
exceedingly careful to avoid either doing a child a mischief, or
placing herself in the unfortunate position where such a claim
can be made by ignorant parents. For this reason deep wounds
involving more than the skin, imbedded foreign bodies, bad sprains,
etc., should be promptly sent home with instructions to the parent
to seek at once a physician or dispensary.

The nurse leaves for the medical inspector a memorandum of
cases treated de novo by herself. An understanding with the inspector whereby the numerous cases treated with zinc ointment
are passed over without memorandum, shortens the list and gives
it enough importance to make it worth reading.

The cases of defective vision, decayed teeth, and other remediable defects are next taken up and inquiry made of the children
whether the official recommendation has been heeded or not. If
the former, the inspector's record on the "Defect Card" is finally
filled out,?"treated" or "glasses" or "operation". If the latter,
a systematic campaign is begun to secure action, first the child
and then the parents at their home being urged to consent.
The school work finally includes an occasional crusade for
cleanliness by a search for pediculi in the hair of the children.
This certainly should never be done as a general procedure through184 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
out a class, unless the teacher requests it because of their evident
existence in several of the pupils. Indignant parents are liable
to take offense at the forced examination of their children, and
among older girls considerable mental distress results. On the
other hand, there are occasions when one-half a primary school
has been shown to possess head lice, and wholesale and heroic
measures are needed. On one occasion a teacher informed me that
the school nurse had examined the thirty-six girls in her class, and
found pediculi in the hair of twenty-four.

Home Visits. Home visits as a rule are for the purpose of
urging parents to act, and not for the actual treatment of cases,
In the latter class are home treatments for the very poor and
ignorant when suffering from pediculosis, scabies, or general filth.
In these rather exceptional instances the children are given a
good scrubbing.

It is well worth while to mention in this connection the success
of the nurses in securing cooperation from hitherto indifferent
parents. The results have been so marvellous that the suggestion
has been made to appoint a sufficient number of nurses, or women
visitors of some sort, to cover all the schools of the city instead of
simply the slum districts.

Dispensary Visits. Many children are escorted to hospital
dispensaries by the nurses. These are cases who are too young
to find their own way, and whose mothers are employed during the
day. Occasionally an urgent case is followed up by the nurse from
school to home and to dispensary in order that the child's eyesight
or life may not be endangered by neglect.

The routine daily work of the nurse is so arranged that if
possible the home and dispensary visits may be made outside of
school hours.

There is no question as to the value and propriety of the
nurse's services in treating minor skin diseases of a contagious
character and thereby reducing the time lost by exclusion from
school. Similarly the visitation of parents by the nurses for the
purpose of personally urging the correction of physical defects has
produced remarkable results in the poorer sections of the city, and
among the foreign element, at least, is a notable aid to medical
inspection.

It is a fact, however, that the major portion of the nurse's
work in the school building, has come to be the treatment of minor
cuts, bruises, and infections owing to the appreciation of free
service by the children. It must he admitted that this relief so
freely and gracefully given is in reality dispensary work, subtracting in a general way from the income of the neighborhood
physicians and pauperizing the recipients, just as free clothing
or free meals or free lodging would adversely affect the merchants
and realty men of the neighborhood and lower the self-respect of
the objects of these charities. It is well to remember this and to
counsel moderation to our salary paid inspectors and nurses with
an eager desire to help humanity.

The nurses in Philadelphia keep 011 hand the following supplies furnished by the authorities, for the list of which I am indebted to Miss Stanley, Head Nurse:
Tincture green soap, boric acid solution, boric acid powder,
peroxide of hydrogen, collodion, zinc oxide ointment, ammoniated
mercurial ointment, adhesive plaster, 1 and 2 inch bandages, absorbent cotton, bichloride solution, aromatic spirits of ammonia,
alcohol.

The results of the school nurses' work are remarkable. Contrasting the work of the medical inspector working without a nurse,
with that of an inspector working with a nurse, the economy practiced by the authorities in employing the nurse is easily manifest.
Just as in the business world, sales are made and business better
transacted by personal interviews, rather than by impersonal announcements and advertisements, so the nurse personally interviewing a mother explains to her the benefits of medical attention to
her child, clears away misunderstandings as to the purpose of medical inspection, provides the solution of how to obtain medical help
by offering to take the child to the hospital dispensary, and
generally knits closer the harmonious relations of the home and
the school. It must be remembered that present figures published,
showing the increased efficiency of medical inspection when aided
by the work of the school nurse, are derived wholly from work
done in the poor foreign quarter of the city where docile foreign
mothers, free medical treatment in dispensaries, and a division of
labor between the doctor and nurse, all contribute to successful
results. For that reason the writer of this paper does not venture
here to analyze the figures presented, nor to offer them as evidence
in what has at times been almost a controversy as to the relative
credit for results due the medical examiner or the nurse. They are
rather intended to show truthfully without comment the amazing
number of cases handled and helped by a small corps of nurses
working under the intelligent supervision of a head nurse.
In the three months of March, April, and May, 1908, when
the school nurses were but six in number, in round figures thirtysix hundred visits were made to schools, and twenty-one thousand
treatments and advisements were given to school children of whom
forty-nine hundred were new cases and thirty-nine hundred were
cases discharged as cured during the three months. Of these
cases about nineteen hundred were cases of pediculosis, seven hundred were cases of infected wounds mostly of minor degree, four
hundred and fifty were cases of defective vision recommended for
glasses, and one hundred and twenty were cases of enlarged tonsils
and adenoids.

I have here also, a summary of the work performed by the
enlarged corps of ten school nurses during the year 1909-1910, in
thirty-six schools with a school population of 24,000 children.
Number of children with defective vision who obtained
glasses through efforts of school nurses  1,025
Number of operations for adenoids and enlarged tonsils     249
Number of children suffering from malnutrition sent
to country for short time and all benefitted. ... 85
Applications filed for children to go to sea-shore and
country during the summer  94
Children admitted to permanent institutions  6
(Two to Spring City for Feeble Minded;-four to
Epileptic Hospital and Colony Farm, Oakbourne. )
Applications filed for permanent home  3
(One, Epileptic Hospital; one, Mt. Airy Institute; one, Spring City.)
Number of children with defective teeth, treated at
dental clinics  319
Number waiting for admission to hospitals for nose
and throat operations  35
Number of visits made to schools  4,470
Number of new cases treated 13,209
Number of children taken to dispensaries  1,804
Taking up now the work of the municipal nurses engaged
under the direction of the Department of Public Health ? and
Charities last summer in the work of reducing infant mortality, a
NURSE AS MUNICIPAL OFFICER. 187
brief report of the work done by them under the direction of Dr.
Keff and Dr Newmayer may be here given. It should be remembered that this summer marked the beginning of the work of the
Division of Child Hygiene and no mention is made here of the
activities planned for the future.

Eighteen nurses under the immediate direction of Miss
Perkins formed the corps, eight of whom were paid by the city and
ten by volunteer organizations. Twelve of the nurses formed a
central group for work in the congested slum district and six others
worked in the outlying districts. The twelve nurses of the central
district were again subdivided into two groups, one group of eight
nurses to investigate cases, instruct parents and report cases to
the central office; the other group numbering four nurses to visit
the sick babies and give them attention under direction of the attending physicians. In this manner 1463 sick infants were
handled, of whom 396 were referred to hospital wards, dispensaries, or free country homes. A total of 4300 home visits to
sick babies already reported to the central office were made.
The corps of nurses who carried on the mixed work of social
investigation, instruction, and reporting of cases, visited 6300
homes, making a total of 8300 visits.

In addition to home visiting, the Department of Health and
Charities maintained two baby-saving stations on the Delaware
River piers. Here four nurses were stationed, fifteen hundred
infants were brought to these piers for a total of 5000 visits. The
caretakers or mothers were instructed individually by simple
friendly talks and also by lectures given regularly morning and
afternoon. One of the piers was open day and night and sleeping
accommodation furnished to several women and, babies nightly.
This accommodation involved the furnishing of breakfast for at
least the mothers. The other pier was open from eight in the
morning to eleven at night.

Finally, for time does not permit further detailed description,
instructive talks were given to 500 expectant mothers, free milk
furnished to certain worthy cases after home investigations by the
nurses had been made, and over five hundred sanitary complaints
concerning nuisances encountered were made to the Bureau of
Health.

In conclusion may it be pointed out that municipal nursing
marks a new occupation, namely a combination between medical
and social work. Just as the young woman of today who is learn188 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
ing to teacli school children is impressed with the modern thought
that success will depend largely upon the health of her pupils and
that she must therefore have a knowledge of hygiene, so should our
training schools realize that women are needed and demanded in
increasing numbers who possess not only knowledge of the human
body, but who are also trained in making social investigation,
trained in business system, and in an understanding of the methods
of home life of our poorest classes. Just as one nurse will excel
another in the operating room or as a head nurse of a hospital ward
because of inherent traits of character, so are some persons more
qualified than others for special work. A sympathy for the poor,?
meaning by the term sympathy, a charitable understanding of the
poor, their troubles, and their limitations,?a willingness to work
overtime with no recognition of the fact from any one, a freedom
from petty professional jealousy if others interested in humanity
undertake similar work, these are the principal characteristics required. Our training schools should add a course in social work
to the nurse's training, in which the patients applying at the dispensaries should be handled in the same manner in which applicants for charity are handled by our modern charitable agencies.
The applicant should first make a statement that lie is unable to
pay for service and immediately following the medical attention
given him at the time of his first visit, the nurse acting as social
visitor should pay a visit to the home and investigate the income
of the family and the ability to pay for the necessities of life.
This course is already taken by the Society for Organizing Charity,
the Children's Bureau, and the Phipps Institute, before rent is
paid or provisions and clothing furnished. When medical service
reaches the value of a quart of milk, the same procedure will be
followed by our general hospitals. In the meantime, however,
the municipal service offers an ever widening field for properly
trained nurses, and to such as feel the call to labor hard among
the poor of our large cities a great opportunity is presented.
