A First Lesson in Thrift
=========================

:Author: Horace Ellis,
President of Vincennes University, Indiana.

The first step in a psychological experiment of more than
passing interest has just been completed by a leading merchant of
Vincennes, Indiana, Mr. Jacob Gimbel?a man much given to
philanthropy and other work demanding a wholesome public spirit.
Wishing to satisfy himself upon one psychic trait of neglected
boys?the depth of their interest in the future?he employed a
novel and valuable means to furnish him data for an attempt at
solving the problem. Incidentally, Mr. Gimbel wished to teach
the boys a lesson on the value of husbanding their small earnings;
at the same time he sought to note anything else which might
assist him in understanding boy-nature better.

Calling upon the public school principals, he explained to
them his plan, which was simply this: he desired the schools to
furnish him with a group of fifty boys, ranging in age from nine
to twelve, from that stratum of society commonly regarded as
shiftless, each boy bearing the impress of neglect. To each one
of these boys he proposed to give a bank-book, made out regularly
m the boy's name, containing a deposit entry of one dollar. The
boys were to be encouraged to save their pennies?those which go
so easily to the slot machines, the cheap theatre, the candy shop?
and deposit them in the bank each Saturday afternoon for one
year. At the end of one year, if any boy had deposited as much
as one dollar, he was to receive his own deposit together with the
dollar which Mr. Gimbel had placed to his credit. If any boy
had saved more than one dollar, such an one should receive all of
his savings, the original dollar, and also three per cent interest
upon the whole amount.

Arrangements were entered into with the Citizens' Trust
Company under the terms of which the company was to receive
from the boys, at the end of each week, any and all sums down to
one cent they might bring in. President W. H. Vollmer and
Cashier Weisert of the Trust Company gave the project their
hearty approval.

On the last Saturday afternoon of January, 1909, the lads
assembled in the rear room of the bank?four more boys than the
original number provided for?fifty-four in all. The assemblage
was interesting in the extreme?to the sociologist, the psychologist, the religionist, the financier. To Mr. Gimbel, however, who
looks deeply into questions, the gathering was assuring. Beneath
the manifest lack of seriousness among the lads, the noticeable
"kid" hilarity in fact, he saw a deep-seated determination in the
faces of most of these boys to go to the bottom of a new situation
in which they were the chief actors. It appeared to him that this
lot of boys was genuinely anxious to ascertain how much of benefit,
if any, the strange plan offered them, and then appropriate it.
It was just such a "bunch" as he wished.

Short addresses?no sermonizing?were made by Mr. Gimbel,
Mr. Vollmer, and the writer, during which time the boys gave
that respectful attention all boys lend when under a strange environment. After the talks, Cashier Weisert explained in complete
detail just what the bank expected of them?to come on Saturday
afternoons, to try to bring in as much as twenty-five cents each
week but not to fail to bring in smaller sums, and to consider
themselves as owning a bank account as truly as do the business
men of Main Street. This done, the bank-books were handed out
and the boys excused.

The material results of the year's experiment are easily summarized, as follows:
Boys given books   54
" withdrawn   4
" saving nothing   17
" " less than $1.00   5
" " more than $1.00 32
Largest amount saved by one boy  $13.50
Total amount saved by 37 boys  $1G1.1G
Sickness, removal, and other good reasons cause the withdrawal of the four. Contrary to the popular notion which catalogues such boys among those who care only for their present needs,
the facts presented by this experiment seem to point in an entirely
different direction. Two thirds of these neglected boys manifested,
from the start, a commendable interest in making a good showing
at the end of the year. Theirs was not that fleeting interest so
commonly shown by boys, but a dignified effort, devoid of display
and false motive. The young woman cashier who received the
boys' savings reported many sayings of these boys as they met her
each Saturday:

A FIRST LESSON IN THRIFT. 25

"Well, that makes cents."
"I shall have more than a dollar at the end of the year."
"I'm glad Mr. Gimbel gave me a chance."
"I wish I could have had this chance last year for I earned
more last year than I can this," and so on.
The facts appear also to warrant the religionist in believing
that there is good soil in these boys' hearts in which to plant the
seeds of industry, honesty, fidelity, humanity.
One immediate result of interest to the business man was the
lesson now first learned by the boys that money makes money,?
the meaning of the term "interest" in business. Mr. Gimbel's
most difficult task in closing the year's accounts consisted in making it clear to the boys that they were entitled to more money than
they had saved, as interest on the desposit. Some of them declined
steadfastly to receive this added amount at first, believing they
were not entitled to it. But their faces beamed when they finally
appreciated the fact that money as well as labor earns money.
Mr. Gimbel was so pleased with the results as a whole that
he has organized a new class of one hundred for the year 1910.
