Physiological Age as A Basis for the Classification of Pupils Entering High Schools? Relation of Pubescence to Height
=======================================================================================================================

:Author: Wilfked L. Foster, M.D.,
Brooklyn, N. Y.

About one-tliird of all the boys who enter high schools in
New York City are discharged during the first term. It is hard
to believe that it is necessary for so many to leave school so soon,
or that the great majority of those who leave would not be benefited by at least a year or two longer. Of course, some are obliged
to go to work to help their parents, some are eager to begin to
earn money so that they may be more independent, but there are
many others who leave because they have become dissatisfied
and discouraged with their work. Many of the rapidly growing
larger boys feel out of place and out of sympathy with their
studies when they find themselves grouped with very much smaller
and less developed boys. It seems as if there must be some way
to make the work less irksome, not necessarily by changing the
work itself, but by making the boys' environment more pleasant.
Boys of a certain stage of development naturally associate
with boys of a similar stage of development. In their thoughts,
feelings, and actions they have more in common with one another
than they have with boys who are above or below them in the
scale of maturity. The intuitive class distinctions among boys
are more firmly and unchangeably based upon physical and
mental development than upon the standards of birth and wealth
which they will have to recognize later in life. Boys approximating the same degree of maturity, play the same games, have
the same instincts, and are more at ease with associates of the
same physiological age. Larger boys are unwilling to associate
with smaller boys. They feel a sense of embarrassment and offended
dignity when they have to be classed with the "youngsters".
Smaller boys are not unwilling to associate with larger boys, but
they are usually not found with them "outside of the school".
The average height of a boy of fourteen is about five feet,
but this relationship between height and age is quite variable.
A boy of fourteen may be physiologically older than a boy of
sixteen.1 Chronological age is not a good index of development.
Through illness, poor nutrition, or lack of fresh air and sunshine, growth may be retarded, while under better hygienic conditions it may go ahead of the standard height and weight of a
certain stage of growth.2

The majority of boys who enter the IsTew York City high
schools are between the ages of fourteen and sixteen, the age of
pubescence. The degree of pubescence in each case may be taken
as an indication of the boy's physiological age. A classification
of pupils on this basis can easily be made, the degree of pubescence being simply one fact among the several noted in the course
of the physical examination. Of course, some will be found to
be pre-pubescent and others post-pubescent, but by far the greater
number are pubescent.

A classification according to degree of pubescence was made
of the entering class of a ISTew York City high school. This
class was of the cosmopolitan character usual in this city. The
following list classifies them according to nationalities, or rather
according to the country where their parents were born:

Number Per cent Number Per cent
America   146 31.60 France   7 1.52
G-ermany   886 18.73 Canada (French) 3 .65
Russia   50 10.92 Scotland   3 .65
Austro-Hungary ... 46 10.02 Switzerland   2 .43
Ireland   46 10.02 Spain   2 .43
Italy   17 3.71 Portugal  1 .22
England   10 2.18 Miscellaneous   32 7.20
Sweden   8 1.72
Total  459
In weight, height, and age this group of boys proved similar
to others analyzed. Nearly one-half of the total number were
between the ages of fourteen and sixteen.
Height Weight Age
Feet inches Pounds Years months
Minimum   3 5% 58.3 12 2
Average   4 1% 103.58 14 8
Maximum   5 10% 164.67 17 8
Part of the entering class, 295 boys, were separated into eight sections of the usual size and were classified according to physiological
age based upon pubescence. The results of their daily work and
examinations at the end of six months were as follows:
Wramp'on, 0. Ward. The Influence of Physiological Age upon Scholarship.
The Psychological Clinic, Vol. I, No. 4, June, 1907. See also American Physical
Education Review, April-June, 1908.
1Marro, A. La Puberty, Paris: Schleicher Fr&res, 1901.

Group I.
Eight classcs arranged according to physiological age.
Registered.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
39
38
38
37
41
32
34
36
295
Discharges (by ages)
14 15 16 17 Total Per cent
0 0 4 3 7
17 4 1 13
2 3 0 0 5
1 5 2 0 8
2 4 3 1 10
2 10 1 4
5 2 0 0 7
3 0 0 0 4
162214 6 58
18.
34.1
13.1
21.6
24.4
12.5
20.6
11.1
19.66
Failures.
No. Per cent.
14 36
4 10.6
11 28.95
11 29.7
5 12.2
3 9.3
2 5.8
8 22.2
58 19.66
Promotions
No. Per cent.
18 46
21 55.3
22 57.99
18 48.7
26 63.4
25 78.2
25 73.6
24 66.7
179 60.68
Physiological Age.
Most
mature
Least
mature

One hundred and forty-nine boys, making four other sections, entered the high school at the same time, and these sections
were also ranked as above, judging their efficiency from the
number of discharges, failures, and promotions. They were
not classified according to physiological age, but according to
the number of the school from which they came. There is no
reason to suppose that they were in any respct inferior or superior to the boys who were classified according to physiological
age. The results of their daily work and examination marks
were as follows:

Group II.
Four classes, not arranged according to physiological age.
Registered.
1.
2.
3.
4.
45
32
26
46
149
Discharges (by ages)
14 15 16 17 18 Total Per cent.
6 7 2 1 0 17
2 2 3 2 1 10
2 2 2 0 0 6
7 4 10 1 13
17 15 9 3 2 46
37.8
31.2
23.0
28.3
30.9
Failures
No. Per cent.
11
3
5
6
25
24.4
9.4
19.2
13.0
16.8
Promotions
No. Per cent.
17
19
15
27
78
37.8
59.4
57.8
58.7
52.3

Further investigation of a previous class of over three hundred boys, classified rather indiscriminately, shows the following
percentages of discharges, failures, and promotions:

Group III.
Not Classified.
Registered, 318; Discharges, 27 per cent; Failures, 17 per cent; Promotions, 56 per cent.
For easy comparison we may group the results of the three
investigations:
Registered Discharges Failures Promotions
(number) (per cent) (per cent) (per cent)
I. Eight classes arranged according to physiological age .... 295 20 19 61
II. Four classes, not arranged according to physiological age 149 31 17 52
III. Previous class, not arranged
according to physiological age 318 27 17 56
We notice that the group of boys classified according to physiological age has a higher percentage of promotions and a very
much lower percentage of discharges (11 per cent lower than
Group II, and 1 per cent lower than Group III). The failures
are about the same in all; though Group I has a slightly higher
percentage than either of the others.
The marked difference seems to be in the matter of discharges. May this difference not be due to the grouping of the
boys of the same development making work so much more enjoyable that they do not have the same inclination to leave school?
Class 1 of this group was composed of the most fully developed
boys; Class 2 of those less fully developed, and so on until we
reach Class 8, which was composed almost entirely of pre-pubescents. It might be expected that boys of the best physical development would show the best results in scholarship. In fact such
a result was thought of when this classification was first planned,
but the facts prove the smaller boys of the group to be the better
students. Records of smaller boys, as given above, show fewer
discharges, fewer, failures, and more promotions. In fact the four
classes of the smallest boys average almost 20 per cent more promotions than the classes of largest boys. This apparently bad showing
of the larger boys is to be explained by the fact that many of them
have been delayed in their progress at school or by circumstances
at home. Going to work is usually out of the question for a small
boy, and in social affairs and in athletics he is not at all successful.
The influences that tempt the big fellow to neglect school duties
do not have the same force against the smaller boy. Some boys
entered the high school a year or two after their graduation from
the elementary schools. Some of them are in fact too fully developed to be classed as pubescents; they are post-pubescent. Their
physical development has been normal, but intellectually, perhaps from innate mental dullness or from interrupted attendance
at school, we find them poorly equipped to compete with the smaller
boys. For these reasons it is quite certain that the boy of Class I
will never be first in scholarship, but his records show that he will
do much better when he is classed with boys of his own age than
when any other classification is made.

Here, too, we might note the close relationship between
pubescence and height. The average height of the pre-pubescent
was less than that of all others, and the average height of the
classed of pubescents gradually increased with the advance in
pubescence.

Height in Different Geades op Pubescence.
Number Average Maximum Minimum Total range
38 Prepubescents   146.7 cm. 165.2 cm. 130.9 cm. 35 cm.
22 Pubescents of 1st grade   148.1 cm. 157.8 cm. 136.9 cm. 21 cm.
20
56
40
46
47
37
2d "   152.2 cm. 162.5 cm. 140.2 cm. 22 cm.
3d "   153.6 cm. 167.0 cm. 140.8 cm. 27 cm,
4th "   157.7 cm. 175.4-cm. 140.0 cm. 35 cm.
5th "   160.5 cm. 171.3 cm. 148.4 cm. 23 cm.
6th " ..  164.6 cm. 176.7 cm. 151.9 cm. 26 cm.
7th "   167.6 cm. 178.7 cm. 156.2 cm. 22 cm.

There is some overlapping of height in the different grades
of pubescence, but the relationship is so close between height and
pubescence that it might seem to a person who had a view of the
different classes at the same time as if the classification had been
made according to height. All the smallest boys are found in
the first grades, and all the largest in the last grades, although
in the physical examination not the slightest attention was paid
to the boy's height when the degree of pubescence was noted.
In classifying the different grades, since the dividing lines
are not mathematically accurate, there is some room for variation
due to the personal equation, especially in the middle grades.
But this variation is practically negligible in its bearing on the
result. Placing a student in grade 2 or grade 3, for example,
will not make much difference. There is so moderate an advance
from one grade to the next higher, that he will be placed with boys
of very near his own development, which is the object for which
we are striving.

The average variation of the different grades of pubescence
was 26 cm., or about ten inches. In observing a single class, one
would judge all the boys to be about the same height. In some
schools where physical examinations are difficult or impossible, it
would appear that similar results might he obtained by classification according to height.
Classifications according to mental ability, which are sometimes made in the first term of the high school, stimulate ambitious boys to place themselves in those classes which are known
to contain the brightest students. This stimulating effect may
be a good thing for a successful student, but we should bear in
mind also that in this classification we place a stigma upon the
unsuccessful. It is apt to discourage the very boy whom we
should help the most. The problem in the high schools at present
is not so much with the bright boy as it is with the boy who is
not so talented and who has to struggle under this handicap.
If by making school life more agreeable, we can arouse in
a student a desire to stay in the high school as long as circumstances will permit, we shall have gone a great way toward solving
one of the many problems of the education of our adolescents.
Summary.

1. It is more agreeable for boys of the same development to
associate with one another.
2. A classification of high school students according to physiological age, based upon pubescence, is easy and practical.
3. By an experiment in a ]STew York City high school it was
shown that the efficiency of the students was increased by such
a classification. The percentages of discharges was very materially decreased( from 7 per cent to 11 per cent decrease).
4. This increased efficiency is due to pleasanter associations
with students of the same development.
5. There exists a very close relationship between height and
pubescence.
6. In schools where physical examinations are impossible, a
classification according to height would probably produce almost
the same results.
