The Training of a Case of Infantile Stammer.
===============================================

:Author: Claea IIaeeison Town, Ph.D.
The Psychological Clinic for March, 1907, contained the
report of a case of infantile stammer in a boy of twelve years.'
This present article describes a similar case in a boy of thirteen
years.

On April 5, 1909, E. R. was brought by his father to the
Psychological Clinic for examination by Professor Witmer. The
boy's speech was quite unintelligible, and this defect combined
with an inability to spell, threatened to prevent his entrance to
the high school at the usual age. The father hoped that Professor
Witmer would be able to discover the cause of the defects and
recommend some measure by which they could be overcome.
After tests in articulation similar to those described in the
former article, Professor Witmer decided that the boy's defect
was due to a long established speech habit, an infantile stammer.
Apparently, the stammer had originally developed as the result of
abnormal physical conditions. Adenoids had made mouth breathing habitual, and, possibly as a result of this, the teeth were
badly set in the mouth. They were crowded and the lower |j aw
was placed so much further back than the upper j aw that the front
teeth could be brought together only with difficulty.
The boy was well developed physically, was in fact quite
athletic, a member of a football team, and had an alert, manly
bearing.

The examination showed that in the initial position he habitually pronounced p = b, b ? p, b = Tc, d = t, g ? d or ~k, 1c ? t,
v = f, th = f, and dh = f, that m and n were confused, that for
the sounds of s, z, sh, zh, h, ch, j, and I nothing was substituted?
they were simply omitted?and that the sounds th, dh, and g had
never been pronounced. As with the first case reported, the
defects in spelling were closely associated with the defects in
speech,?the words were spelled as they were pronounced by the
boy himself.

Training in articulation was recommended and was at once
begun. He was given two lessons a week, beginning April 5th
and continuing, with two weeks intermission, until July 1st. The
work was wonderfully facilitated by the boy's unusual power of

application. I have never seen more concentrated effort than he
put into that articulation drill.

The method pursued was similar to that described in the earlier
article with the exception that instead of giving the preliminary
drill on all the consonants in the initial, middle, and final position
in a word, he was drilled in one consonant in all the positions in
conjunction with every vowel and diphthong before passing on to
the next consonant. The drill on these words and on the many
practice sentences, which we formed as we progressed of the words
which needed most repetition, lasted until June 10th. Each
lesson was devoted to one and sometimes two new sounds and their
combinations, together with a review of the preceding lessons. A
frequent repetition was found necessary. The first sound
attempted was k on April 5th and not until May 24th was it possible for R. to pronounce every word on the sheet. The k sound
presented a peculiar difficulty. It was only with great effort that
he learned to produce it after me as an isolated sound though he
used it habitually as a substitute for initial t (take = cate). .
This conversion of an habitual articulation to a voluntary one was
extremely difficult. Kin and ken were difficult, not on account of
initial k but the termination, their first rendering Icing and keng
persisting for many lessons. Chalk and rock were, on account of
their initial sounds, impossible until the end of May.

For the second lesson t was attempted. The ending un in
tun was at first impossible to produce, the word being rendered
tung. It was finally achieved by circuitous paths. It was easy
for !R. to say under; he was led to prefix at ? tunder, which was
successfully done, then to pronounce the word tunder whispering
the last syllable der, next to pronounce the tun and only think the
der, and at last he thus succeeded in producing a good clear tun.
This method of utilizing some combination which had become
habitual, in developing his power to articulate voluntarily some
new combination was very useful in his training and was resorted
to again and again. By May 3d, the ninth lesson, all the words on
the t list1 were well pronounced at sight.

The third sound g had to be worked over for seven lessons.
The boy's ear was not at all sharp in detecting slight differences of
sound, and it was most important- to show him just how to hold
his tongue, teeth, and lips in order to produce the various sounds.
For instance g was pronounced d, and when, after he had learned
to produce the guttural and found that he could do so quite easily,
I asked him why he had not used his throat before, he answered,
1 By ' list * is meant here a list of words containing a given sound element.
"I did not know about it, no one ever told me." Gun gave trouble
as tun had done, it was rendered gung, and dropped, a word in a
sentence, was pronounced dwopped. The sound of r was especially
difficult for the boy and was not mastered until the sixteenth
lesson, although he was given some little practice on it during
every lesson for fear its difficulty might prevent its mastery by the
end of the term. Not until the latter part of May could he pronounce rock, which occurred in the first lesson, as one syllable, and
then the effort used was so intense that it made me feel tense to
watch him. The sound of ch was second in difficulty and was
treated in the same way.

The fourth sound d required seven lessons before all the words
in the list were correctly pronounced. The initial d was made t,
and to dawn and done a final g was added?dawng and dung.
Awed was turned into wored, code into cote and goat, and birthday
(a word in a sentence) into birfday. The process of changing
dung to done was, however, not so long as had been that of changing tung to tun, but not until April 22d was R. able to feel the
differences in tongue pressure used in done and dung.
The fifth list b was not read correctly until the sixteenth
lesson, May 27th. B was often pronounced p, bottle was pollow,
bollow, boltel, bun was boon, bite was bit, and bauble was bibble.
Burr was persistently called purr, superficially it would seem
because the word purr with its meaning was more familiar, but
the rendering of ball by Paul and pari cannot be so readily
explained from the vocabulary of a football player.
P, h, and ing were commenced in the sixth lesson, the p list
not being correctly read until the fourteenth lesson, May 20th.
Both initial and final p were pronounced b. Fop was fob until
May 20th. H and ing did not require so much time; they were
conquered by the twelfth lesson.

S and f were presented in the seventh lesson. There was a
tendency to pronounce the s as sh which did not entirely disappear
until the fifteenth lesson. St was especially difficult, still = seel.
F required seven practice lessons. The x in fox was difficult;
serf was called self, whiff = waff and roof = woof.
The eighth list v was troublesome on account of the tendency
to substitute the sound of f both for initial and final v. It was
difficult for R. to learn to make the voiced sound,?vile was file,
vow = fow, leave = leaf, save = safe, prove = proof, etc. A
peculiar mistake was berry for bevy, the r sound coming quite
naturally. Nine lessons were required for this list.

L was introduced in the ninth lesson. There was difficulty
in pronouncing the I and further difficulty in combining it with
short i and u, as in fill and lull. The list was read through correctly on May 27th after eight lessons.
M and n were both presented in the tenth lesson and required
five lessons for mastery. They had been habitually confused,
moist was noist, am = an, noose = moose, etc. Nail was pronounced nile, nook = nock, boon = boom and can = tan. I
cite the last example to show how the habit of changing initial k to
t persisted in a new word after ten lessons. In the sentences gone
was gong and with = wif. M gave little trouble. Makes was
mates and makts before it was makes (k changed to t), fume was
foom and am = an.

Drill was begun on w and wh in the eleventh lesson and continued through succeeding lessons until the sixteenth. The trouble
lay in the vowel combinations. Win had to be learned through
winter, want was went, waft = wauft and warf = wlierf. Sh
was begun in the same lesson and the whole list, including the very
difficult rush, read correctly in the fifteenth lesson.
Tlv was presented in the twelfth lesson. This was a particularly difficult sound for R. to produce even after he had learned
the correct position of the tongue. There was a tendency after
properly placing the tongue to draw in the breath and the tongue
with it. In addition to the difficulty of articulation, the habit of
always substituting an f for th complicated the process. By the
sixteenth lesson, however, every word on the sheet was pronounced
correctly.

The thirteenth lesson was devoted to r. There had been
much preliminary drill leading to this lesson and it bore good
fruit. R. put forth tremendous effort and by the next lesson had
practically conquered, though up to the last the sound was made
consciously and with effort. Hour gave great trouble,?he would
say arrow,?and fire was far. Ch, the second most difficult sound
which had also received preliminary practice, was attempted in the
fourteenth lesson. Again a great effort was made with equal success. The tendency to substitute sh was very great. J occupied
the fifteenth lesson. It was difficult as a final sound, sh being
substituted. Z and zh completed the lists in the sixteenth lesson.
They gave little trouble. Of course the sounds taught in the final
lessons had occurred more or less in the earlier lists and had thus
received some practice before their particular sheets were reached.

The remaining six lessons were devoted partially to further
drill on the lists of words, but principally to the task of developing
the habit of practical application of the newly acquired command
of articulation. The boy read aloud, attempting all the pronunciations without help. If he failed in a word he was given some clue
which led him aright. The result of these lessons was most gratifying. It showed that he had not merely memorized certain
words, but that he had learned to associate written symbols with
their auditory and articulatory equivalents. He could now judge
from the appearance of a word how it should be spoken.

At intervals during the term the effect of the articulation
drill on R's spelling was tested. During the lessons the printed
words were always before him, thus the visual, auditory and articulatory experiences were constantly associated. As the lessons
progressed the written symbols more and more surely called up
their equivalents in sound and speech. The spelling test would
determine whether the drill had also developed the reverse of the
process, whether the sound of the word would call up the correct
visual picture, in spite of the fact that no formal spelling drill had
been attempted.

On April 19th out of sixty-three dictated words only six were
misspelled; on April 22d, thirty-eight words and four sentences
were dictated and the number of mistakes was seven. Some of
these errors were the direct result of his old speech habits; for
instance, cake was kate (t for k) duke was dut (t for k). One
was a transposition of letters, gril for girl; this persisted for some
time.

On June 15th in sixty words and three sentences the errors
were eleven. Kite was tike, showing a transposition of k and t.
On June 17th only nine words of ninety-one were misspelled.
Such results clearly indicate that It's defective spelling was
a direct result of his speech defect, that the speech stammer was
accompanied by a corresponding writing stammer.
More drill would have been desirable, but the summer vacation made it impossible. Much, however, had been accomplished
in the twenty-two lessons,?much more than would have been
possible had not the boy thrown himself into the work with a will
and a determination to succeed.
