Are the Schools Responsule for Retardation?
===========================================

NEWS AND COMMENT.

In the Biennial Report of the Schools of Erie, Pa., Superintendent
H. G. Missimer devotes himself chiefly to the question of retardation.
The faults discovered in his investigations, as well as his comment
upon them, are worthy of the attention of students of this complex
problem. He says in part:

"Retardation in the grades, on the above figures for the year 1908,
was 36 per cent for the boys, 28 per cent for the girls, and 32 per cent
for the entire grade enrolment.

"For the year 1909 the retardation for the boys was 44 per cent,
for the girls 35 per cent, and for all 39 per cent.
"This is a large percentage of retardation and there are two things
about it that are noticeable:

"First. The boys show in Erie, as in all cities, greater retardation
than the girls. The boy mind, in other words, is of slower development
than the girl mind.

"Second. The retardation is greater in the upper grades. In the
primary grades it runs from 1G per cent in the first grade to 37 per
cent in the third grade. In the upper grades it shows 53 per cent for
the fourth grade, 60 per cent for the fifth grade, 55 per cent for the
sixth grade, and 45 per cent for the seventh grade.

"A certain proportion of this retardation is undoubtedly blamable,
and can and should be overcome by closer and stronger supervision,
by reducing irregularities of attendance, by more rigid enforcement
of the compulsory law, by greater improvement in methods of teachlngj by the elimination of teachers who cannot improve, by the use of
the latest and best text-books obtainable, and by provisions for the
special teaching of those pupils who are mentally deficient.
"No pupil in our schools of regular attendance and normal capacity
stays in one grade for two years, or three years, or four years. Pupils
of normal capacity and attendance go through on time. We have no
record even of pupils of irregular attendance staying in one grade two
years, or three years, or four years. Mental defectives may do so, but
their place is not in the public school at all.

"The underlying principle of all school training should be the
recognition of the individual capacity of each pupil. No pupil in
any grade of our public schools should be kept marking time for those
of less capacity to catch up. Machine promotion at regular intervals
of the bright, the average, the slow, the dull pupils, all at one time
and all together, kills all life and elasticity in a city school system.
"Blamable. retardation or repeating, if any, is mainly due to the
lack of a sensible provision for giving pupils the opportunity to go
ahead according to their individual capacities. I am convinced that
there is very little such retardation outside of this failure to provide
for such promotion. The retardation talked about in educational
conventions, as revealed by the scrutiny of school statistics by the
special agents of school inquiries and ex-commissioners of education
m some of our extra-constitutional colonial dependencies, is not retardation at all, but slow progress through the grades of a large percentage
of pupils, due to natural conditions, for which the schools and teachers
are about as responsible as they are for the rise and fall of the tides,
or the picture of the man in the moon.

"Permit me to recite some conditions of slow progress beyond the
control of schools, or teachers:

"First. Where does the responsibility rest for the incontrovertible
fact that in every class in the schools there are always some pupils
who are below the normal in capacity, or are confessedly dull and slow,
and naturally require more time to do the work of the grade? The
Creator of all things, alone, and only He can be held responsible.
"Second. Is the school responsible for the social and economic
conditions that produce the poverty that keeps children out of school
for the want of necesary clothing and shoes, or compel many to work
out of school hours to help to support the family, and so cause poor
lessons, and slower progress in school?

"Third. Is the school responsible for irregularities of attendance
caused by sickness and epidemic diseases, and the consequent loss of
schooling under the vexatious enforcement of superficial regulations of
a state board of health, which every year causes hundreds and hundreds
of school children to lose, on the average, nearly two months' schooling because the baby or some child in the house has the measles, the
mumps, or the chicken-pox?

"Fourth. Irregular attendance caused by a lax enforcement of
the compulsory law or the retention of poor teachers as factors of Retardation may be chargeable to the school system, but the remedy therefor
does not lie with the school but with the school board upon whom rests
the responsibility for the manner of enforcing the law and for the
reappointment of inefficient teachers.

"Fifth. Can the frequent changes of teachers caused by resignation, or sickness, in the teaching force; can the transfer of pupils from
a country, or parochial, to a public school; can a change of teachers
caused by a change of residence, and change of school district; can all
these things affecting hundreds of children in every city school district, and naturally causing slow progress in their studies, be chargeable to the schools?
"Sixth. Can the fact that a city has hundreds of foreign-speaking
children in the public schools, who have to learn English first, and take
twice as long to finish a grade as American children; can (the statistics
men to the contrary notwithstanding) that be chargeable to the schools
as blamable retardation?

"These foreign-speaking children rarely go through the grades.
Their main object is to learn English, to learn to read, to write, to
figure a little, and as soon as they reach the age when they may go to
work, they stop school. We have every year in Erie, as the tables show,
quite a number of foreigners of mature age, who come into the lower
grades just to learn to read English. These pupils figure, of course,
in the matter of retardation, but it surely cannot, and should not, be
termed retardation at all.

"Seventh. Can the compulsory act, permitting children to enter
school as late as eight years, be chargeable to the schools as retardation
when such children are sixteen before they finish the grades?
"Eighth. Can the loss of lessons caused by parents calling children
out of school to run errands, or keeping them out of school every half
day or so to mind the baby, be chargeable to the schools?
"Ninth. Can the adenoid afflictions of many pupils; can defects
of vision and hearing, and other physical disorders in hundreds of
others, inevitably resulting in slow progress, be chargablo to the schools,
as blamable retardation?

"Tenth. Can the presence of mentally defective children in the
schools who are a burden upon the teacher; whose parents will not put
them into the institutions provided for such children, and for whom
school boards generally do not provide special schools, or whom they do
not exclude from school, on the ground that they are the children of
taxpayers, can the failure to advance such pupils be justly called retardation ?
"Eleventh. In conclusion, one reason quite generally prevalent, of
retardation in the schools lies in the fact that many parents do not
wish their children to study at home. Social conditions have so generally changed in the last twenty-five years that, though it was once
considered a wholesome thing for the children to stay at home nights
and get their lessons, it is now considered too injurious to their health,
and they must not have their growing activities and desire for play
restrained by too much confinement. The public playgrounds, the
nickel shows, the children's parties, the boys' clubs?the forerunners
of the men's clubs?and other innocent resorts monopolize the attention of many youngsters out of school, and at night, and are all considered necessary to their development, morally, spiritually and physically, while the confinement at home to get their lessons is quite
hurtful, and may produce nervous collapse from over-study.

"Of the pupils admitted to the High School in June, 1909, about
39 per cent finished the grades in seven years and less; 38 per cent finished in eight, and 23 per cent finished in nine years and over. That is,
77 per cent finished on normal time or less, and 23 per cent ran overtime from two to nine months.
"When we inquire into the causes of the retardation of these pupils,
who comprise the 23 per cent, we find that sickness, poor health, late
entry into school, changing schools by change of residence from one
city to another, lack of capacity, slow mental development, poverty
compelling many to work their way through school, cover each and
every case of such retardation. These are legitimate reasons entirely
beyond the control of either school or teacher, and such pupils have a
positive, moral right to more time to do the work of the school, and
such retardation is reasonable, fair, just, praiseworthy, right, and
wholesome. The money it costs the taxpayers to permit such pupils to
repeat is not wasteful expenditure at all, but is money well spent, and
m the highest interests of the community."

The readers of the Psychological Clinic may well feel that the
writer has done too much honor to one or two students of the subject,
m signaling them out and ignoring the contributions of Cornman,
Bryan, Neal, Greenwood, and others. He does a service in pointing
out that the causes of retardation are largely of a social character, and
must be sought in conditions outside of the schools and their administration. This aspect of the case has not escaped the attention of other
writers, but has perhaps not been so forcibly expressed by them. It is
clear that while we have an increasing .knowledge of the general causes
underlying retardation, we are still very far from any exact notions
as to their relative importance. Until we gain this information a comprehensive program of remedial measures cannot be formulated, nor
can we form any idea as to the probable outcome of any single measure
which may seem obvious. If in certain parts of the report cited,
one gains the impression that the writer believes retardation to be
wholly inevitable, this is counteracted by other passages when it is conceded that some, if only a small part, of the retardation could be
obviated.
