American Institutions for the Insane
=====================================

We subjoin an able article from the pen of a distinguished American psycho-
logist, Dr Pliny Enrle, on the present state of the principal Asylums for the
Insane in the United States of America.* It is taken from two consecutive
numbers of Dr Hay's ably conducted and excellent periodical, The American
Journal of the Medical Sciences. The reports upon which this paper is
based are so difficult to obtain in this country, that we are glad of an oppor-
tunity of placing this abstract before our readers, all of whom are much
interested in the progress of medico-psychology among the enlightened mem-
bers of our profession engaged in the treatment of the insane on the other side
of the Atlantic.

More than two years have elapsed since we last published an abstract of the
reports emanating from the various public institutions for the insane, then
existing in the United States. During the intervening period, the general
scheme for meliorating the condition of those who are atllicted with mental
disorders, has advanced with that accelerated rapidity, imparted to it by the
active and energetic labours of the preceding twenty years. Two new State
institutions have gone into operation; several of those previously existing have
been enlarged, and measures have been taken by the legislatures of other States,
for the erection of similar establishments within the limits of their legislation,
respectively. Miss Dix, whose labours in the cause are too generally known to
require a recapitulation, has pursued her mission with an energy that never
abates, and an assiduity that knows no interruption. The medical superin-
* " Reports of American Institutions for the Insane":?1. Of the Maine Insane Hos-
pital, for 1848,1849, and ] 850. 2. Of the New Hampshire Asylum, for 1849 and 1850.
3. Of the McLean Asylum, for 1849 and 1850. 4. Of the Massachussets State Hos-
pital, for 1849 and 1850. 5. Of the Butler Hospital, for 1849 and 1850. 6. Of the
Hartford Hetreat, for 1848, 1849, and 1850. 7. Of the Bloomingdale Asylum, for
1849 and 1850. 8. Of the New York State Lunatic Asylum, for 1849 and 1850.
9. Of the New York City Asylum (Blackwell's Island), for 1849 and 1850. 10. Of
the New Jersey State Asylum, for 1849 and 1850. 11. Of the Pennsylvania Hospital
for the Insane, for 1849 and 1850. 12. Of the Frankford Asylum, for 1848, 1849,
and 1850. 13. Of the Maryland Hospital, for 1846, 184-7, 1848, 1849, and 1850.
tendents of several of the institutions have been changed. No less than three of
the physicians who bad become the most distinguished in this speciality of the
profession have deceased. The aggregate number of the insane collected into
hospitals has very considerably increased ; and, finally, a large amount of matter
has accumulated upon our hands. We proceed to lay such portions of this as
we think the most interesting or useful before our readers:?
Men. Women. Total.

1. The number of patients in the Maine Insane Hos-
v pital, March 31st, 1848, was ... 80 47 127
Admitted during the year ..... 60 63 123
Number of cases under treatment . . . 140 110 250
Discharged during the year .... 61 62 123
Remaining March 31st, 1849 .... 79 48 127
Of those discharged, there were recovered . . 11 17 28
Died 8 10 18
Causes of Death.?Dysentery, 9; phthisis, 4 ; apoplexy, 2; " exhaustion,"
2; partial paralysis, 1.

" About the middle of August," says the report, " with more inmates than
at any (previous) time since the house was erected, a malignant dysentery, or
rather colonitis, began to afflict our inmates, and, soon after, several of the
officers and attendants were prostrated by it. In a few weeks, about fifty cases
occurred, of whom nine died. Severe and unmanageable as the disease showed
itself, one death only took placc in any person who had not been weakened by
years of previous disease. If the disease was not rheumatic in its character, it
certainly was followed, if not suspended, by an acute type of that malady,
affecting the membranes of joints, and in one case, the joints and eyes alter-
nately. There were but few cases of relapse. In one, however, there was a
renewed attack and death, after several weeks of convalescence. * * *
"We are constrained to confess that the common remedial agents disap-
pointed our expectations; and were the disease to repeat its visit, with the
knowledge thus far acquired, we should confine our action to cleanliness,
ventilation, and the administration of such quieting or stimulating remedies
as nature seemed to require, to enable it to struggle through the contest. Few
diseases, if any, are accompanied by more offensive emanations than the one
under consideration."

Before reading the report, we do not recollect to have met with the result of
any researches in regard to the comparative curability of suicidal insanity and
other forms of the disease. Hence, we regard the following extract as one of
no inconsiderable interest. " Of eight hundred and sixty-eight cases which
have been in this hospital, one hundred and one are known to have had a pro-
pensity to suicide. Fifty-one have recovered, which is twelve per cent, greater
than the average recoveries on eight hundred and sixty-eight admissions.
Whether this results from the disease being more easily recovered from, or in
consequence of their being sooner committed, I have not the means of judging
with any degree of accuracy. It is ccrtain that some of the most perfect
recoveries that ever took place here, happened to some of the most determined
of this class."

On the 1st of January, 1849, an additional edifice, forming a wing one hun-
dred and fifty-eight feet in length, and designed for male patients, was opened
for occupation. It was warmed by steam, according to the present improved
method. Dr Bates, in this report, recommends the construction of a similar
wing for females, to meet the increasing applications for the admission of
patients.

The report for 1849, opens with an allusion to the exemption of the inmates
of the establishment from the Asiatic cholera, which prevailed in the summer
of that year.

Patients, March 31st, 1849
? admitted during the year
Whole number of cases ? ? .
Number discharged ,, ,,
? remaining March 31st, 1850
Of patients discharged, there were recovered
Died
Men. Women. Total.
79 48 127
63 63 126
142 111 253
56 53 109
86 58 144
30 28 58
8 7 15

Causes of Death.?Paralysis, 4; marasmus, 4; apoplexy, 2; exhaustion, 2;
phthisis, 1; phrenitis, 1; old age, 1.
The piquancy of the following extract is peculiarly refreshing. " Whether
more or less of our patients recover than in other institutions, exactly similar
in all respects, if there be such, I am unable to say. Some boast of more cures
than have ever been realized here, while others, equally meritorious, so far as
I know, have been so modest as to report even less than we have done. We
are certain that many of our institutions possess appliances which are not, and
probably never will be furnished to this; and it is not unreasonable, other
things being equal, to look to tliem for greater success."

As a suitable companion to the foregoing, we subjoin the doctor's remarks
upon statistics. "When honestly made, they are not likely to do injury; but I
am sure they are sometimes made instruments of deception. If ligures cannot
lie, they may mislead, by disguising the truth. For instance; suppose, at the
end of each year, instead of reporting all cases as recent, which were actually
admitted within one year of the attack, I should, for the purpose of appearing
to cure 90 per cent, of recent cases discharged, report only such as recent cases
as had not become old ones by remaining with us, I might impose the belief on
the uninitiated, that 90 per cent, of recent cases could be cured; when every
man acquainted with the subject knows, that no instance can be shown, in
which 90 out of 100 cases, admitted in succession, no matter how recent, were
ever cured.
" On our examination of our records, I find there remain, this day, sixty-five
cases which were admitted within one year of the attack . . 65
Seventy-nine which were more than one year . . . .79
Total   144
"But 'as the manner of some is,' calling none recent, except such as have
not 7iow been insane over one year, the account stands,
Recent (cases) 36
Old   108
Total  144

Our cases remain as first recorded."

Few physicians have entered more into the details of the statistics of insanity
than Dr Bates, and his productions in this department carry with them the
evidence of "honesty" in their compilation, while their accuracy and per-
spicuity are unrivalled.

The value of many of the statistics of insanity is materially deteriorated by
including the whole number of cases rather than that of the number of persons
admitted into the hospitals. The second and still subsequent receptions of the
same individuals, form an element in the calculation too important to be over-
looked. Thus, according to the report before us, the whole number of cases
admitted into the hospital was 994, while the number of persons was but 807.
The admissions after the first were as follows Second 134, third 26, fourth
14, fifth 6, sixth 3, seventh 2, eighth 2.

Of the 994 cases, 403 had been discharged cured, and 78 had died.
In the course of the last winter, the public were generally informed, through
the medium of newspapers, of a terrible incident in the history of the Maine
Insane Hospital. In their report for 1S50, the trustees of that institution thus
allude to the fatal accident.

" Since the last annual report, the two south wings of the hospital have been
burnt This catastrophe occurred between three and four o'clock on
the morning of December last (1850)?a period when all was quiet, and sup-
posed to be secure from any casualty of this sort. The lire originated in the
not air-chamber under the old south wing, probably from some defect in the
arrangement of the smoke-pipe connected with the warming apparatus, a,nd
spread with great rapidity. The flues leading from the hot air-chamber, afford-
ing a direct communication, very quickly filled the galleries with smoke, gas,
and heat, incompatible with human life, rendering it more than probable that
those who perished were suffocated long before the fire reached them.
"Soon as the fire was discovered, every elfort was made for the rescue of the
inmates; first, by opening tiieir dormitories, and, when the smoke and gas ren-
dered that impracticable, recourse was had to the windows on the outside of
the building, by means of ladders, by which several were removed.
" The progress of the fire was checked before it reached the north wing,
consequently the female patients were all safely removed.
" Twenty-seven of the inmates (patients) perished in the conflagration. One .
of the attendants, Mr. H. D. Jones, while nobly exerting himself to rescue the
patients, shared the same fate.

"The officers, without much difficulty, succeeded in procuring good tempo-
rary accommodations for the inmates, in private dwellings, in the Augusta
House, and, for some of the most furious, in the county jail, under the imme-
diate supervision of the attendants, until they could be removed by their friends,
or otherwise provided for."

Dr Bates, in his accompanying report, says, " To those who merely specu-
late on such matters, it maybe easy to conjecture how fire should be communi-
cated from a funnel sixty feet from the fire-grate, when no fire had been placed
in the furnace for more than nine hours; but to those (a jury of inquest) who
spent ten days in the inquiry, it remained a matter of uncertainty. The
stove-pipe, near where the fire was first discovered, had been put up under
the steward's directions, within six weeks of the time of the fire; and, though
I never examined that portion of the pipe, I had every reason to believe that
it occupied the same position it did during the whole of the winter previous.
"Much has been said about the fire being set by an incendiary; some
undoubtedly believe it now. It may not be improper for me to say, I have
never entertained such an idea for a moment."

Men. Women. Total.
Number of patients March 31st, 1850 80 58 144
? admitted in 10 months, to Jan. 31, 1851 50 40 90
Whole number . . . . . .136 98 234
Discharged 104 78 182
Remaining January 31st, 1851 .... 32 20 52
Of those discharged, there were cured 30 21 51
Died  35 4 39
Catises of Death.?" Suffocated at the burning of the hospital," 27; general
paralysis, 3 ; marasmus, 3 ; " prostration, from violent mania, 2 ; phthisis, 1;
old age, 1; chronic abdominal inflammation," 1; acute inflammation, 1.
The people of Maine are indebted to Dr Bates for the original draft of their
laws in regard to the insane, and to insanity in all its legal relations. These
are, undoubtedly, as nearly perfect as any in existence. In the report before
us, he makes the proposition subjoined.
" I submit, for the consideration of the legislature, the subject of a penal act,
making it the duty of any person who shall know of any cruelty or abuse to an
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 485
insane person in the Insane Hospital, or elsewhere in this State, to give infor-
mation thereof to a magistrate, or to the superintendent (if at the Hospital),
within days."

In January last, Dr Bates, having been appointed by the Governor and
Council to visit the Institutions in other States, for the purpose of learning
any improvements which may be introduced when the Maine Hospital shall
be re-built, resigned the place of superintendent. Dr H. M. Harlow, the
Assistant Physician, has hitherto fulfilled the duties of the position. He makes
an addition to this report for the two months necessary to complete the official
year.

Men. "Women. Total.
During this period there were admitted . . 6 7 13
? ? ? discharged 6 3 9
,, ? ? cured ... 3 1 4
died ... 2 .. 2
Remaining March 31st, 1851 . . . 34 24 58
Causes of Death.?Serious apoplexy, ] ; phthisis, 1,
In some remarks upon hereditary insanity, Dr H. says, " it is, undoubtedly,
a fact that the mother is more likely to transmit the predisposition than the
father, and a good deal more likely to transmit it to daughters than to sons;
while the father more frequently transmits it to the sons." These propositions
are asserted with a degree of positiveness which, in the present state of know-
ledge upon the subject, appears to us as hardly warrantable.
In regard to the prevalence of mental disorders, he says, " we hazard the
opinion that, could an accurate census be taken of the insane and idiots who
are incapable of taking care of themselves, in Maine, the proportion would be
found to be one in every three hundred of its inhabitants. And the same
melancholy fact, we believe, would obtain in all the other New England States."
We do not recollect to have seen so high an estimate of the insane and idiots
in any other portion of the world, excepting, perhaps, a part or the whole of
Scotland, and a district in Yorkshire, including the city of York, England.
2. " So far as statistics can furnish an inference," says Dr McEarland, of
the New Hampshire Asylum, the past year (1849) has been the most successful
that the institution has known since its foundation. A number unusually large
has been received, more have recovered, and the proportionate mortality has
been less than in any preceding year.

Men. Women. Total.
Number of patients, May 31st, 1849 ... 52 62 114
? admitted during the year ... 59 44 103
Whole number ....... Ill 106 217
Discharged ....... 38 52 90
Died 3 4 7
Remaining, June 1st, 1850 .... 69 58 127
Of those discharged, there were cured ... 17 28 45
The report states, that the institution has " been filled with inmates beyond
its proper capacity during the whole of the official year. To remedy this incon-
venience, and to meet the increasing necessities of the public, the Legislature
of the State made an appropriation, in July, 1849, for the purpose of erecting
an additional wing for the accommodation of fifty patients. This edifice, at
the time of the report nearly finished, is one hundred and twenty-six feet long,
thirty-six wide, and three stories high above the basement. It is intended for men.
We select the following passage, not only for the truths which it contains,
but also for the beautiful style in which it is written.

"It has always been a striking feature in the whole subject, that every truly
well constructed and well managed asylum for the insane, in this country, has
always been filled with inmates. There is no such thing as properly managing
the insane, as a class, elsewhere, without a cost beyond the means of most in
a community like ours. So far as kindness of treatment and safety of person
are concerned, there is no doubt that the odds are decidedly in favour of col-
lecting the insane into hospitals. Money may purchase proper attention at
home; kindred and affection will never, save in extraordinary instances, render
it: they are ties which, sooner or later, give way. Incurable insanity is but
the half-finislied work of death. The destroyer has swept away all save the
unhumanized shape, around which affection will not for ever linger. This is a
truth towards which all experience leads; and its universal recognition, among
the philanthropic in both hemispheres, has created the lunatic asylum, now
an indispensable part of the machinery of human society.

" It is no violation of the principles of duty and affection, that the living
should seek to bury the dead from sight; neither should any false conception
of the obligations owed the insane require, that those whose services society
demands should remain for ever in the exhausting contemplation and the vaiidy
attempted preservation of ruins hardly less abhorrent than those consigned to
the dust, after the extinction of all vitality.

"The first and best efforts should be used to effect restoration. Failing in
that, it is no small boon to avert the progress of mental decay, and throw around
the unfortunate a shield from an exposure at which every sentiment of pro-
priety and humanity revolts."

We have rarely, if ever, seen so faithful a picture of the mental and moral
position of the medical officer of an establishment for the insane, as that with
which this report closes. As it occupies but little space, we present it without
curtailment.

" It is no trivial matter to assume the right to think and act for a body of
our fellow-beings, of whose liberty we have become custodians, and whose
minutest movements we may be obliged to direct. It is no irresponsible under-
taking to impose restraints which, if protracted, may be injurious, or to grant
liberties which, if transcended, may prove fatal. It requires no little schooling
of the sensibilities to listen patiently, for the hundredth time, to the complaint
which has no existence save in the disordered fancy; to parry the request that
cannot be granted, and which it is painful to deny; to frame a new reply to the
interrogatory that has been and will be repeated with every meeting, however
often; to meet the eye, whose every glance is a volume of yet unexpressed
suffering, that admits no mitigation. It needs more than human aid to keep
unexhausted the fountains of sympathy, and to bear cheerfully a burthen from
which night affords no relief. If to walk daily amid, scenery like this is the
ordinary lot of all who assume the care of the insane, under the most happy
circumstances, the case puts on a new aspect, if to this be added the never yet
described condition of a crowded lunatic asylum. There is then a painful sense
of irritation read in every movement and feature of those who are seeking
vainly, amid the throng, the disbursement of an overcharged brain, in solitude
and silence. Suffering, as it is reflected from one countenance to another,
re-creates itself, and each reduplication is clothed with new horrors."
Men. Women. Total.

According to the last report of Dr McF., the num-
ber of patients in the Asylum, May 31, 1850, was 69 58 127
Admitted during the year ..... 44 44 88
Whole number admitted during the year . . 113 102 215
Discharged during the year .... 54 44 98
Remaining May 31, 1851   59 58 117
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 31 14 45
Died 2 10 12
Causes of Death.?"Insanity of advanced age," 5 ; epilepsy, 2; phthisis, 2;
dysentery, 1; typhoid fever, 1; marasmus, 1.
The report before us is written with much ability, and is unusually interest-
ing. As our limits deny us the pleasure of extracting all that we might wish,
we must confine ourselves to such portions as appear to us of paramount
importance.

" The system of lodging patients in associated dormitories, which is adopted
in part (in the new building mentioned in the report for 1849), operates favour-
ably beyond our anticipations. It is not contended that the insane, as a body,
would be safe, associated with no discrimination, save of sex, in a common
sleeping-room. Yet many, either from timidity on their part, or as a protec-
tion against self-injury, are more properly lodged in that manner."
The following remarks are valuable in their bearing upon medical juris-
prudence.

" It is the most nice point in all the departments of philosophy, to ascertain
precisely what effects a given amount of mental impairment will exhibit; or,
in other words, to predicate, upon the language, actions, and other general
demeanour of an individual, how unsound his intellect may be. This uncer-
tainty obviously lies at the foundation of all the difficulty in fully establishing
the legal relations of the insane. The experience gathered here shows that
when we thus reason from effects to causes, we most frequently set the amount
of actual disease too low, and that events sooner or later teach us that the
degree of mental unsoundness is greater than we anticipated. Instances by
the score could, be gathered from our case-book, to substantiate this position.
Many have been fit inmates, whose appearance and address would have
staggered a court of justice, if called on to decide the existence of insanity."
It appears that, in New Hampshire, there are no statutory enactments
requiring a legal examination of the mental condition of an individual, previous
to his committal to the asylum. The friends of the patient may alone assume.
the responsibility of thus depriving him of his liberty. The dangers of this
state of things are well portrayed in the report, and illustrated by appropriate
cases. The basis of a code of laws is then proposed, which would cover the
whole ground of the subject, providing for a careful pre-examination of every
case of alleged insanity, defining the powers of magistrates and of courts of
probate and judicature, in regard to the insane, protecting the asylum, its officers,
and the friends of the patients in case of committal, carefully guarding the
rights of the patient, defining his responsibility in business transactions, and in
civil and criminal suits, his testamentary ability, &c. &c.

In the summer of 1850, Dr McFarland visited about twenty of the institu-
tions for the insane in-England, Scotland, France, and Italy. Some of the
results of his observations are embodied in this report, from which we make
the subjoined extracts.

"A visitor to the English and French hospitals is immediately struck with
the great evident cost of many of them, compared with the number they are
intended to receive. This is no test, however, of their excellence, which,
architecturally considered, lies in their spaciousness, the altitude of their ceil-
ings, and the strict attention paid to the details of heating and ventilation.*
Tiie gloomy interior of most of the American asylums, where the light must
be excluded by a mischievous and false economy, finds no parallel in Europe,
save in the extremely old institutions of the North, or those of Catholic coun-
tries, where an asylum is most frequently a suppressed monastery.

" We (Americans) do not suffer in the comparison (of institutions). Indeed,
there is much reason for self-gratulation. Our institutions are better organized;
and, if our edifices for the reception of lunatics be not so spacious, we are
already alive to their deficiencies, so that there is no obstinate adherence to
exploded designs. We have no mischievous precedents, gray with age, to be
annihilated. We have no evils to anticipate, like those which hang their
weight upon the charities of communities, who, in a thousand other ways, are
now paying the debts imposed by the jisages of barbarous times.
" Insanity in America is ever presenting to us almost precisely the same
aspects. In very old communities, where the lines between different grades of
society have been closely drawn for ages; and where contiguous neighbour-
hoods, from different pursuits, have a distinct character, in no place is the differ-
ence more quickly seen than in the lunatic asylum. While the lunatic of
Louisiana is almost of the same mould with him of Maine, the plodding agri-
cultural serf of the North Hiding of Yorkshire seems, when insane, a totally
different being from the coal miner of Durham, or the manufacturer of the
West Riding, and each neighbours of but an hour's journey removed."

3. Dr Bell, in the report of the McLean Asylum, for 1819, says: " The cholera,
in its visitation to this section of New England, held one of its strong holds
just across our border line; and many of the most intense and virulent cases
of this fell epidemic were in the village between us and the city. Yet we were
wholly preserved; if there were premonitory indications of the effects of a
malarious atmosphere among us, their actual nature was lost sight of in the
facility of their yielding to medical agents."

Number of patients at beginning of year
Number admitted during the year
Whole number ? ,,
Discharged ? ,,
Remaining at end of year .
Of those discharged, there were recovered
Died ......
Men. Women. Total.
77 84 161
77 83 160
154 167 321
59 78 137
95 89 184
26 38 64
9 6 15
The institution was filled to its utmost capacity for patients during the whole
year.

"We have resorted," says the report, "to personal restraints only in some
two or three cases, where it was believed that life could not have been preserved
without a resort to such aid."
During the thirteen years that Dr Bell has been connected with this asylum,
1857 patients have been admitted, of whom 948 have recovered, and 199
have died.

From the report for 1850, we gleam the following items :?
Men. Women. Total.
Patients at beginning of the year ... 95 89 184
Patients admitted during the year ... 80 93 173
Whole number admitted during the year . . 175 182 357
Discharged ....... 75 82 157
Remaining at end of year ..... 100 100 200
Of those discharged, there were cured ... 34 44 78
Died ? . . 15 13 28
Patients admitted from 1837 to 1850, inclusive . .. .. 2030
Of whom have been cured . . . . . .. .. 1026
Of whom have died . . . . . . .. .. 227
?
During this period, the average number of patients, annually resident, has
gradually augmented from 80 to 201.
By the following extract, it will be perceived that this institution has attained
an exemption from one of the most discouraging obstacles with which the phy-
sicians of such establishments are generally obliged to contend.
" What was, a dozen years since, one of the most painful and disheartening
circumstances in the experience of those in charge?the capricious removal of
patients at the most critical and promising stages of restoration, soon to fall
kick into permanent disease, is now a rare occurrence." This desirable con-
dition of things has been effected principally by a fund contributed by the
Hon. William Appleton, the proceeds of which are devoted to defraying the
expenses of those patients whose pecuniary means, and those of their friends.
are such as to require this assistance. A worthy example, this, to be followed
by the wealthy! Nor is this the only instance of the benevolence of the same
generous donor. " The recent decision," says the report, " of our munificent
friend, the Hon. William Appleton, to continue his course of liberal benefac-
tions to our institution, by bestowing upon us the means (twenty thousand dol-
lars) of establishing two distinct edifices, in the neighbourhood of the other
buildings, for the accommodation of a class of patients most favoured by fortune,
with arrangements more extensive, complete, and commodious than have been
before known in this or perhaps any other country, will be an era in the history
of the asylum."

A billiard-room, fifty feet long by twenty-five wide and fourteen high, was
constructed during the past year; and heating by water, with forced ventilation,
has recently been introduced into the whole establishment.
We close the notice of this report with the remarks of Dr Bell upon the
importance of well-endowed institutions.

" As the communities called to provide for the insane advance in familiarity
with this duty, and in means to meet it, the fatal error of cheap institutions will
cease to exist; an error involving not merely the negative objection of leaving
the presumptive ends of hospital treatment unfulfilled, but the positive hazard
of accidents, compromising not only the institution immediately concerned, but
the usefulness and reputation of the whole class. It would be a happy convic-
tion upon the minds of legislators and communities, could they be persuaded
that, between no provision at all of a public kind for the insane, and a parsimo-
nious, stinted, and inefficient imitation of a real provision, the former evil is
infinitely the least. A county, or town, or state, may dignify a part or the
whole of some custodial receptacle for its lunatics, with the high-sounding title
of an ' Asylumthe public and curators of the unfortunate, or even the friends
and relatives, may ignorantly, or as an excusing salvo, accept such substitution
as a full acquittance of their obligation; but every person who gives an hour's
reflection to the matter, and compares the cost of persons in health, and of the
insane under even the minimum outlay for mere custody, to say nothing of
amelioration and cure, cannot but see the impossibility of doing justice to the
insane on a cheap plan."

4. The report of the Massachusetts State Lunatic Hospital, for 1849, says:
" The hospital has been more crowded the past year than ever before. The
extent of its accommodation does not exceed what three hundred and seventy-
five requires. At no time has there been less than four hundred and five
patients. The greatest number was four hundred and forty. The average for
the year about four hundred and twenty."

Men. Women. Total.
Patients at beginning of the year . . . 217 192 409
Patients admitted in course of the year . . 134 139 273
AVhole number admitted in course of the year . 351 331 082
Discharged in course of the year . . . 131 122 253 %
Remaining at the end of the year . . . 220 209 429
Of those discharged, there were cured . . . 70 68 138
Died 19 18 37

" The diseases usually prevalent in the warm season," writes Dr Chandler,
" prevailed to some extent among .our patients and their attendants. Diarrhoea,
dysentery, fever, and a few cases of the graver forms of cholera morbus, and
cholera, with all its characteristic features, occurred among our household in
the month of August. By strict and immediate attention to the first indications
of diarrhoea and the forming stage, only eleven eases, all of which were among
the male patients and their attendants, took on the more severe and unma-
nageable symptoms of cholera. Four died very suddenly of this mysterious
scourge. Three of them had become debilitated by long and incurable disease,
and the fourth, although he was fleshy and laboured much in the open air, was
in the habit of drinking enormous quantities of cold water. All through the
summer, we took the precaution to place fires in all the furnaces whenever the
weather was cool or damp.

" It is somewhat remarkable that the inmates of this hospital should be
almost entirely free from all bowel complaints until about the first of August;
that these diseases should then commence and become more and more prevalent
and more fatal up to the third of September, and that they then should suddenly
cease as an epidemic. Since that time we have been happily relieved of any
great amount of sickness among onr patients; but there have been several cases
of typhoid fever among the attendants.

" On the 19th of March, one of our attendants became sick with the measles.
Three successive croj>s of this disease succeeded. Thirteen attendants, eight
patients, and my two daughters had it. The last of the fourth crop became sick
on the 30th of April following. It was noticed that the attendants?those who
were supposed to be in better health than the patients, and who were capable
of taking more rational care of themselves, had the disease, almost uniformly,
in a more severe form, and apparently suffered more from it than the patients.
In the forming stage of the disease, the patients lived in a more uniform
temperature, and were less exposed to the vicissitudes.of the season than the
attendants."

Cases of mental improvement, caused by attacks of insanity, have heretofore
been recorded by several writers. Dr Chandler says : " I have known a few
individuals who were brought here insane, and who recovered to become better
citizens than they were before. Their minds and feelings acquired strength
and soundness by the disease and by undergoing the process of cure, as some
musical instruments are said to be improved by being broken and repaired
again.

Men. Women. Total.
By the report for 1850, it appears that the number
of patients remaining December 1st, 1849, was 220 209 429
Admitted during the year ..... 129 112 241
"Whole number ...... 349 321 670
Discharged . . . . . . . 120 109 229
Remaining November 30th, 1850 . . . 228 213 441
Of those discharged, there were cured . . . 60 65 125
Died  29 28 57
The whole number admitted from 1833 to 1850,
inclusive, a period of 18 years, is . . 1818 1780 3598
Of whom have been discharged, recovered , . 818 876 1694
Died  199 167 366

Causes of Death.?Marasmus, 61; apoplexy and palsy, 43; consumption,
39; epilepsy, 38; disease of heart, 18; suicide, 17; disease of brain, 17;
typhus fever, 10; lung fever, 12; hemorrhage, 5; dysenteric fever, 8; cholera
morbus, 4; inflammation of the bowels, 4; mortification of limbs, 3; dropsy,
6; chronic dysentery, 4; erysipelas, 12, diarrhoea, 16; diseases of brain from
intemperance, 2; bronchitis, 3; old age, 5; gastric fever, 4; land scurvy, 1;
congestive fever, 2; concussion of brain, 1; disease of bladder, 1; fright, 1;
rupture, 1; exhaustion, 19; convulsions, 2; cholera, 4; asthma, 1; hydrotho-
rax, 1; cancer, 1.

The report says, that, during the last year, " we have had nothing like an
epidemic, unless about twenty-five cases of erysipelas, which occurred in the
spring, may be so called. These cases made their appearance from the last of
February to the first of June in a majority of the wards, without being in any
instance contagious. No cause can be assigned with any certainty for their
breaking out then more than at any other time. The inflammation was, in a
majority of cases, confined to the head and face, and when the disease extended
to the body it was apt to be fatal." Five patients and one female assistant
died of it. " It was noticed that those patients who occupied rooms nearest
our hot-air furnace, and were consequently the warmest, were most liable to its
attack.
Epilepsy "is very often one of the prominent symptoms (attendants?) of
insanity brought on by habitual intemperance; and where it is so, fatal results
follow in a short time."
The table subjoined exhibits some not unimportant facts in relation to
twenty-eight epileptic patients who have died in this hospital.
Average insanity Average residence Average age
before admission. in hospital. at death.
23 men .... 36 months. 13? mouths. 42 years.
5 women.... 60 ? 14 ? 38 ,,

" The number of males afflicted with epilepsy in this hospital is greater than
that of females. The males died at the most advanced age, but they may have
been, and probably were, attacked with epilepsy later in life than the females.
"The accession of the fits of epilepsy are very irregular as to time and
severity in different persons. Some have one or two fits every day or two.
Some have ten or twenty in quick succession, and are much disturbed in mind
for several days, to be followed by an interval of some weeks or months of
freedom from fits, and by serenity of mind. Some are seized only while asleep,
and others only while awake. In some, the fits amount only to slight dizziness
which hardly takes away consciousness. In others, all the senses are locked up
for the time, and the physical system is racked with convulsions horrid to behold.
As a general thing, these persons are unconscious at the time of the fit, and,
after apparently sull'ering the most frightful tortures, wake up and inquire of
those around them what has happened. A very few have a short warning of
the coming on of a fit, but generally they know nothing of it except as they are
told by others. Most epileptics enjoy the pleasing delusion, that their fits are
constantly becoming lighter and more unfrequent.

" The management of them should be kind and conciliating. About the time
of having fits they are irritable, jealous, and easily provoked to violent actions.
They will not be driven, but must be flattered. They should have exercise,
but should never get fatigued. Their diet should be sparing, but nutritious.
They should never overload the stomach or become surfeited.

" But little can be done in the way of medical treatment. In slight cases,
stramonium, nitrate of silver, and sugar of lead have some reputation. In a
few cases, unconnected with insanity, a mitigation and a cure even have fol-
lowed their protracted use."

Heating by steam has been introduced into a part of the establishment, and
lighting by gas into the female department.

The average number of patients, during the last year, was 410.
5. from the second annual report of the Butler Hospital for the Insane, at
Providence, 11. I., we learn that the number of patients at that institution:?

January 1st, 1849, was ....
Admitted in the course of the year
Whole number admitted in the course of the year
Discharged in the course of the year .
Remaining, December 31st, 1849
Of those discharged, there were cured
Died
Hen. Women. Total.
56 44 100
42 51 93
98 95 193
47 39 86
50 57 107
24 11 35
11 9 20
Causes of Death.?Dysentery, 4; acute mania, 4; chronic mania, 7; epilepsy,
1; disease of heart, 1; abscess, 1; intestinal perforation, 1; pulmonary
disease, 1.

"I need hardly say," remarks Dr Ray, "that a general summary of results
like this conveys but a very inadequate idea, to most persons, of the amount of
good accomplished in a single year, by a hospital for the insane. To how few
can the simple statement that so many have recovered, give any idea of the
peculiar joy experienced by those who have seen the cloud of disease lifted from
their spirits, and the undimmed light of reason shining serenely out upon their
mental horizon! The hours of mental torture that have been soothed, the
crushing burden of distrust and apprehension that has been lightened, the joy
of those?the husband, father, child?who welcome the return of the loved
one as from the grave; the relief of that desperate agony, which day after day
has been aggravated by the appalling sights and sounds that often crowd upon
the shattered mind, the restoration to the domestic circle of peace, order, and
quiet, that has followed the withdrawal of some uneasy spirit, whom none of the
arts of kindness could please or soften?these are benefits that cannot be esti-
mated by figures, though not among the least conferred upon a community by
establishments like ours. Neither are words more adequate to the purpose,
because those benefits lie too far beyond the range of ordinary experience to be
conceived of by any who have not personally seen and felt them.

" It will be noticed that four of the deaths were produced by dysentery. In
this, as in many other parts of the country, cholera was immediately succeeded
by dysentery, which prevailed with a degree of severity not experienced for
many years. The former we fortunately escaped altogether. Prom the latter,
however, no advantages of diet, ventilation, or cleanliness could entirely save
us, although they probably rendered the disease of a milder character than it
presented in the neighbourhood. The whole number of cases was nearly forty,
besides several among our attendants and domestics."

Dr Hay remarks that he believes the proportion of foreigners among his
patients is much larger than it is in the same population, that they are less
curable than Americans, and that this fact has been observed in other institu-
tions. He alludes to the difficulties in treating them, and appears to approve of
the construction of hospitals specially intended for them. He thinks the dif-
ficulties in treating them arise, at least in some measure, from the " inability to
approach them in a proper way." We infer from hip remarks, that he would
have the officers of the special hospitals referred to foreigners also, or at least,
more intimately acquainted with the language, idioms, modes of expression,
manners, customs, and religious faith of the patients. We have no doubt that
great advantages would result from such an arrangement, but the obstacles in
the way to its attainment are various and great.

Men. Women. Total.
According to the report for 1850, the number of
patients at the beginning of the year was ? 51 56 107
Admitted during the year ..... 88 35 73
"Whole number . . . . . . . 89 91 180
Discharged ....... 38 29 67
Remaining, December 31st, 1850 ... 50 63 113
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 12 7 19
Died 7 9 16
Causes of Death.?Acute mania, 4; chronic mania, 4; meningitis, 3;
" Bell's disease," (typhoid mania P) 1; consumption, 1; epilepsy, 1; disease of
heart, 1; general paralysis, 1.

"Many of those who died had gradually approached the extreme limit of life,
and ceased to exist less in consequence of any particular organic lesion, than
that gradual consumption of the vital forces ivhich results from chronic
insanity. This disease conducts its victims to the tomb by a series of changes,
as secondary and subordinate to that of the brain as the colliquative diarrhoea
that closes a case of consumption; and, in the latter instance, to say that the
patient dies of diarrhoea would convey as false a representation of the fact,
as to say, of many of those who die insane, that their death is caused by
diarrhoea, or marasmus, or exhaustion, because one or the other of these
disorders happened to be the last obvious member of a series of morbid
changes, the first, most efficient and characteristic of which had its seat in
the brain."

In Rhode Island, as in New Hampshire, there are no sufficient laws authoriz-
ing the commitment of the insane to public hospitals. Dr Ray thus writes
upon the subject:?

" Oar appropriate duties are performed rather by sufferance of public senti-
ment than any sanction of law, and thus we constantly lie at the mercy of excited
passion and prejudice. The actual practice is, for those who stand in the nearest
relation to the insane person, to place him in charge of an institution, and give
the necessary obligations for his support. No one, certainly, can deny that this
is right and proper, and in many cases it meets every practical requisite. The
person is correctly considered insane, and he quietly submits to the measure.
On recovery, he recognises its propriety and gives it his grateful approval. But
in cases of a doubtful character, there should be a provision for some authorita-
tive judgment, and especially in that class of cases where the person regards
not only the deprivation of his liberty as the grossest outrage upon his rights,
but is in a position, sooner or later, to seek redress for his fancied injuries. The
probability of being involved in litigation would often induce one to forbear to
interfere, even while every other consideration called for his interference. At
any rate, the law, whatever it is, should be clearly defined, and should meet the
difficulties experienced in the exceptional cases. The common law sanctions
no confinement of the insane, except on the score of their safety, or that of
society; and our statutes are silent upon the subject. For any other purpose,
the measure is at the peril of those who seek it. True, it seems almost incredible
that people should be punished for doing what common sense and common
humanity prompted them to do; but it has happened, and may happen again,
that an insane person believing, or affecting to believe, that his confinement was
grossly unjust, though it resulted in his partial recovery, has resorted to the
law for redress; and, by setting up false issues, and making artful appeals to
the popular sympathies, has succeeded in convincing a jury that he was a much
injured man, and obtained from them a verdict of vindictive damages."

The report contains some very reasonable remarks upon the very unreasonable
requirements of many people, in regard to the treatment of their friends by
the officers and their assistants in public institutions. After mentioning the
safeguards which are thrown around the patient, it continues: " In these facts
will be found a guaranty against improper practices, and, upon a broad estimate
of the ordinary rules of action that govern men, it would seem to be a sufficient
one. But it would be as idle to suppose that, in some mysterious way, the
moment people are entrusted with the charge of the insane, they become trans-
formed from men and women into angels; as that, on the other hand, they should
systematically pursue a course opposed by every influence around them. There
are exceptions to all general rules ; imperfection and short-coming are incident
to everything human ; and if, occasionally, an attendant should so far forget or
disregard his obligations as to utter a harsh word, or use unnecessary force, no
sensible man would consider the fact as enough to outweigh the numberless
benefits conferred by these institutions. To expect that a young person, without
any extraordinary moral endowments, or any special preparation for the duty,
can bear, day after day, and hour after hour, week in and weeic out, the inces-
sant and systematic efforts of one whose power for mischief is only heightened
by disease, to teaze and irritate him, and never lose his patience, is to expect
a phenomenon not often witnessed in any other department of life."

We once knew of the reception into an asylum of a woman whose relatives
would consider the insinuation that they were not respectable as an unwarrant-
able insult. Her sister was very particular in requesting that she might be
treated with all possible kindness, tenderness, and consideration. In her sub-
sequent visits to the institution she was never weary in the endeavour to ascer-
tain whether this humane course was ever departed from. In a few months
the patient, appearing to be incurable, was removed, at the request of this
sister, who now assumed the care of her. Forty-eight hours had not elapsed,
after the removal, before the two had a regular set-to, which would have honoured
the combatants of the ring, with such fisticuffiing, scratching, and pulling of
hair as is not to be seen every day in well-regulated and affectionate families.

G. The principal statistics of the Hartford Retreat for the Insane, for the
year ending March 31st, 1849, are as follows :?
Men. "Women. Total.
Patients at the beginning of the year ... 59 63 122
? admitted in course of the year 49 84 183
Whole number ? ? . 108 147 255
Discharged ? ? . 47 75 122
Eemaining at end of the year .... 61 72 133
Of those discharged, there were cured. . . 20 50 70
Died 7 5 12
Daily average number for the year . . . .. .. 141
Causes of Death.?General debility, 3 ; marasmus, 2; exhaustion, 2;
phthisis, 1; "disease of brain," 1; "disease of lungs," 1; erysipelas, 1;
suicide, 1.

Dr Butler relates the following case in this report; "A. B. of C. was brought
into the institution in 181?. The following is the history of the case, as given
by the intelligent gentleman who brought him to the Retreat. B. is 36 years
of age, and has been insane twenty years. When young, he was considered,
in point of intellect, quite equal to most boys of his age, and was fond of read-
ing and of mathematical studies. From some unknown cause he became a
violent maniac, destroying everything in his way, and dangerous. The family
became afraid of him, and chained him in a room or pen, partitioned off from
the stable, in the barn. He would tear his clothes and any bed-clothing pro-
vided for him, so that he would often be entirely naked, the coldest nights in
winter, without appearing to suffer by exposure. His usual dress was nothing
more than a coarse flannel frock, and without anything for a bed but loose straw.
He remained in this state for years, when his father, becoming poor, called
upon the town for help. The select-men went and found the man as described,
and consulted with the father as to what should be done. Their conclusion
was, that, if the father had kept him in a barn, it would not be improper for
the keeper of the paupers to do the same.

"Accordingly, lie was removed from place to place, as the paupers were
changed, and kept as his father had kept him. He was generally fed as we
feed swine, had nothing but his hands to feed himself with, and, as all his filth
remained in his stable for many days, it was a fearful job to attempt to clear
it out, as the saying was. He was in an out-building, and without fire, for the
twelve or fifteen years that he was supported by the town. He was in a sittiug
posture so long that the cords of the legs contracted, so that his knees are
drawn up to his breast, while his legs are drawn close to his body. He is
entirely negligent of the calls of nature.

" He is now," continues the report, " in the Retreat, demented; is always
cheerful and docile, takes his meals regularly, and is cleanly in his habits and
person. His lower limbs are closely contracted upon his body, and he accom-
plishes locomotion, with a good deal of agility, by placing his hands on the floor
and swinging his body along."

From the report for 1849, we glean the following items :?
Patients at the beginning of the year
Admitted in course of the year .
Whole number. . -
Discharged ....
Remaining April 1st, 1850
Of those discharged, there were cured
Died .....
Daily average number for the year
Men. Women. Total.
61 72 133
60 75 135
121 147 268
48 77 125
73 70 143
17 47 64
17 13 30
143

"The number of recoveries is larger than that of any previous year
excepting the last, and this number would have been increased by the addition
of several cases from among those reported as more or less improved, but for
their ill-advised and premature removal from the institution.

" During the months of August and September," says the report, " we were
visited by the same malarious influence which pervaded the valley of the Con-
necticut, as well as most other sections of our country. Though spared by a
merciful Providence, from the ravages of the cholera (not a case of which has
ever occurred in the institution), we had a large number of cases of diarrhoea
and dysentery. The former yielded readily to treatment in nearly every case,
and was fatal in none; while the latter appeared in a very severe and malignant
form, and was very difficult to control. It proved fatal in the cases of eight
patients and one attendant. The whole number of cases among the patients
was forty-seven; twenty-two females, of whom four died, and twenty-five males,
of whom four, also, died. Among the attendants there were eight cases, of
whom one died.

" At different times during the year or two past, an epidemic erysipelas has
prevailed in this city and vicinity, in a form of unusual severity. With a single
exception, in the month of July last, no cases have occurred in the Retreat
until last January, during which, and the two following months, we had twelve
cases, of whom six died. All of these were old and incurable cases, and, with
a single exception, were the most infirm and debilitated patients in the institu-
tion.

" In addition to the preceding deaths from epidemic diseases, there have
been fifteen others (about the usual proportion of preceding years), from the
following diseases: two of consumption; three of general debility; two of
f eneral paralysis; and one, each, of apoplexy, old age, paralysis, marasmus,
isease of the'heart, chronic diarrhoea, and dropsy; and one of exhaustion, an
acute case complicated with febrile disease, and aggravated by the fatigue of
travelling?an unfit case for the institution."
Men. Women. Total.
According to the report for 1850, the number of
patients at the beginning of the year was . 73 70 143
Admitted in the course of the year . . . 56 72 128
Whole number....... 129 142 271
Discharged 57 57 114
Remaining April 1st, 1851 .... 72 85 157
Of those discharged, there were recovered 25 34 59
Died 9 6 15
Daily average number for the year . . . .. .. 151
Seven years ago, the same average was .... .. 84
During that period, the annual admissions have increased from 80 to 128.
Causes of Death.?Dysentery, 4; exhaustion, 3 ; general debility, 2 ; apo-
plexy, 1; epilepsy, 1; old age, 1; suicide, 1; general paralysis, 1; erysipelas, 1.
" Twenty-six of our patients were removed from the Retreat during the year,
in different stages of improvement. Some of them were slowly but surely
recovering." In a general allusion to discharges of this kind, the report says :
" The history of some of these premature and ill-advised removals is verv
sad. Many have relapsed into an incurable state, while others remain half-
crazed, or nervous invalids, and will probably remain so for life."
Much of the increase in the number of patients, during the last seven years,
is stated to have been the result of an appropriation, by the State, for the sup-
port, at this institution, of such lunatics as are unable to bear the expense.
This fund was 2000 dols. in 1842, but was increased to 5000 dols. in 1843, at
which sum it is still continued.

For many years past, the Rev. T. H. Gallaudet, one of the purest philanthro-
pists of the age, has been connected, as chaplain, with the Hartford Retreat.
With intellectual powers far above mediocrity, a heart overflowing with kind-
ness, and a spirit ever rejoicing in whatever may contribute to the improve-
ment of the physical or moral condition of any portion of his fellow-men, he
was adapted, in a degree almost without parallel, for the situation whose duties
he so honourably, faithfully, and usefully fulfilled.

The annual report of the physician to this institution has generally been
accompanied by one from Mr. Gallaudet. That which is before us is his last?
for since its publication, the institution and the public have suffered the
necessary loss resulting from his death. The following extracts from this
report is worthy of attention.

" In appreciating the benefits of institutions for the insane, regard is too
much had simply to the cure or relief which they afford; and their utility is
too often measured only by the amount of good thus effected. This is, indeed,
their great object; and if this alone is considered, they have claims upon
public bounty and private benevolence, than which none can be greater among
the various forms of suffering humanity.

"But the many collateral advantages of such institutions are apt to be
overlooked. If conducted by wise and observing individuals, they furnish
the means of shedding clearer light upon questions of deep and general interest
connected with the philosophy of mind, and the reciprocal influence which the
mind and the body have upon each other?the elements of moral science?the
education and training of children and youth, both in families and schools?
the laws of hereditary physiology?the preservation of health and reason?
prison discipline?criminal jurisprudence?and the precautionary measures to
be pursued, to guard against many of the ills of the flesh and of the spirit?
and then, of diffusing this light for the benefit of the whole human family.
" Such institutions ought to feel their responsibility in these respects, and be
so conducted as to meet this responsibility. The light which they get should
not be hid under a bushel. They occupy a position which can fit them to take
rank among the greatest benefactors of mankind. The ill which they can
be instrumental in preventing, outnumber and outweigh, thousands of times,
those which, having already taken place, they are privileged to mitigate or
remove.

"My mind has been turned to this subject from noticing, after thirteen years'
experience as chaplain of the Retreat, what a school of practical wisdom it
may be, and often is, not only to those who are placed for a time under its
care, but also to the relatives and friends. They learn much of themselves,
and not a little, in this respect, which they never knew before, much from their
companions in misfortune, and much which they could never get from books
or the common intercourse of society.

" They get new and more correct views of human nature; of what they
should live for, and of the means of preserving a sound mind in a sound body,
without which the great ends of life can be but very imperfectly, if at all,
accomplished."

7. The Report of the Bloomingdale Asylum for the Insane, for 1849, is the
first issued by Dr Charles H. Nichols, who succeeded Dr Earl, as physician
to the asylum, in the spring of the year mentioned.

Men. Women. Total.
The number of patients Dec. 31st, 1848, was . 59 60 119
Admitted in the course of the year ... 58 37 95
Whole number ? ? ? 117 97 214
Discharged 54 36 90
Died ? ? ? . . 13 8 21
Remaining December 31st, 1849 ... 50 53 103
Of those discharged, there were recovered 26 18 44

Causes of Death.?Pulmonary consumption, 4; " typho-maniacal delirium,"
2; " apoplectic symptoms, occasioned apparently by a sudden increase of old
serous effusions into the inner-cranial cavities," 4; " gradual exhaustion pre-
ceded by dysentery," 3; gradual exhaustion attended with diarrhoea, 4; suicide,
2 ; cancer, 1; delirium tremens, 1.

" In the fact, that among at least fifty persons with constitutions in a state
of general decay, and .offering but little resistance to epidemic agents, no case
of cholera occurred, and but few cases of dysentery, though the former disease
prevailed to some extent, and the latter very generally in the neighbourhood,
is abundant evidence, if any were needed, of the salubrity of the site of the
asylum."

Seven of the recoveries were cases of inebriety. " In nearly every case of
intemperance received here," says the report, " the habit has existed, either
continuously or periodically, for many years; and the individual has suffered
numerous attacks of delirium tremens, or other sickness arising from drink ;
and every means but prolonged restraint has been exhausted to induce him to
forsake the path to destruction in which he has so far advanced, but in vain;
and at last delirium and stolidity are the only varieties of mental condition
known to his experience, and he is totally unable to protect his interests or
his person.

" The habit of intemperance is usually entered upon with the consent of a
free will, and generally deserves to be treated as a vice; but my observations
are confirmatory of the belief of Esquirol, Ray, and others, that in the case
just described, a pathological state of the brain has been gradually induced, to
which the will is wholly or in part subject; and I think physicians and magis-
trates need not scruple to grant the lunacy warrant, which we require in every
description of case received here."

The following remarks upon moral treatment are very correct; but the
grand practical difficulty is, to find amusements in which all the patients, or
even a very considerable number of them, can join " as equals, if not prin-
cipals."

" It has struck me that there is a material difference in value of what may
be termed, in reference to the individual under care, the active and the passive
modes of moral treatment. An amusement, a lecture, or a religious exercise
which a patient witnesses merely, will often attract his attention, and thus, in
a greater or less degree, suspend those morbid modes of mental action it is our
object to eradicate; but if he himself takes an active part in the exercise
going forward, his interest is enlisted on more self-respecting, not to say
ambitious grounds, and is therefore more awakening and absorbing; and, as
he has become an actor in a scene which suffers more or less interruption when
he ceases to perform Ins part, the healthy mental effort is necessarily deeper,
less divided, and more confirmatory of itself. In devising amusements for our
patients, therefore, I have given preference to those in which they could par-
ticipate as equals, if not principals. As, for digestion, it is better to walk
than to ride; to saw wood than to see it burn; so, for the substitution of
sound for deranged cerebral action, it is better that the patient should himself
execute even poor music than hear the best executed by another; that he
should constitute eighth of a cotillon than be the mere spectator of a score;
that he should read aloud to others than that he should be trusted to listen."

Men. Women. Total.
The report for 1850 states that the number of
patients in the Asylum Dec. 31st, 1849, was . 50 53 103
Admitted in course of the year .... 51 46 97
Whole number....... 101 99 200
Discharged ....... 39 33 72
Died 12 6 18
Remaining December 31st, 1850 ... 50 60 110
Of those discharged, there were cured 28 22 50

Of the cures, 10 were cases of uncontrollable inebriety.
Causes of Death.?JParalysie generale, 4 ; chronic melancholia, 4; epilepsy,
3 ; chronic mania, 2; anasarca, 1; phthisis, 1; ascites, 1; hemiplegia, 1;
suicide, 1.

"We have had no epidemic and no acute disease, or, at least, none that
proved fatal in its first stages. In those instances where a more specific cause
is not assigned, death was the inevitable and awaited final issue of a gradual
deterioration of the organism, consequent upon long-continued derangement
and deficiency of innervation."

Our extracts from this report will be limited to a single additional one,
corrective of an opinion very generally entertained among the people.
"It is often queried, whether the separation of insane persons with sensitive
minds from the family circle and endearments, and their commitment to the
care of strangers, will not be attended with a sort of shock to the nervous
system, and thus greatly aggravate the mental distress and aberration, and
whether it be suitable that a number of such persons should be associated in a
greater or less degree; but I believe it to be the uniform opinion of those
experienced in this speciality of the medical profession, that the injurious
effects of removal to an asylum, sometimes apprehended, never occur; and that
the association of the insane, if there be a proper classification, very often
essentially promotes recovery, and is attended with no objections whatever.
No points in the management of nervo-mental diseases are better settled
than these, and, if necessary, are capable of copious and very conclusive
illustration."

8. Dr Brigham, the late distinguished superintendent of the New York State
Asylum, died in the summer of 1849, and his place, during the remainder of
the year, was filled by his principal assistant, Dr George Cook, by whom the
report before us was written.
Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the beginning of the year . . . 241 254 495
Admitted in the course of the year . . . 192 170 362
Whole number. . . . . . .433 424 857
Discharged ....... 207 201 408
Remaining at the end of the year . . . 226 223 449
Of those discharged, there were cured . . 113 90 203
Died  35 34 69

" During the past summer," says the report, " while the epidemic cholera
pervaded a large portion of our country, we, through the kindness of an over-
ruling Providence, were spared from its ravages; and, with the exception of
some cases of dysentery, in the months of August and September, the general
health of our patients was good. But in the month of December last (1848),
the asylum was visited by the smallpox, which continued to prevail amongst
us f> r several weeks, and in a number of cases proved fatal. No person who
came here had the disease at the time of admission, or, as far as we could
learn, had come from a section of the country where it was prevalent. It
made its appearance in the female division of the asylum, and the first case
occurred in a patient who had been here about seven months." The first,
second, third, and fourth cases were very mild; the fifth, in a patient who had
been at the asylum several months, confluent and severe. "When attacked, the
patients were removed to the infirmary.

" Of four hundred and ninety patients who were in the house at the time,
and who were more or less exposed, forty-eight took the disease; viz., twelve
men and thirty-six women. Thirty-three had it in a mild form; of these, six
were men and twenty-seven women. Fifteen had the confluent form, of whom
six were men and nine women. Fourteen died in the course of the disease, or
soon after its termination; viz., five men and nine women, of whom eleven
died of the disease, and in the other three, death was only perhaps a little
hastened by it." Besides the above, eight attendants had the disease, two of
whom died.

The remaining fifty-five deaths were caused as follows: Dysentery, 14; menin-
gitis, 7; consumption, 6; exhaustion following excitement, 5 ; general paralysis,
4 ; epilepsy, 3 ; marasmus, 2 ; diarrhoea, 2 ; pneumonitis, 2 ; ascites, 1; hydro-
thorax, 1; suicide, 1; puerperal fever, 1; " disease of spinal cord," 1;
erysipelas, 1; apoplexy, 1; " serous diarrhoea," 1; old age, 1; " peritoneal
inflammation from perforation of the intestines," 1.

The general system of moral treatment Introduced by Dr Brigham is still
pursued. The tailor's shop appears to be no unimportant item in this system,
as the report contains a list of no less than four thousand six hundred and
four garments and articles of household furniture made in it during the year.
The officers of this institution have for several years taken particular pains
to ascertain the number of suicides that occur within the State of New York.
They think that "nearly all" are included in their tables, the totals of which
are?for 1845, seventy-four ; 1846, sixty-four ; 1847, one hundred and six ;
1848, eighty-eight; and for 1849, sixty-tico.

The report for 1850 is the first issued by Dr N. D. Benedict, the successor
of Dr Brigham. It is elaborate, and ably written.

Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the beginning of the year . . . 226 223 449
Admitted in the course of the year . . . 185 182 367
Whole number  411 405 816
Discharged ....... 209 178 387
Remaining at the end of the year . . . 202 227 429
Of those discharged, there were cured . . . 94 77 171
Died  34 17 51
Causes of death.?Chronic mania, 12 ; acute mania, 2; dysentery, 13;
general paralysis, 3; erysipelas, 4; pleuritis, 2 ; phthisis pulmonalis, 2; diar-
rhoea, 2 ; operation for strangulated hernia, acute gastritis, typhus fever, acute
dementia, aneurism of aorta, phagedena, ascites, metro-peritonitis, strangulation,
suicide, 1 each.

Of the deaths from chronic mania the report says : " These cases presented
no evidences of organic disease; no inflammation, or results of inflammation,
in any tissue or organ. For months before their dissolution the capillary
circulation became extremely feeble, the secretions imperfect, the elaboration
and appropriation of food defective, and consequent emaciation ensued. The
whole train of morbid phenomena being referable to insanity, it seems proper
to report them as dying of mania rather than of marasmus." We suspect,
however, that such cases are, in most asylums, reported as deaths from
marasmus.

" Thirteen died of dysentery, though it was at no time epidemic in the
institution. We include, under this head, a form of disease very unlike dysen-
tery of private practice and of general hospitals, but which we believe is very
common in asylums, and which we do not recollect to have seen called by any
other name. It occurs in chronic cases, whose powers of life have long been
gradually sinking, and in recent cases, who have become much exhausted by pro-
tracted excitement. With premonitory symptoms, or exposure to known exciting
causes, the patient is suddenly seized, and generally in the night, with bloody
discharges, scanty and gelatinous, or, more frequently, copious and serous,
with no heat of skin or abdomen, nor pain or thirst, or loss of appetite or
strength. Death supervenes a few days after the attack. We have perceived
but little benefits from remedies in this form of disease, the treatment for
ordinary dysentery proving entirely nugatory."

There were twenty-three cases of erysipelas in the course of the year, mostly
in the cold months, when the air of the halls was the most impure. " It is
said of one of the New England hospitals, before infested with erysipelas, that
after the introduction of a system of forced ventilation, this formidable disease
entirely disappeared."

One of the cures reported was that of a man who had been insane upwards
of six years, had been several years in the asylum, and long considered as
demented and incurable. " He would stand for hours in strange postures,
apparently without thought or feeling. Gradually he began to take notice of
things around him, and to exercise. He resumed his trade, that of a tailor,
and at length acquired his former dexterity and skill." This case furnishes
another proof, not only of the importance of perseverance in the treatment of
the insane, but also of the singularity of this wonderful and mysterious disease.
By " perseverance in treatment" we mean the keeping of the chronic insane at
institutions where the circumstances of their position furnish the greatest aid
to a spontaneous or natural cure; for we presume that, in this case, medical
treatment had long been abandoned. The case reminds us of one which once
came under our observation. A lunatic had been under curative treatment
until the hope of restoration was relinquished. He was pronounced incurable;
a commission of lunacy was immediately appointed, his case legally investi-
gated, and he was put under guardianship. Within three weeks from that
time he was perfectly well, and soon returned to his employment as clerk in
a large mercantile establishment.

In the treatment of acute mania, with violence, raving, and consequent
exhaustion, Dr B. employs seclusion, hot baths with cold applications to the
head, and free evacuation of the bowels. " In no case," says he, " have we
found local or general bleedings admissible ; but, on the contrary, nutritious
diet and brandy-punch are generally demanded
The physician by force, in Moliere's " Medecin Malgre Lui," speaks of the
stomach as being situated upon the right side, and the liver upon the left. An
interlocutor seems puzzled by this asserted position of the viscera, and men-
tions his impression that the stomach is on the left side and the liver on the
right. Hereupon the physician by force acknowledges that, formerly, such was
their position, but very sagely adds, "nous autres medecins, nous avons change
tout cela." With much more truth may it be asserted, in regard to the
treatment of acute mania, as recommended by Iiusli, and as generally prac-
tised in this country until within a comparatively few years, " nous avons
change tout cela." This change has taken place, not at the Utica Asylum
alone, but at all, or nearly all, the institutions for the insane in the United States.
" Of moral, or perhaps more correctly, immoral insanity," says the report,
"nine cases have been under our care, two of whom have been admitted
within the last year. These cases present the various forms of derangement,
from the mere rascally little sinner (two were lads) up to the most aggravated
form of the genuine disease. We have an idea that a remedy, not much known
to modern science, but in vogue in the days of Solomon, commenced early and
faithfully persevered with, would have been eminently successful in preventing
the development of the disease, or, at least, arrested its progress before its full
establishment. One of our patients is the exact counterpart, if not the
identical fellow seen by Mr. George Combe, in the Dublin Lunatic Asylum,
who exhibits a total want of moral feeling and principle, yet possesses intelli-
gence, ingenuity, and plausibility. He has been a scourge to his family from
childhood \ was sent to the army to get rid of him, from which he was turned
out as ail incorrigible villain, ahvays fighting and getting drunk, for which he
was repeatedly Hogged. By seclusion, he becomes so savage as to render the
task of entering his room and supplying his wants by 110 means enviable ; and
when at large, lie often assaults those around him. His chief employments are
eating and fighting; and although he is constantly endeavouring to ' get out of
these barracks,' he seems to have no particular object in view but the more
free indulgence of these propensities. In all but this one case, moral treat-
ment alone has accomplished our object; but on him little moral influence can
be exerted. By the aid of nauseating remedies, and purgatives frequently
administered, we are enabled, in some degree, to control him. Blisters and
setons to the back of his neck are now being tried."

The physicians to insane hospitals generally acknowledge their tables of the
" causes of insanity " to be comparatively valueless. That they are so, we have
a striking proof in the report before us. Of the two thousand three hundred
and seventy-six patients admitted previously to 1849, only nineteen, or four-
fifths of one per cent, are reported as having originated from masturbation;
while of three hundred and sixty-seven, received in the course of the year
mentioned, fifty-three, or more than fourteen per cent., are attributed to that
cause. Now, no reasonable man can believe that both of these statistical items
can be true. Whence is the error ? In the fact, undoubtedly, that they were
reported, the former by one physician and the latter by another;?by two men,
who, although they may have been equal in talent, learning, and skill, may
have favoured different theories; or the one may have been somewhat more
thorough in his investigations than the other.

" Frequently," writes Dr B., " the patient himself can give the most satis-
factory cause of his insanity, and often the very opposite to that attributed
by his friends. This is especially true of masturbators, whose insanity is
looked upon by friends as caused by c religious anxiety,' because the first
evidence of it noticed was an extraordinary anxiety about their salvation ; an
inordinate fear of future punishment; or abandoning all occupation but that
of reading; or holding a Bible as if reading; or praying; or mumbling
incoherent sentences, in an attitude of prayer, at improper times and places;
or 'trying to tell his experience' in a religious meeting; or joining in and
going to great lengths in the excitement of protracted religious meetings, or in
such like acts. Another class, frequently placed under the head of ' religious
anxiety,' are religious monomaniacs, whose insanity is undoubtedly referable
to dyspepsia, habitual indigestion, and constipation, and the injudicious use
of remedies for these diseases."

In the treatment of masturbation, " we rely mainly on mechanical restraint
and aphrodisiac medicines. The combination we prefer is that of conium,
camphor, and belladonna; and we think we have indubitable evidence of its
power. We sometimes prescribe blisters and cold baths with advantage."
Although we have exceeded our usual limits in the notice of this report,
we cannot leave it without laying before our readers the following extract:?
"Of the 816 patients in the institution, during the past year, the suicidal
propensity existed in 6G?22 males and 41 females. There were 28?21
females and 7 males?in the house at one time. In 20 of these 21 females the
propensity was intense. To have at one time under care twenty-eight persons
bent upon destroying themselves, is a burden which they alone know who
bear it, increased by the necessity of carrying, at all times, amid surrounding
sadness, a cheerful countenance over a heavy heart. The successful attempt
at self-destruction, before reported, was made on the 12th of July, by a female
patient of our most intelligent class. Her melancholy end became known to
her companions, with whom she was a favourite, and, on the following day,
two other patients on the same hall were overheard devising a plan for their
own death. About this time, the suicidal propensity prevailed extensively,
and seemed to be epidemic. There were admitted, duriug the mouth of July,
the large number of forty-four patients, from different portions of the State,
nineteen of whom were suicidal. Several of these had attempted suicide
immediately previous to admission. Two patients, who had long been in the
house, and never exhibited suicidal propensities, attempted it during tlie
month (on the 13th), though they had no knowledge of the violent death
that had occurred in another portion of the building. On the 17th, a
patient, believed to be entirely ignorant of all that had occurred previously,
attempted strangulation, and continued to repeat the attempt until restrained
by mechanical means. On the 20th, a patient tried to open a vein in her neck ?,
and, on the 22nd, another, who knew of the suicide, and was no doubt
influenced by it, attempted her destruction.

"Prom the 14th of July, fourteen attempts were made by eight different
persons; and twelve others, in whom the propensity was strong, required
constant observation. The suicidal epidemic prevailed from the 12th to the
end of July, after which time it gradually subsided, and left the minds of most
of the patients."

The whole number of patients admitted since the opening of the
asylum, is    2743
Of whom there have been discharged cured . . . . .1188
Died ............ 320
Men. "Women. Total.
9. The number of patients at the asylum on Black-
well's Island, New York, Jan. 1st, 1849, was . 187 250 437
Admitted in the course of the year
Whole number
Discharged
Died
Remaining January 1st, 1850
229 230 459
416 480 896
145 138 283
85 127 212
186 215 401

Of those discharged, there were cured (from insanity) .. .. 172
Thirty-six cases of delirium tremens, one of hysteria, and three of febrile
delirium, also recovered.

Causes of death.?Cholera, 8G; chronic diarrhoea, 38; diarrhoea, 10;
dysentery, 4; consumption, 21; congestion of brain, 12 ; apoplexy, 5 ; epilepsy,
5 ; paralysis, 2 ; paralysie generale, 3 ; typhoid fever, 8 ; delirium tremens, 3 ;
erysipelas, 2 ; old age, 4 ; and of scrofula, scurvy, suicide, albuminuria, typhoid
pneumonia, chronic peritonitis, softening of the brain, dropsy, and exhaustion
from exposure to cold, before admission, 1 each.

There were more deaths in June and July than in the remaining ten months
?a mortality caused by the prevalence of the cholera. The first case of this
disease was on the 10th of June, when there were 577 persons in the establish-
ment, of whom 497 were patients. Of the whole number, 148 were attacked,
and 91 died. The greatest number of new attacks, on, any day, was 15, on
the 9th of July; the last attack was on the 26th of the same month. "The
principal sufferers were those who were usually lying about upon the floor
or benches, regardless of their situation, and, in some cases, addicted to
filthy habits, resulting from, their demented state. Their physical condition
was impaired generally."

The subjoined table shows the duration of the disease, from the time of
attack, in the 91 cases of death :?
6 died in from 3 to 6 hours; all were collapsed ab initio.
18 ? 6 to 12 hours; all were collapsed ab initio.
30 ? 12 to 20 hours; all were collapsed, apparently ab initio.
16 ? 20 to 30 hours; all collapsed from 4 to 12 hours after attack.
6 ? 30 to 48 hours; 5 collapsed, 1 partially collapsed.
4 died on the 3rd day; all partially collapsed, and died from prostration.
4 died on the 4th and 5th; 2 collapsed, 2 partiallv so; all died from consecu-
tive fever.

7 died after the 5th; 3 collapsed, 2 partially so; all died from consecutive fever.
" In those who were not entirely demented, the intellectual powers were
apparently improved during the severity of the disease; but, at its subsidence,
the mind resumed its previous condition."

Of the 148 cases, there was neither diarrhoea nor vomiting in 1, no diarrhoea
in 1, no vomiting in 5, and no cramps in 59. Diarrhoea, vomiting, and cramps
occurred in 82, and complete collapse in 90. Premonitory symptoms were
known to exist in 61, to be absent in 31; and there were 56 in regard to
which this fact was unascertained.

"In the case in which vomiting and diarrhoea were absent, there were severe
cramps in the extremities, and extreme collapse, death occurring in three hours,
followed by strong muscular contractions. The patient in whom diarrhoea was
absent had severe cramps in the extremities and abdomen, excessive vomiting
and feeble pulse, but recovered. The five in whom vomiting was absent were
collapsed directly after the commencement of the disease. In one, cramps were
likewise absent. All died, in three, five, four, three, and sixteen hoars respec-
tively. Of the 59 cases in which cramps were absent, 13 were partially and 32
completely collapsed: 36 of this number died."

The term collapse is used here in reference to those cases alone in which
the patient was pulseless.

The erection of a new "Lodge" for violent patients, and of a large addition
to the principal building, has given to the patients of this institution the addi-
tional room which was so much needed; and, rendering the improved manage-
ment the more effective, has been of no little assistance in elevating the
establishment above the wretched condition which made it a "shame and a
reproach" to a Christian community. "Less restraint," says Dr Ranney, "has
been requisite, and frequently it has not been necessary, during the day, to apply
any restraining apparatus, or even to confine a single patient in his room. The
number of violent paroxysms, accidents, and attempts to commit suicide, has
been lessened. At least one-third of the whole number of patients have been
engaged in some species of labour."

Why, Dr llanney, people who visited your institution in 1846 would hardly
know where they were should they call there again. At that time, one would
have as soon looked for a library at the sources of the Nile, or among the
Esquimaux, as at that asylum; but now the patients are supplied with
" biography, history, geography, philosophy, theology, poetry, fiction," &c., and
"free access to the reading-room has contributed much to the restoration of
convalescents." That is as it should be. No more blessed resurrection has
occurred within the limits of our experience.

In the report of the visiting physicians, Drs. Ogden and Williams, it is
remarked, in reference to the cases of cholera, that " several patients refused
to take medicine, and those all died; while many in apparent extreme collapse
recovered under medical treatment?an important fact, showing the fatality of
the disease when left to the unassisted efforts of nature."

. Men. Women. Total.
By the report for 1850, it appears that the num-
ber of patients oil the 1st of January was . . 186 215 401
Admitted in the course of the year . . . 195 196 391
Whole number ... ... 381 411 792
Discharged ....... 138 113 251
Died  43 34 77
Remaining December 31st .... 200 264 464
Of those discharged, there were cured. . . .. .. 179
Among the cures were 25 cases of delirium tremens.
Causes of death.?Consumption, 23; general debility, 20 ; paralysis, 6;
paralysie generale, 5; congestion of the brain, 5; epilepsy, 2 ; apoplexy, 2;
dropsy, 3; stomatitis, 2; suicide, 2; inflammation of the brain, diabetes,
empyema, lumbar abscess, erysipelas, chronic diarrhoea, and old age, 1 each.
The proportion of deaths, upon admissions, was four per cent, less than in
1848, and ten per cent, less than in any other year; that of recoveries was
two per cent, greater than in 1848 ; and ten per cent, greater than in any
previous year. Such are the expected, because the legitimate, results of the
improved and still improving condition of the asvlum.

From motives of "economy"?whether domestic or political we cannot
assert, though, judging from the management of some of the institutions upon
Black well's Island, while they were under the government of the common
council of the city, we should strongly suspect it to be the latter?the convicts
of the penitentiary have been employed as domestics and attendants at this
establishment. Some of the results of this system are thus alluded to in the
report:?

" The prisoners not only steal the clothing of the patients, but anything else
of value that falls in their reach. As an illustration, the following case may
be mentioned, as one from a great number of cases of a similar character.
A few years ago, a young lady, who had been insane for some time, was
admitted, and, although partially demented, her self-esteem was gratified by
the possession of a beautiful head of hair. The morning after admission it was
observed that her head was completely shorn, and, after a long examination,
the ringlets so highly valued were found in the possession of a prison aid in
the hall, who had committed the theft for the purpose of selling them to a
peruke-maker."

The correction of this evil, by hiring suitable attendants, has been com-
menced, and will, undoubtedly, be completed before long. Various improve-
ments, both within doors and without, were made in tie course of the year.
Among the former is the allowance, " for the first time," to the patients, of
knives and forks in several of the halls. One of the best evidences of improve-
ment, to persons who know the former condition of this asylum, is found in the
gardener's report, where it is stated that an aggregate of 2779 days' labour
was performed by the patients, between the 26th of May and the 31st of
December. They raised twenty thousand cabbages, ana other vegetables in
proportion.

The visiting physicians, in their report, say that the number of pauper
lunatics in New York city, on the 1st of September, 1834, was 116 ; whereas,
on the 1st of January, 1851, it was 464. "Estimating the future increase
from these data, the city and county of New York will, fifteen years hence,
have more than a thousand lunatics to be supported at the public charge."
They suggest various improvements, which, if adopted and effected, will
render this institution one of the best of its kind. At the close of the report,
Dr Williams resigns the place of attending physician.

10. From the report for 1849, of Dr Buttolph, of the New Jersey State
Lunatic Asylum, we extract the following statistics :?

Men. Women. Total.
Patients in the Asylum January 1st, 1849 46 37 83
Admitted in the course of tlie year ... 55 41 96
"Whole number ....... 101 78 179
Discharged ....... 39 30 G9
Remaining January 1st, 1850 .... 02 48 110
Of those discharged, there were cured ... 24 20 44
Died ........ 4 5 9
Causes of death.?Exhaustion, 5; consumption, 2; chronic diarrhoea, 2.
"During the prevalence of the cholera in neighbouring places, a marked
epidemic tendency to affections of the digestive organs prevailed in the
institution; but no death, or very alarming sickness of that character,
occurred."
The cure of a woman, insane more than eighteen years, and that of a man
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 505
whose disease had existed upwards of six years, are reported. Of the former,
Dr B. says, "No expectation was entertained of her recovery by her friends
or the officers of the institution; and it must be regarded as a very unusual
exception to the general rule of success, and to be attributed rather to a happy
and rare effort of nature, than to the course of treatment adopted, which, at
best, could only be considered as having favoured such a result." Of the latter
he remarks, that in the recovery of the patient he was "also agreeably sur-
prised, and could scarcely believe that a permanent cure had been effected,
until some months of careful observation of his mental state had established
the fact."

Now, granting that both of these remarkable cures were, as is suggested of
the first, the effect of a " happy effort of nature," the question may still be
asked, If it be likely that the " happy effort" would have been crowned with
such success, had the patients not been taken to an asylum ? We think it
would not. Nature wanted just such assistance as can be and is rendered by
a well-conducted institution.

The principal part of this report is devoted to a detailed account of the
management of the institution, its daily domestic duties, &c. &c.
We proceed to the report for 1850.

Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the beginning of the year . . . 62 48 110
Admitted in the course of the year ... 52 58 110
Whole number ....... 114 106 220
Discharged ....... 28 30 58
Remaining January 1st, 1851 .... 86 76 162
Of those discharged, there were cured ... 15 17 82
Died ........ 6 4 10
Causes of Death.?Apoplexy, 3; consumption, 2 ; exhaustion, 2; chronic
mania, 1.

Dr Buttolph makes the following remarks upon treatment:?

"We use medicine sparingly, being influenced somewhat by the opposition
that many insane have to taking it; but more especially by the fact, that a
physiological treatment is frequently quite as salutary as medical, and vastly
more agreeable to the patient. Under the head of mental and moral treatment
we include all those means and influences that can be brought to bear upon a
person through the medium of the mind and feelings. Thus, the removal of
a person from home, and the associations with which their excited, depressed,
or perverted feelings have arisen, is often nearly all that is required to restore
the healthy balance of the faculties. But, in addition to the effect of separa-
tion from irritating causes at home, the new scenes, regulations, employments,
amusements, and, indeed, the petty inconveniences and even annoyances met
with in an institution, often have the effect, insensibly, to withdraw the
attention of the patient from subjects upon which he has dwelt to his injury.
Hence, treatment in an asylum is usually more successful than in private, and,
as a general rule, is to be recommended. Occasionally, however, cases arise in
which the question of removal from home can only be properly settled by an
experienced medical adviser, or by resort to the experiment of change."
After mentioning some improvements in the means of heating the buildings,
which is done by steam, the report continues as follows: " As now working,
we may safely challenge the world to produce another apparatus so perfect in
the arrangement of its details, and so satisfactory in its results."
Dr B. recommends an enlargement of the building by the addition of two
wings, one on either extremity of the present structure, and each to accom-
modate thirty-eight patients.

11. Dr Kirkbride, in the report of the Pennsylvania Hospital for the Insane,
for 1819, says, that the institution was full at the commencement of the year,
and continued so until its close. The average number of male patients was 110,
and of females 99. An additional wing, for the accommodation of twenty more
women, was constructed in the course of the year. " When the institution was
opened, in 1841, it offered accommodations for only 110 patients and their
attendants. Since then, additions have been put up, at various times, which
will now contain 80 patients with their attendants, making four new classes of
eacli sex, and giving two fine infirmaries, and a great variety of fixtures and
arrangements, of immense importance to the comfort of all, but which were
scarce thought of in the commencement of the main building."

The recent additions are heated by steam. " The character of the warm air
from a steam or mild hot-water apparatus," says Dr K., " is so entirely differ-
ent, and so incomparably more pleasant than that from the common hot-air
furnace?its neatness, avoiding, as it does, all dust, dirt, or gas in the rooms, is
so striking, and?after the first cost of the fixtures?its economy is so evident,
that I feel no hesitation in saying that no one, who has had an opportunity of
testing its advantages, will, with our present knowledge, be willing to see any
other system than one of these adopted in any building like a hospital, whether
for the ordinary sick or for the insane."

Patients at the beginning of the year .... 200
Admitted in the course of the year ..... 208
Whole number ........ 408
Discharged . . . . . . . . .187
Remaining at the end of the year . . . . .221
Of those discharged, there were cured . . . .104
Died .......... 19
Causes of Death.?Pulmonary consumption, 5 ; apoplexy, 2; congestion of
brain, 1; acute mania, 4; chronic inflammation of the intestines, 2; chronic
organic disease of brain, 1; exhaustion from high excitement, 2; bronchitis, 1;
pericarditis, 1.

Upon the approach of the cholera, " every reasonable precaution was taken
to avoid the exciting causes of that disease. When it is recollected that the
epidemic prevailed for some time in our vicinity, and that a public institution
within sight of us lost no less than two hundred and twenty-nine of its resi-
dents, of whom seventy were insane, we must all feel that we have cause for
devout thankfulness to a protecting Providence that I am able to record the
fact, that not only was there not a single case of cholera in our household, but
that there was no serious acute sickness of any kind, and less general indisposi-
tion than is commonly prevalent in the institution and its vicinity."
" The museum and reading-room, put up by the patients and friends of the
institution, and presented to it as a Christmas offering, last year, has been in
daily use, and has proved a source of great enjoyment to a large number of the
inmates of the hospital." The report is ornamented with beautifully executed
wood-cuts, representing the exterior and the interior of this building, so valu-
able an acquisition to the inmates of the establishment. There are also, similar
views of the " Patients' Cottage" and the " Ladies' Summer House."

Although the facilities furnished, at this institution, for the moral treatment
of its patients, are not exceeded, perhaps not equalled, at any similar establish-
ment in the country, yet Dr Kirkbride, in his untiring philanthropy and his
characteristic striving for the perfect, looks forward to more. "The treatment
of the insane," says he, " has been gradually improved, till many persons
believe that little more is to be accomplished. This, however, is a serious
error, and ought to be disavowed by all who are familiar with the wauts of the
insane. Many highly important means of treatment are still to be procured,
or their use widely extended, and nothing but an absolute want of pecuniary
ability ought to prevent a much greater degree of efficiency than has ever yet
been attained. Conspicuous among these means are the various measures con-
AMERICAN INSTITUTIONS FOR THE INSANE. 507
nccted with the direct mental treatment of the patient?important in all cases,
even in those apparently the most hopeless?but indispensable for many whose
diseases assume forms that make them peculiarly interesting."
The report for 1850 is the tenth issued by the institution and by Dr Kirk-
bride. It contains so large an amount of valuable matter that, although there
will be no difficulty in beginning to make extracts, yet we fear that it will not
be so easy a matter to decide when and where to stop.
Patients at the beginning of the year .... 221
Admitted in the course of the year ..... 207
Whole number ........ 428
Daily average number . . . . . . .219
Discharged . . . . . . . . .215
Remaining at the end of the year . . . . .213
Of those discharged, there were cured .... 106
Died 27
Causes of Death.?Pulmonary consumption, 5 ; acute mania, 5 ; inflamma-
tion of brain, 3; apoplexy, 2; dysentery, 2; general paralysis, 2; softening of
the brain, 2; exhaustion following excitement, 1; chronic uterine disease, 1 ;
epilepsy, 1; purpura, 1; disease of heart, 1; old age, 1.
Six of the patients died within two weeks from the time of admission.

" While simple insanity does not often produce death, it unquestionably tends
to lessen the average duration of life, by rendering the individuals labouring
under it less able to resist attacks of acute disease, by the difficulty often
experienced in discovering sickness in its commencement, and by the resistance
offered to the adoption of a proper course of treatment. There is, however, an
acute form of insanity which does often cause deatli by a kind of exhaustion
induced by the combined operation of long-continued mental excitement, want
of sleep, and refusal of food. To distinguish these cases from ordinary insanity,
to which they have little resemblance, the mode in which death has appeared to
be caused has been inserted in the table. When acute disease of the brain has
been referred to, it is intended rather to designate active inflammation of that
organ than insanity."

After treating of the utility derived from the farm and garden, the workshop
and mechanical department, and the museum and reading-room?the last of
which has been found so useful that another, so that there shall be one for each
sex, is desired?the report continues as follows :?

" During nine months of the past year, the course of lectures and entertain-
ments in the lecture-room was kept up regularly three times a week, to the
great gratification and benefit of the patients and those employed in their care.
I have no knowledge of such a course having been regularly continued for so
long a period in any other institution, and it was interrupted only on account
of the hot weather rendering the room uncomfortable for so large an audience.
During this intermission, on several evenings of the week, the patients were
entertained in other modes, on the lawn in front of the main building.
" The practice of daily reading, by the teachers, to the patients in the different
wards, especially those devoted to the more excitable class of patients, has been
continued with marked good effect.

"The entertainments in the lecture-room have almost entirely done away
with the social parties for both sexes that, in the earlier days of the institution,
were frequently given, and the effects of the former have been found, upon the
whole, to be much more satisfactory. Frequent sewing parties are still held
by the matron, among the ladies of the different wards, and a grand entertain-
ment, for all in the house, is always expected on Christmas eve, preparatory to
the special dinner given on the following day."

A new feature lias been added to the mental treatment, by the establishment
of a library in each ward, of which there are sixteen, These libraries contain
eleven hundred volumes. " A trial of three months has already been made
with these books, and the result is most gratifying. The expressions of satis-
faction, and of the benefit derived from them, by the most intelligent patients,
is of itself sufficient to show their great importance, and but three volumes, of
little value, are reported to me as having been injured."

We now come to that part of the report which has reference to the whole
period of the existence of the institution. This is introduced by some, in our
opinion, very just remarks upou statistics, from which we shall extract the most
important passages.
"The value of statistical tables, on any subject, must, in a great measure,
depend upon the competency of the observer, and the care that is exercised in
their preparation; but the fact that there are some inherent difficulties in the
case can scarcely be deemed a sufficient reason for making no attempt to
overcome them, or not approaching as near as possible to absolute certainty.
There seems to be no sound reason why the statistics of insauity may not possess
as much certainty as those of most other maladies. Notwithstanding the false
deductions made by those who have carelessly analyzed these reports and tables,
it must still be acknowledged that this evil will be likely to correct itself; and it
cannot be denied that, with all their defects, the general circulation of hospital
reports, containing the results of judicious treatment, has done more to enlighten
the public mind in reference to insanity, to stimulate and give proper direction
to the efforts of philanthropists, and eventually lead to a liberal provision for
the wants of the insane generally, than all other means combined.

" One great error, often committed in reference to the statistics of hospitals
for the insane, has been in using those from different institutions as a basis of
comparison, without alluding to the varied character of these establishments,
the kind of patients received, in regard to their curability and general health,
the different modes prescribed for their admission, the authority to detain them
for treatment without regard to the caprices of friends, and various other cir-
cumstances having an important bearing upon the results, and without a full
knowledge of and allowance for which, all comparisons are perfectly useless.
"Of all the medical subjects that can be tabulated, the number is exceed-
ingly small in which the statements are not, to some extent, matters of opinion,
and this latitude is as allowable in reference to insanity as to any other
malady."

Men. Women. Total.
"Whole number of patients admitted . . 999 807 1806
? ? ? ? discharged cured . 466 377 843
,, ? of deaths .... 104 72 176
" The number of males in the institution has generally preponderated (over
that of females); but not universally. In nearly every year at some period,
the number of the sexes has been equal, and, at other times, there have been
more females than males."

The attention of those who have made themselves familiar with the reports
of our institutions for the insane, during the last ten or fifteen years, must
have been arrested by the fact that the number of females, not only absolute
but relative to that of males, in those establishments, has been gradually
increasing. While this truth indicates greater public confidence in the utility
and the management of the hospitals, it throws a doubt upon what was believed
to be a fact in former years?that the number of insane men in this country
exceeds that of insane women.

" Among the cases embraced in this report, by far the most prevalent cause
of insanity has been ill-health of various kinds, and in about the same propor-
tion in both sexes. Intemperance is set down as the direct cause, in 106 (out
of 1800) patients, of whom 97 were men and 9 women. This, however, is
far from showing its real influence in the production of the disease. It tells
nothing of its effect on others, nothing of the blighted hopes, the losses of pro-
perty and character, the domestic difficulties and the mental anxiety, deep and
depressing, which follow in its train and owe their origin to its existence. Loss
of property, directly or indirectly, is a not infrequent cause of insanity, affecting
men much more than women; while domestic difficulties are a vastly more
common cause of its existence among females than males."

Fifteen cases, ten men and five women, were attributed to fright. They
" were well marked, and resulted directly from that cause." After mentioning
various other causes, the report continues: " Two cases in men and five in
women, are reported as caused by the use of opium; and four in men, by the
use of tobacco. Opium is much more used by females than males, and its
effects upon the mind, no less than upon the body, are of a most injurious
character. The use of tobacco has, in many individuals, a most striking effect
on the nervous system, and its general use iu the community is productive of
more serious effects than is commonly supposed. I have never seen anything
more than a temporary annoyance result from its entire discontinuance, and by
that course alone the complete re-establisliment of impaired health has often
been produced,."

Some physicians report the loss of sleep as a not infrequent cause of mental
derangement. Dr K. gives no case from this origin, as he has found that the
loss of sleep arose from some antecedent cause, or was the effect of the insanity.
When the physicians to asylums have deprecated the practice of general
bleeding in insanity, they have frequently been met by the argument that they
do not receive patients until the acute stage has passed away, and that, con-
sequently, their authority for the treatment of that early stage cannot be valid.
Of the iS06 cases reported by Dr Kirkbride, in no less than 913 the disease
was of less than three months' duration. It is not unreasonable to suppose
that a large number of these had not existed two months, and many of them
not one. Now, where are there any ten physicians, in general practice, in
one city or vicinity, whose combined experience in the treatment of even acute
insanity is equal to that of Dr Kirkbride's ? And yet we venture the asser-
tion?and we call upon the Dr to correct us, if we are in error?that, in all
these 913 cases, Dr K. has not practised venesection, for insanity, in a single
instance. He may have done it for apoplexy, or congestion of the brain; but
for mania, melancholia, or any of the maladies generally included under the
name insanity, we presume to say never.

But perhaps we shall be referred to the authority of Dr Rush, whose work
on mental disorders is the only one generally known in this country. If so,
we have two answers and another authority to offer. First: If, in the time of
Dr Rush, venesection actually was the best treatment for insanity, it does not
necessarily follow that it is so now. Second: We consider the authority of Dr.
Kirkbride, in the treatment of this disease, as of far greater weight than that
of Dr Rush, and that simply because we believe his experience to have been
greater. Now for our authority; and it comes from a high source, the centre
of London. In the early part of the present century, the system of treatment
at Bethlem Hospital for the insane " consisted of bleeding, purging, and
vomiting, in the spring months. A certain day ivas appointed on ivhich the
patients were bled; another ivhen they were purged; another when they
toere vomited. They were bled in May, and again in June, the precise
time depending on the weather. The two authorities are contemporaneous.
The latter is from an hospital so elevated in its position, that it is the only one,
in the whole kingdom of Great Britain aud Ireland, which is exempted from
the inspection and surveillance of the Commissioners of Lunacy, and whose phy-
sicians, it must therefore be presumed, are among the most eminent in London.
But the physicians of probably nineteen-twentieth s of the institutions for the
insane, not only in America and Great Britain, but in France, Prussia, and
Austria, condemn the practice of general bleeding, in insanity, unless it be in
rare and exceptional cases.

Dr Kirkbride lias found mania to be the most curable of any of the specific
forms of insanity. Next, in this respect, follows melancholia. Monomania
occupies the third place; and the least proportion of cures?fifteen in two
hundred and twenty-one?was in dementia.

W e close our notice of this report with an extract relating to the provision
for the insane in Pennsylvania.

" It is now just about a century since the Pennsylvania Hospital, the pioneer
institution for the insane in America, was incorporated by the Provincial
Assembly, and opened for the reception of patients. With the exception of
the Priends' Asylum, at Prankford, established in 1817, and an Insane Depart-
ment of the Philadelphia Almshouse, at Blockley (which, a few years since, for
the first time, took rank as a curative establishment), the Pennsylvania Hos-
pital has been the only institution in the State to which any class of her
citizens could resort for the treatment of insanity, and it was, strictly, the only
one which offered relief from this malady, without cost, to the indigent of
Pennsylvania.

"Prom the foundation of the Pennsylvania Hospital, in 1751, to the present
time, 6062 insane persons have been admitted and treated in its wards. Of
these, more than 1000 were poor, who received every care and attention with-
out charge of any kind, and of whom a large proportion were restored to their
families in perfect health, and many others in various states of improvement;
the number of this class under treatment being limited only by the income
of the institution.

" It will be a fitting commemoration of the services rendered by a private
charity to all classes of the insane, but especially to the indigent insane of
Pennsylvania, duiing a whole century, that, exactly at the end of that period,
our noble Commonwealth will have prepared and put in operation a State
Institution,* intended to afford relief to all her citizens who labour under loss
of reason, and which, with a judicious organization, and fostered by liberal and
enlightened legislation on the part of the government, cannot fail to spread
blessings of inestimable value throughout the community.

"When the new institution is in operation, about one thousand insane
patients will be comfortably provided for in the State, and, except an hospital
m its western part, Pennsylvania will require no material extension of the
accommodations for her insane, for many years, although important improve-
ments will be desirable in all the existing institutions."

12. The official year, of the "Asylum for the Relief of Persons deprived of
the use of their lleason," at Prankford, Pa., commences with the 1st of March.

Men. "Women. Total.
Number of patients March 1st, 1848 ... 24 31 55
Admitted in the course of the year . . . 19 19 38
Whole number ....... 43 50 93
Discharged ......... .. 46
Remaining March 1st, 1849 ...... .. 47
Of those discharged, there were cured ..... .. 25
Died .......... .. 5
Causes of Death? Effects of-long excitement, 1; organic disease of the
brain, 1; old age, 1; tumour on the brain, 1; acute mania, 1.
Schools and lectures constitute a part of the moral or mental treatment of
the patients. " The experience of the past year," says the report, " confirms
the opinion heretofore expressed, of the great utility of mental occupation, as
well as bodily labour, in the curative treatment of the insane; and also its
great importance in promoting the comfort and well-being of those who are
incurable. It is not to be expected that the latter class should be capable of
* At Harrisburg. It is now in operation.

making much advance in learning, though their mental powers are certainly
strengthened, and more developed by being brought into use, and stimulated
by exercise; but, independent of this, important benefits result to them, from
the efforts made to interest and employ their minds, inasmuch as they soon
be gin properly to appreciate the care and attention required to instruct them,
and manifest their willingness to repay it by increased correctness of deport-
ment."

In the course of the year, means of forced ventilation were introduced into
some parts of the building, the old bath-rooms were improved, and two new
ones arranged.

The leading statistics, from the report for 1849, are as follows : ?
Men. "Women. Total.
Patients at the beginning of the year ... 24 23 47
Admitted in the course of the year ... 16 11 27
Whole number ....... 40 34 74
Discharged . . . ' . . . . .. .. 26
Remaining at the end of the year ..... .. 48
Of those discharged, there were cured ..... .. 14
Died ... . . . . . . .. .. 4
Causes of Death.?" Obstruction of the bowels," 1; acute bronchitis, 1;
typhoid fever, 1; suicide, 1.
"Although the cholera prevailed at Prank ford and in the vicinity of the
asylum, yet the inmates of the institution were mercifully preserved from its
fearful visitation; but, during the last summer and the first fall months,
epidemic dysentery prevailed, to a considerable extent, among the patients and
their attendants."

The report says that " a detailed description of the means that have been
employed (in treatment), would be little more than a repetition of the matter
of previous reports," and, consequently, no such detail is given. We find a
similar idea expressed in the reports of several other institutions. Now, so
far as our observation has extended, comparatively few people read the reports
of asylums for the insane, other than physicians and those who have some
near relative or friend suffering under mental alienation. Hence, a very large
proportion of those readers is constantly changing. The new class of them are
mostly ignorant of the modern method of treatment, and ought, as they gene-
rally wisn, to be enlightened thereupon. It has, therefore, long been our opinion
that each report of every institution should contain a description of the moral
treatment, so full as to give a clear comprehension of it to a person previously
without any knowledge upon the subject.

At or about the commencement of the official year for 1850-51, an important
change was made in the organization of the Frank ford Asylum, by making a
physician its superintendent or principal officer. Dr Joshua II. Worthington,
who, for several years had been the resident physician, was appointed to the
place. He is well qualified for the fulfilment of its duties.

Patients at the beginning of the year ..... 48
Admitted in the course of the year ..... 20
Whole number ........ 68
Discharged ......... 25
Remaining March 1st, 1851 ...... 43
Of those discharged, there were cured . . . . 12
Died .......... 2
" In general," says Dr Worthington, " the time required for the cure of any
case of insanity will depend upon the promptness or delay with which the
patient is submitted to proper treatment. The earlier the treatment is com-
menced, the more speedy will be the recovery; and the reverse. We occa-
sionally, however, meet with cases of long duration, in which the condition of 'tlie patient lias been mueli neglected, or where the disease may have been kept
up by improper treatment, which recover rapidly when placed under different
circumstances. An instance of this kind was that of a young man from one of
the interior counties of this State, who was discharged during the last year. He
had been insane for two years previous to his admission, and, at the com-
mencement of the attack, had attempted to take his own life by leaping into a
well, and afterwards had been kept bound with chains. Under our care, he
recovered in the course of a few months; and, during the period of nearly a
year that has elapsed since his return home, he has continued entirely well, and
been usefully employed in the management of a farm."

In regard to the curability of insanity, Dr W. states, that, " in this institu-
tion, with the reception of all classes, and the disadvantage of premature
removals, the per-centage of cures of recent cases, since 1842, is 72.25, there
having been received, since that time, 191 cases of that description, of which
138 have been restored. If to this we add 10 per cent, as the probable loss
sustained by premature removals, we shall have 82.25 per cent, which may be
considered as nearly representing the proportion in which recent cases of
insanity are curable. During the same period, 121 chronic cases have been
admitted, 21 only of which, or 19.83 per cent, have been restored; the propor-
tion of cures, on the whole number received in that period, being 51.92."
13. Dr John Fonerden became connected with the Maryland Hospital in
1846; but no report, written by him, was published until the close of 1849.
This report, therefore, contains the statistics of four years.

Men. Women. Total.
Patients at the hospital January 1st, 1846 . . 58 49 107
Admitted in the course of four years . . . 189 113 252
Whole number ...... 197 162 359
Discharged 131 95 226
Remaining December 31st, 1849 ... 64 69 133
Of those discharged, there were cured 43 36 79
Died  40 17 57

"There were admitted, exclusive of the patients enumerated above, 107
private boarders affected with mania a potu. All of these were discharged
recovered, except three who died. As asylums for the insane are not appro-
priate places for cases of this character, it will probably be discovered, in the
progress of moral intelligence, that it is a proper function of the Temperance
Societies to adopt the plan of building, on a farm near each of the principal
cities, a suitable retreat; to be conducted, under the advice of a physician, by
managers of mature age and discretion, who, having the promotion of tempe-
rance in view, and sufficient leisure, would aim, by their personal aid, to lead
young men, after recovering from the dreadful malady, to love sobriety and
usefulness of conduct."

" The number of recent cases of insanity admitted during the four years,"
continues the report, " was very small. Almost all the cases were of more than
one year's duration before admission."

Dr F. mentions the defects of the hospital, and the necessity of a " thorough
reform." He evidently looks forward to a new architectural arrangement of
the building, or to the erection of a new one, in a more suitable place. We
hope that no considerations will induce the managers of that institution to
decide upon the former course. Between the investment of a pretty large
amount of funds in the attempt to make the present establishment what a hos-
pital for the insane ought to be, and throwing the same sum into the river,
there would be, in our opinion, but little choice.

In allusion to defective training, in early life, as a cause of mental disorder,
the report closes with the following beautiful effusion of the heart of a father
and, in the best and noblest sense of the term, a man:?

" How important is it, then, that childhood and youth should be gently led,
by a patient and loving help, both in play and at pleasant work, into innocent
habits of the mind, and, in agreement therewith, into bracing habits of the
body. For, so far as such conjoined habits become identified with the physio-
logical life, they will combat, triumphantly, many a hereditary peculiarity,
mental and corporeal; and they will be strong in vital power to resist the
invasion of disease. More than this; becoming, in due time, subservient to
the religious principle, in its legitimate works of sincerity and justice, they will
surely generate a purity of purpose in the discharge of domestic and all other
duties; and thus, by exempting the mind from an abiding presence of selfish
thought and inclination, they will be a safeguard against most of the secondary
causes of disordered ideas and emotions, of incoherent speech and impulsive
actions. So may the human mind, apart from the blighting power of unavoid-
able disease and accident, gradually work out its emancipation from the
infirmities of a natural temperament; so can it earn the faculty of living in
freedom according to reason."

Statistics from the report for 1850:?
Patients at the beginning of the year
Admitted in the course of the year
Whole number ....
Discharged ....
Remaining at the end of the year
Men. "Women. Total.
64 69 138
25 15 40
89 84 173
21 11 32
68 73 141
Of those discharged, there were cured . 8 6 14
Died 5 1 6

Seven cases of mania a potu were also received, and discharged cured.
Dr Fonerden calls the attention of the President and Board of Visitors to
the necessity of providing additional accommodations for the insane, in the
State of Maryland. The only argument adduced is the impossibility of receiv-
ing all the applicants at this institution. " It may now happen," says he,
"that one or two months will elapse before another public patient can be
received. In the mean time, urgent applications will continue to be made for
the relief of the public and of families, and for the protection of the destitute
insane, whose cases, in most of the counties, are dependent upon this institution
for custodial arrangements. On the day of writing this, applications have been
made for the admission of three patients at the expense of the counties."
