Mortality and Insanity in Separate Plan Prisons In England and America
=======================================================================

Dr.. Parrish presented and read the following communication,* embracing
the substance of the remarks made by him at the last meeting of the College,
with revisions and additions.

In the London Lancet for June, 1851, will be found an abstract of a paper
on prison discipline, read before the London Medical Society by Dr Forbes
Winslow, which, with the discussion upon it, forms matter for profitable reflec-
tion and comment.

Dr Winslow believes, and we think with good reason, that the study of the
great problem of crime and its punishment comes peculiarly within the province
of physicians, who, as a class, are better qualified than any others, both from
their education and pursuits, to grapple with them. With these views, Dr.
Winslow appears to have carefully investigated the recent improvements in the
construction and management of prisons in England, in order, if possible, to
arrive at some definite conclusions as to their actual effects on the moral and
physical condition of convicts.

His statistics possess unusual interest, when viewed in connexion with those
obtained from the prisons of this city and county; and in this light I propose
to regard them.

It is known to the fellows that the plan of separate confinement, which
originated in Pennsylvania, has been partially adopted in England, as well as in
some parts of the continent of Europe; and it is to this class of prisons that
the inquiries of Dr Winslow are directed. In order, however, to draw a just
parallel between the separate prisons of England and our own, it will be
necessary to present some of the points of difference between them; and to
sketch as briefly as possible the main features of the plans now in operation in
the two countries.

Our Pennsylvania system has been both highly lauded and severely con-
demned; and in the discussions in regard to it, a degree of acrimony and
uncharitableness has been engendered akin to that which too often marks
sectarian and political controversies, and which is altogether unfavourable to
the development of truth. It is the province of the physician, looking at this
question as a medical and philosophical one, to free himself from all undue
bias, and to view it in the light of facts alone.

Regarding the origin of the system of separate (or, as it was originally
denominated, solitary) confinement, all must admit that the motives of the men
who projected it were eminently philanthropic. They were amongst the most
benevolent and public-spirited citizens of Pennsylvania, men of pure lives and
honest hearts.

Seeing the utter failure of the old and vindictive methods of punishment to
reform bad men, and considering this as the paramount object of penal law,
they naturally sought for something higher and better. More than a century
and a half ago, the wise founder of our state had taught that the reformation
of the offender should be the grand object of punishment, and that cruelty and
vengeance, which had entered so largely into the penal code of the Old World,
should be swept away before the advancing tide of a purer gospel. Acting
upon this sentiment, the original penal code of Pennsylvania was far milder
than that of the mother country, or even of the other colonies, and under the
* Stated Meeting of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia, September 2nd, 1851,
Dr Meigs, Vice-President, in the chair.

Mild sway of Penn, prisons were houses of correction rather than bastiles for
executing vengeance. Nor was the example of the founder wholly lost upon
succeeding generations. "What was then rather a peculiar idea is now the
popular sentiment in the most enlightened states.

It was in furtherance of the grand idea of reformation and correction of
offenders that the plan of separating them from each other during their incar-
ceration was conceived and carried out. The bad influence of their promiscuous
intercourse in crowded rooms and workshops had been abundantly verified. It
presented, in fact, an insurmountable obstacle to reformation, and was, in many
instances, a direct cause of increased moral contamination, especially to the
young and uninitiated.

To counteract this, entire separation, both by day and night, was offered as
a substitute. It was believed that solitude would furnish a strong incentive
to moral renovation. That the convict, shut out from society, with every
motive to deception and to the indulgence of his passions taken away, without
external objects of interest or amusement upon which his mind could rest, with
no books but those of a serious kind, and deprived of the knowledge of the
stirring events which were transpiring in the busy world around him, his
thoughts would necessarily turn to the errors and crimes of his past life,
which, as he looked back upon them, would lead him to deep contrition, and it
?might, be to sincere penitence.

It was believed, too, that, by exclusion from the public gaze, and from his
fellow-prisoners, he might emerge from his solitary cell, at the expiration of his
term, and go out into the world without having the brand of the convict fixed
upon him, and thus be enabled to commence anew the struggles of life. Plots
of mischief and rapine, laid within the prison walls, to be executed by trained
bands, grown old in crime, after their discharge, would thus be prevented, and
the public security be thereby promoted.

These were some of the considerations which impelled many of our fellow-
citizens to give their hearty support and co-operation to a new and then untried
method of prison discipline. The plan seemed feasible : it held out the flatter-
ing prospect of reforming vicious and dangerous men, not by bayonets, stripes,
shower baths, or other physical torture, but by the gradual softening influence
of solitude, combined with moral and literary instruction. The early advocates
of the system were divided on the question of introducing labour into the
prison, some of them even supposing that occupation might amuse and distract
the mind, and thus lead it off from serious reflections; but this idea was over-
ruled by the more sagacious, and daily labour was, from the first, made a part
of the scheme. Different opinions prevailed also in regard to the amount of
intercourse which should be permitted between the prisoners and their officers,
visitors, &c., as well as upon some other details of the plan.

The separation and non-intercourse of the prisoners, under any circum-
stances, were, however, agreed upon by all parties, and constituted the cardinal
feature of the system. This was made the basis of a revised penal code, which
was adopted by the legislature at its session in 1829, and has since been the
law of the Commonwealth. Each prisoner is now sentenced to " solitary or
separate confinement at labour" for a term corresponding- with the gravity of
his offence, or of the circumstanccs under which it was committed.

The introduction of this system involved, of course, the erection of new and
costly buildings adapted to the end in view. The chief object being to isolate
each occupant from his fellows, separate cells were constructed, facing upon
lofty arched corridors, which radiated from a central hall. These cells are
separated from each other by massive walls J4 feet long and 7 4 wide; the light
is admitted from above, through a skylight 22 inches long by 4 in width, and
ventilation is effected by an opening in the top of the cell, which may be opened
or closed at the discretion of the prisoner.

A cess pipe occupies a corner of the apartment; and across it pass two iron
rods for the conveyance of heat. A double door, the inner of firm iron grating,
and the outer of thick wood, guards the front and rear opening of the cell.
The floors of most of the cells are of plank upon a firm joice laid on cement,
while some others are of stone. To each cell is attached a yard of the same
size, enclosed by a massive wall 11 feet higb, to prevent intercourse during the
hour devoted to exercise.

A room thus constructed, without open doors or windows, and surrounded
by a wall 11 feet high, with no other opening for sun light than through a
narrow skylight at the top, and with impcrfect means of ventilation, and this
in a great measure under the control of its occupant, must be somewhat damp,
and oftentimes offensive, especially when used alike for work, eating, sleeping,
and, in fact, for all other purposes. In this apartment the prisoner is strictly
confined at labour, one hour of each day being allowed for exercise in the cell
yard, unless evidences of ill health or mental disorder induce the physician to
direct a relaxation of the discipline.

Each block contains about 31 cells on each side of the hall, and is under the
care of an overseer, who is obliged to inspect the condition of each prisoner at
least ^ three times daily, and to superintend his work. The warden, overseers,
physicians, official visitors, and members of the acting committee of the Prison
Society are the only persons allowed to hold intercourse with the prisoners.
Until recently, the principal trades pursued in these cells were weaving, shoe-
making, and bobbin winding.

Without entering farther into the details of the separate system, it may be
remarked that it was carried into effect in Pennsylvania, under the most flatter-
ing auspices, in the year 1829, and has since been in full operation in the state
prisons at Philadelphia and at Pittsburg, and more recently in several of the
county prisons in the interior. The prison at Philadelphia was opened in the
10th month (October), 1829, and soon attracted a large share of attention from
philanthropists, statesmen, jurists, and from the public generally. The order,
decorum, and quiet which reigned within its walls; the absence of the sad
spectacle of human depravity and wretchedness, which meets the eye in the
thronged apartments of prisons conducted on the old plan, excited general
admiration. Commissioners from England and Prance were sent out to visit it,
and returned to their respective countries with the most favourable reports.
These evidences of regard naturally excited a degree of state pride, and
induced Peunsylvanians generally to feel themselves identified with a movement
which originated in their State, and which promised to effect a most desirable
reform in penal law over the world.

If any had doubts of the harmony of the plan with the laws which govern
the human frame; or imagined that close and long-continued confinement in
cells, such as have been described, would breed disease and death; or that in
strict seclusion from society the mind would feed upon its own thoughts until
it became morbid and deranged?they silenced their fears, and determined to
await the results of experience.

The institution was placed under the charge of five inspectors. It was
officered with an efficient and humane body of men, fully impressed with the
importance of the experiment upon which the State was about to enter, and as
its medical attendant, a gentleman was selected whose experience as physician
to the old "YVakiut-street prison, and whose high character, both morally and
professionally, offered the best security that nothing would be left undone to
secure to the inmates as good a degree of health as was compatible witli their
position and circumstances. For the first few years nothing transpired to
excite doubts in the propriety or humanity of the plan of separate confinement.
The medical reports, though written with great caution and accuracy, bore
testimony to the general good health of the prisoners, and to the safety of the
course to Avliich they were subjected.

As, however, the number of persons brought under the discipline of the insti-
tution increased, and the influence of long periods of imprisonment became
more evident, facts accumulated which appeared to place a different aspect on
the question.

The observations of our esteemed fellow, Dr B. H. Coates, who, as a member
of the Prison Discipline Society, was a frequent visitor at the institution,
induced him to believe that there was a large mortality from scrofula and con-
sumption amongst the prisoners of African descent; and on investigating the
subject with his usual candour and accuracy, he proved conclusively that
separate confinement was particularly injurious to the coloured race. Dr.
Coates' paper was published in 1843, although his first communication on the
subject was made to the Prison Society in 1840. In addition to this, a large
number of cases of acute dementia began to appear in the medical reports of
Dr Darrach during the years 1839, 1840, and 1841, occurring more frequently
amongst the coloured prisoners, and believed by Dr Darrach to be mainly attri-
butable to self-abuse.

Without proceeding farther with this history, we shall endeavour to lay
before the College a brief summary of the sanitary condition of this institution,
together with that of the county prison at Moyamensing, down to a recent
period, and then proceed to a comparison between them and the English prisons.
The whole number of prisoners received at the Eastern State Penitentiary,
to the close of the year 1848 (as contained in the annual report for that year),
is 2421, of whom 1631 were white, and 790 coloured. The number of deaths
recorded to this time, embracing a period of 19 years, is 214, or nearly 90 in
the 1000, or within a fraction of 9 per cent, of the whole number received.
Calculating the mortality of each year from the average number of convicts for
the year, and then giving the average annual mortality for the whole period,
this per centage would be considerably reduced; but the former method appears
to me to convey a more accurate idea of the relative proportion between the
number subjected to confinement and the number of deaths, besides being that
applied by Dr Winslow to the English prisons, with which we shall presently
compare them.

The class of prisoners received at this institution is not of the worst descrip-
tion, nearly two-thirds of them coming from the rural districts; thus, from
2176, received to the close of the year 1846, 948 were from Philadelphia
County, and 1228 from the country; of 124 new prisoners received in 1847,
43 from Philadelphia County, and the remainder from the country; and of 121
received in 1848, 40 were from Philadelphia, and the rest from the other
counties.

The sentences of the convicts range from one to twenty-one years, their
average duration being about three years.

The accustomed population of the prison for some years past has been about
300. The deaths in any one year vary from 1 to 26, and are generally from
chronic disorders, scrofula and consumption being the most prominent. Acute
diseases, and especially infectious and epidemic disorders of a low type which
so frequently scourge crowded and filthy prisons, are unknown at Cherry Hill.
The most fruitful source of the large mortality indicated by the above figures is
from the deaths amongst the coloured prisoners; from the 790 coloured inmates
received to the close of the year 1848,141 deaths occurred, being nearly 18 per
cent, of the whole number.

It would be easy to give the annual average mortality of this class, as derived
from the average number in prison in each year. Thus, in looking through the
reports, I find in two years, 1830 and 1833, there were no deaths amongst the
coloured, while in 1831, the average mortality of this class to the average
number in prison was 10'03; in 1832, 13'52; in 1834, 6*68; in 1835, 4"61;
in 1836, 6*74; in 1837, 6*49; in 1838, 1P80, &c.; while, according to Dr.
Emerson's tables, the annual average mortality of the coloured population of
Philadelphia, of both sexes and all ages, between the years 1830 and 1840, was
about 3J per cent.
{To be continued.)
