Crime And Its Punishment In The United States
==============================================

The Inspector of Prisons reports the following ratio of crime to population :?
"New York, 1 in 1608; Massachusetts, 1 in 2232; Connecticut, 1 in 1700;
Maine, 1 in 5374; New Hampshire, 1 in 4370; Virginia, 1 in G856; Ken-
tucky, 1 in 7238; Maryland, 1 in 1336; Pennsylvania, 1 in 4022; New
Jersey, 1 in 2010." Crime is more severely punished in Virginia than in any
of the other States enumerated. The reformation of the oifender can only be
effected bv the enlightenment and culture of his religious, moral, and intellec-
tual faculties, and by preserving and improving his physical powers. An
inspection of State prisons will satisfy any one that these indications are not
fuliilled by long sentences. Most men who have been confined for long terms
are distinguished by a stupor of both the moral and intellectual faculties; they
become mere machines; long disused to the exercise of their own volitions,
and subjected to an unvarying routine of occupations and of objects, the
noblest powers of their natures fall into decay, while the mere instinctive and
animal faculties are those which remain in exercise. Even hope dies within
them , and not unfrequently insanity in its most frightful forms completes the
wreck of all their facilities. Reformation is then out of the question, and the
power of providing for their own livelihood is for ever destroyed. Those who
are most familiar with the history of criminals know that pecuniary necessities
are the chief springs of crime. Even those who enter the path of criminality
through the portals of the grog-shop, the brothel, or the gambling-house, are
constrained to adopt this course, because those agencies have deprived them of
all other means of providing for their wants. Prisoners are punished in the
following extraordinary manner:?" The form of the machine is that of the
common stocks, with a reservoir of water above it, having a head of fifty-four
inches, measuring from the surface of the water to the perforated plate at the
end of the discharging tube. The offender, being stripped of his clothing,
is placed in a sitting posture in the stocks, with his feet and hands securely-
fastened, and his head contained in a sort of hopper, the bottom of which
encircles his neck so closely that the water will not run off as fast as it can be
let on, the water being under the control of the keeper by means of a cord
attached to a valve in the bottom of the reservoir. From the perforated plate
the water falls about eighteen inches, when it strikes the head of the convict
immovably fixed, thence passing over the whole surface of the body. When
the reservoir is full, the force of the blow upon the head is nearly equal to a
column of water seventy-two inches in height. This force is somewhat reduced
by the intervention of the perforated plate, a late modification in the instru-
ment. To the mechanic who calculates the influence of mere matter upon
matter, the power of this column of water must possess considerable import-
ance. But to the physiologist, who can alone judge with any degree of correct-
ness of the influence of a stream (generally at 32 degrees Fahrenheit) falling
upon the head, and thence covering the whole body, the suffering induced and
danger incurred must appear momentous in the extreme. The kind of punish-
ment next in frequency inflicted in this prison (Auburn) is yoking. The yoke
is formed of a flat bar of iron four or five inches wide, and from five to six
feet in length, with a moveable staple in the centre to encircle the neck, and a
small one at each end to surround the wrists. Ail these staples are so arranged,
that by turning screws on their protruding ends, on the back of the iron bar,
they can be tightened to any degree deemed expedient. The weight of the
lightest yoke is thirty-four pounds avoirdupois; and some of them, I believe,
weigh forty. The principal objection to this punishment is, that the yoke bears
too heavily on the cervical vertebra;. Most persons are aware of the unpleasant,
and, in fact, insupportable, sensation produced even by the weight of the
unbuttoned coat and vest pressing upon the back of the neck. Under the
weight of this instrument the convict cannot retain the erect posture even for
a few minutes consecutively, but is forced to bend forward in his continual
writhings, which brings the entire weight of the bar upon the lower cervical
vertebra;. The arms are generally stretched to their full length, and from
steady tension of the nerves are benumbed, while the hands turn purple, and
at times become much swollen. In several instances I have placed my fingers
beneath the yoke, and found the pressure so great that it was actually painful
to me."
