Bethlem Hospital
=================

Most of our readers are, in all probability, aware that a successful at-
tempt was made when the Earl of Shaftesbury's bill for the regulation
of asylums was passing through the House of Lords, to exempt Beth-
lem Hospital from the official visitation and control of the commis-
sioners in lunacy. These gentlemen have, from time to time, had
various statements laid before them as to the alleged gross mismanage-
ment of this hospital, and desirous of ascertaining the accuracy of the
reports in circulation, the commissioners applied to the Secretary of
State for the Home Department, for permission to officially examine
into the condition of the institution and to ascertain the treatment to
which the patients were subjected. Armed with the authority of govern-
ment, the commissioners instituted a rigid inquiry into the state of
Bethlem Hospital; medical officers, attendants, governors, and patients
were examined upon oath at the hospital, and before the Board of
Commissioners. Discoveries of a most painful character are said to have
been made both in regard to the general mismanagement of the asylum,
as well as to the cruel treatment of the patients. The official report of
the commissioners to the Home Office is represented to be anything but
flattering to the vanity of those officially connected with the hospital.
Dr Munro and Sir A. Morison protest against any report having been
made without being afforded an opportunity of answering the charges
made against their conduct as the physicians of the asylum. These
gentlemen have applied to the commissioners, and to Mr. Secretary
Walpole, for a copy of the evidence upon which the adverse report of
the commissioners is based, but without success. The commissioners
have no objection to a publication of the evidence and report?the hitch
exists at the Home Office. It now appears that Mr. Walpole is willing
to lay a copy of the report, evidence, correspondence, &c., upon the
table of the House of Commons, as soon as the committee, having the
general management of Bethlem, send in their reply to the charges of
negligence and inattention made against them by the witnesses examined
by the commissioners. We hope yet to be in possession of a copy of the
report of the commissioners before we go to press; if so, we intend pub-
lishing it in extenso. The evidence, we understand, is voluminous; there-
fore it will be impossible to print in this number of our journal an
analysis of it. In consequence of the inquiry of the commissioners,
and, we presume, the suggestions embodied in their report, the governors
of the hospital have resolved to materially alter its medical organiza-
tion, by appointing a resident officer of a superior grade, who is to have
for the future the exclusive management of the hospital and treatment
of the patients, with a salary of ?700 per annum, exclusive of a fur-
nished residence, coals, &c. The appointment is said to be (inclusive of
pupils, fees, &c.) equivalent to ?1000 a year. We hail with feelings of
unqualified and unbounded satisfaction this recognition of the pecuniary
value of medical services. The salary offered is a good one, and may
tempt a few men indifferent as to private practice to become candidates
for the office. We have before us a programme of the duties which will
devolve upon the new resident physician and medical superintendent.
In the first place, he is not professionally to attend any private patient,
or to be connected directly or indirectly with any other establishment
for the reception of lunatics. During his term of office he is never to
leave the hospital without placing some other competent medical officer
in his place, such substitute having the approbation of the " president
and treasurer." This, we think, might have been dispensed with.

Surely, if a good, trustworthy, and efficient man be selected, it would have
placed him in a more comfortable position, to have freed him from the
necessity of being obliged, whenever he wished to leave the hospital, to
apply to the " president and treasurer" for their approval of the party
selected to act for him during his temporary absence.

Again, the medical superintendent's position is rendered more de-
pendent by the fact that he is never to be absent from the hospital for
one night, " without the written assent of the president or treasurer
but an absence of one month in every year is to be permitted,
" provided that arrangements are made satisfactorily to the same
authorities." The medical officer is to be under the control of the pre-
sident, treasurer, committee, and the Bethlem sub-committee; but in
the hospital he is to reign supreme, having the exclusive management
of all the other officers, attendants, and servants, and the medical and
moral treatment of the patients. What are the duties of the resident
superintendent 1 He is to classify the patients, regulate the diet tables
from time to time, examine the provisions furnished for the use of the
patients; to examine every patient upon admission, and, if requisite,
on their discharge,?to have proper entries made in the books; to
make daily visits to all parts of the hospital, &c. He is to visit
every patient under restraint or seclusion, to exercise a general super-
vision over all the attendants and servants, to act as physician to
the other resident medical officers, and also to all the inmates of
the house of occupation?to see that prescriptions are dispensed and
administered?to investigate all complaints made by patients, atten-
dants, and servants?to take care that the prescription books, medical
journals, and case books be regularly kept. The minute particulars
as to each patient are to be entered into the case book, including the
previous history of the case, with an accurate description of the external
appearance of each patient?the character of the eyes, the expression of
the countenance, and the peculiarities of physical formation, with a minute
description of the early and more advanced symptoms of the attack.
The resident superintendent is to direct the post-mortem examinations,
communicate with the relatives of patients dangerously ill, and " to
remain with them, as far as may be practicable, during the continuance
of such illnesshe is to admit medical pupils to the hospital; make
regulations for their instruction; to give each term a course of lectures,
to be illustrated by cases under his care at the timej and to present to
the General Court of Governors in every year an annual report, &c. &c.
In sober seriousness, we ask where is the man to be found, irre-
spectively of his mental qualifications, with a sufficient physique to
enable him to perform one-fourth of the duties that are to devolve upon
the resident medical officer of Betlilem Hospital? Unfortunately for
this great institution, giants either in body or intellect do not exist in
these degenerate days; yet one would suppose that in dotting down the
details of the medical officer's duty, the governors of Bethlem had some
modern Goliath, or Admirable Crichton, in view, otherwise how could
they, for one moment, have magined that any one man would be able
to approach the standard which the governors of Bethlem evidently had
in contemplation whilst compiling the document before us! If, instead
of ?700, they were to offer ?7000 per annum to their medical officer,
he never could perform a tithe of the duties expected of him with any
degree of satisfaction to a conscientious mind, or advantage to the
patients who would be under his care. If they were to appoint one
officer to keep a record of the cases, to make out the reports, to
attend the meetings of the committee; another to compound the
medicine, and to see it administered; a third to attend to and visit the
sick, see and correspond with the relatives; and two to visit and pre-
scribe for the patients, to make the jwst-mortem investigations, and to
lecture,?there then would exist an efficient medical staff, and we should
have reasonable expectations of witnessing Bethlem Hospital take a posi-
tion with Gharenton and the Bicetre. "VYe feel positively assured that there
is ample work at Bethlem Hospital for four resident medical officers.
How is it possible that, with the immense amount of responsibility
and work devolving upon the resident medical officer, the governors can
expect that he will have time to prepare a course of lectures, in accord-
ance with the most recent discoveries in the pathology and therapeutics
of insanity, likely to reflect credit upon himself, and to elevate in public
estimation Bethlem Hospital as a scientific school of medicine 1 We
do not for a moment doubt, with a few exceptions, the utility of the
regulations laid down for the guidance of the medical officer, but we
maintain that no one human being can be found competent to discharge
them at all efficiently.
