The Case of Mrs. Catherine Cumming
====================================

We append to this number of our Journal an elaborate, and we
may add, faithful report (from the shorthand writer's notes) of
perhaps one of the most important lunacy cases which has been
made the subject of judicial investigation in this country for the
last fifty years. We have been anxious to publish a verbatim
report of this Commission of Lunacy, not only on account of the
deep interest, both public and professional, attached to the case,
but in consequence of the many important medico-legal points
involved in the inquiry. As this trial has attracted the attention
of the legislature, and is likely to give origin to some important
modifications of the law, we consider it our duty to place the
general and professional evidence on both sides at once before
our readers, in order that they may be in a position to form their
own unbiassed and unfettered judgment as to its merits. As
the question of the right of "traverse" is still sub judice, we
purposely abstain from making any comments upon the evidence
adduced and facts disclosed during the inquiry. The subject
will be considered in all its details in our next number. We
present this trial, extending over eleven sheets, to our readers
without any additional charge. To accomplish this, we have
reluctantly been compelled to put aside several valuable articles
of great practical interest, all of which will appear in our July
number, with copious analyses of several English and foreign
works,including both the German, American, and French journals
of medical psychology.
