On the Prevention Of Chime
==========================

:Author: MR. IT. I). IIILL, Q.C.j RECORDER OF BIRMINGHAM.

Gentlemen of tiie Grand Jury,?At. the Michaelmas sessions of last year, I
addressed your predecessors on the repression of crime, confining, however, my
remarks to one branch of that great subject?namely, the propriety of holding
in restraint known malefactors, who could be shown on sufficient evidence to
pursue crime as a calling, although by their dexterity and good fortune they had
been able to elude the proof of any specific offence. This charge drew public
attention to an extent for which I was not prepared. By those best acquainted
with the class to be held in check, and with their manifold inflictions on society,
I believe I may venture to state that it met with acceptance; but having been
handled by men of acute minds, unguarded from error by practical experience,
I ought not to wonder that a new question, or, at all events, a question new to
* An address delivered to tlic grand jury.

these critics, would call fortli dissent as well as agreement?dissent exhibiting
itself in a multitude of ingenious objections. If 1 had foreseen that any obser-
vations falling from me could have been deemed worthy of so much notice, I
might have thought it prudent to offer my views to the public under circum-
stances whicli would have enabled me, by treating the subject in greater fulness
than can well be done in a charge, to hare answered by anticipation the objec-
tions which have been urged against me. My reply I intend to give on the
present occasion, and, as I hope, without drawing too much on your patience.
No doubt I might have taken an earlier opportunity of performing this task;
but I thought it due to the diversity of opinion to which 1 have adverted to take
ample time for a consideration of what I had submitted to your predecessors,
in order that by a careful and (so far as any efforts of mine could insure it) a
candid review of all that has been urged on the one side and the other, I might
either maintain my position or retract my errors, and give at the same time
publicity to the reasons which had led to my change of opinion. And, gentle-
men, if I know myself, I should not have felt humiliated by such a retractation.
On the contrary, it Avould have been satisfactory to me to reflect that the
discussion which I had originated had proved the fallacy of a remedy which,
having been plausible enough to mislead one searcher after truth, might decoy
others of more power and influence, and thus lead to its being carried into
action. This review I have at length made, and have weighed the arguments
on both sides. I have also taken into account some general facts, which have
either come into existence in the interval, or have been made more prominent
than before; and I am bound to avow myself confirmed in my original views.
Gentlemen, 1 submitted to your predecessors a speculative opinion and a prac-
tical proposal. My speculative opinion was, that all persons living without
visible means of support, and who, in the belief of witnesses acquainted with
their way of life, are maintaining themselves by crime as their stated calling,
ought to be called upon to prove themselves in the enjoyment of some honest
means of subsistence; and I further submitted that, in the absence of such
proof, they should be bound to give sureties for good conduct; and again, that
fading to give satisfactory security, they should be committed to prison for a
limited period. This was my theory. And it was founded on the well known
fact (which I pause for a moment to state has never yet been controverted),
that each individual of the class of professional marauders is well known, both
personally and by character, to the police and to his neighbours, and could be
pointed out with perfect ease. From this fact I drew the consequence that
society (having such means of knowledge within its reach) was not oidy justi-
fied, but bound to use it for the general protection. In my practical proposal,
however, I stopped short, and limited the application of my theory to the cases
of offenders who had already been convicted. I adopted this limitation for seve-
ral reasons; one, that it is always well to proceed step by step in an untried
course, or in a course comparatively untried; another, because convicted crimi-
nals form a large, and by far the most dangerous portion of the predatory class;
and thirdly, because by conviction they have necessarily forfeited the confidence
of society. That they have been guilty men is an established fact, while in the
majority of instances there is neither evidence nor probability of their having
abandoned their evil courses. Indeed, how should there be ? The administra-
tion of the law proceeds on the principle of retribution. _ The criminal is con-
victed of a given offence, and has measured out to him a given length of punish-
ment. It is true that, during his term of confinement, we take some steps to
reform him, which are more or less adapted to attain that end. But his deten-
tion is neither in the first instance regulated by an estimate of the time required
for that purpose, nor is there any power to continue it until his reformation is
effected. The prisoner is afflicted with a moral disease, but the prison cannot
be considered in the light of a hospital for its treatment without exposing the
administration of criminal justice to ridicule. For what sliould we think of a
hospital for the cure of a malignant and infectious disease (and surely no disease
can be more malignant or more infectious than crime), if the rule of its gover-
nors were to keep the patient, not until he is cured, but a week, a month, or a
year, according to a principle of regulation quite irrespective of his condition
at the time of his dismissal, and making it altogether a matter of accident
whether he is relieved of his distemper, or whether lie is sent forth to spread
infection through the land.

As long, then, as punishment is measured out upon the retributive principle,
so long an individual once convicted must remain an object of just and
unavoidable suspicion, and the class to which he belongs may reasonably be
selected for any experiment which the welfare of the community requires to
be instituted. To those who have made it a topic of observation and inquiry,
it is well known that criminals not unfrequently pursue a system of depredation
with impunity for long- periods. With regard to one man very lately sentenced
to transportation, it has from peculiar circumstances occurred to me to know,
that his career of crime has extended over more than thirty years without a'
single conviction; and I have strong reasons for believing that his is by no
means a solitary case. Almost every newspaper contains some paragraph
narrating a criminal exploit in which there is a combination of skill and
boldness, marking out the perpetrator as experienced in the violation of the law.
We often read of attacks in streets and other frequented thoroughfares, by
ruffians who seem to have taken as their model the Indian Thug; and their
feats prove them to be as dexterous as their masters, while in audacity they
leave Mm far behind. Such outrages as these, gentlemen, are not the acts of
tyros in villany. They imply the skill, the contempt of danger, and indiffer-
ence to the sufferings of their victims, which training, and training alone,
can give. And here we cannot shut our eyes to the fact, that our present
system of punishment offers great facilities, not to say inducements, to a training
to crime. In order to place this unhappy tendency in a clear light, let me
suppose for a moment that it were the object of society to defeat the intention
of its own laws, and to strengthen the propensity to crime in every individual in
whom such propensity had ever been disclosed by the commission of an offence.
Let us compare our present mode of proceeding, as to criminals, with that
which we pursue when our wish is not to deter, but to stimulate and encourage.
And I think you will observe a wonderful similarity. _ What is our treatment
of our children in their education ? Do we not give them short and easy
lessons at first, lest they should be disgusted with learning at the outset, and so
close their minds against the lessons of their teachers ? And do we not augment
their tasks with the growth of their strength, and in proportion as practice
adds to their ability for mental application ? Do we not, in short, graduate
the rate of their progress according to their powers of action aiid endurance?
Well, then, let us now consider our treatment of criminals. When the juvenile
offender first presents himself at the bar we give him a slight imprisonment,
just enough to accustom him to short separations from his companions, and to
dispel the wholesome illusion which had made the gaol a place of fear, becausc
it was a place of mystery. On the next occasion lie remains longer; but he
has become practised in prison life, and bears confinement far better than he
would have done but for his former lesson. This process is repeated from time
to time, while the moral which the wretched creature draws from his alternations
of confinement and freedom is, not to refrain from offending, but to commit
offences in such a manner as shall least expose him to the risk of detection;
and, moreover, that when at length detected he ought to bear his privations
with as much of contempt and defiance as he can command?consoled by
the prospect of restored freedom and the hope of better fortune in future.
Is not this, gentlemen, a fail' parallel? And does it not show that our
treatment of malefactors is better calculated to confirm them in evil doing
than to withdraw them from crime ? It will be observed that I speak of the
general working of our system. That there arc many exceptions to the rule I
am glad to believe. No man can appreciate more highly than I do the labours
of many governors and many chaplains?aided, as they are often, by volunteers
of both sexes, who look on the criminal, not as an outcast to be flung aside in
contempt and hatred, but as an erring brother, to be reclaimed from guilt, if
by the most strenuous and persevering efforts of well directed kindness that
great end can be reached. If then, gentlemen, the foregoing remarks are well
founded, the number of convicted malefactors roaming at large must excite
much less of surprise than alarm; but I greatly fear that we are yet to expect
considerable additions to this body. It is well known to you, as to all persons
of education, that during the last forty years (dating from the time of that
great and good man, Sir Samuel Rom illy) there has been a steady progress
made by the legislature in mitigating the severity of our criminal code, which,
when he began his labours, was the most sanguinary to be found in the civilized
world. Neither can it have escaped your observations, that the sentiment which
has actuated the legislature has also prevailed in the administration of criminal
justice. Indeed, society through all its gradations is imbued with a far milder
spirit than in bygone times. The combined operation of these causes has been
not only to shorten terms of imprisonment, but to make the severer penalty of
transportation of less frequent occurrence in proportion to the number of
convicts than heretofore?a circumstance which would have attracted more
attention if the difficulty of ascertaining the numbers actually sent out of the
country at different periods were less than it is and always has been. And now
an additional obstacle in the way of transportation has arisen, which threatens
very seriously to lessen, if not altogether to extinguish this kind of punishment.
Penal colonics, planted by the mother country at a vast expense for the disposal
of her convict population, and which formerly were the willing recipients of
these degraded persons (gladly availing themselves of the ample supply of
labour thus afforded for bringing their tracts of new land into cultivation) have
at length discovered, that the moral evils incident on the importation of
malefactors far outweigh the material benefits to which they (the colonists), had
hitherto limited their calculations. It would be unbecoming in me, while
sitting here, to enter into the controversies and heartburnings which have arisen
out of this change in colonial policy. All that I desire at the present moment
is to call your attention to the portentous conscqucnces which may, and as I
think must, result from the impediments thus thrown in the way of transporta-
tion, when taken in connexion with the causes to which I have adverted, as
lessening the numbers on whom that punishment would be inflicted, even if the
facilities for carrying it into effect were as great as they continued to be up to
a recent period. This consequence is, the permanent augmentation around us
in the number of liberated convicts. What that addition will amount to it is
of course impossible to predict, but that it must be very large is pretty certain,
from the experience of countries having no colonial outlets, and because,
although sentences for transportation were at ail times more frequently for
limited terms of years than for life, so few returned, that the country might
almost be said to be freed for ever from the presence of a convict when once he
had left our shores.

Do not, gentlemen, mistake me by imagining that I am pronouncing an
eulogy on transportation. Believe me, I Bear too clearly in my mind the
powerful and conclusive arguments by which it has been assailed. All I desire
to impress on you is, that the stoppage of that great sewer which has for so
many years carried away the dregs of our population, will produce a most un-
wholesome effect, other things remaining as they are; and that while the
country adheres to the principle of retributive punishment (as it probably will
do long after the voice to which you so kindly listen is hushed in the grave), so
long that pernicious effcct will imperatively call for some special remedy?which
remark brings me back to the consideration of the one laid before your prede-
cessors, and of which I have already given you a sketch. This I will now more
fully describe. I propose that every person who has been convicted of felony,
or of a misdemeanour implying fraud (as obtaining goods under false pretences,
knowingly passing base coin, and the like), shall be liable to be dealt with as
follows:?If, after the expiration of his imprisonment under his conviction, he
shall be brought before a magistrate, charged with still persevering in crime,
it shall be the duty of the magistrate, if the witnesses by evidence of general
conduct satisfy his mind that the charge is established, to call on the prisoner
to show that he enjoys the means of honest subsistence either from his property,
his labour, the kindness of his friends, the bounty of the charitable, or from Ins
parish. Should he succeed in adducing this proof he is to be discharged.

Should no such proof be forthcoming, lie is next to be called upon to give Dail
for his good behaviour. Supposing him to answer this demand, he is to be
still entitled to his discharge. But in the event of his failure, he is then to be
held to bail on his own recognizances, and his case is to be sent to a jury at the
assizes or sessions, when, if a verdict pass against him, he is to be imprisoned
for a term to be fixed by the law, but capable of diminution by the judge before
whom he is tried. This, gentlemen, is my proposal in detail, and, perhaps, it
will appear to you, as it did to your predecessors (who honoured it with their
approval when I submitted it to them in outline), that it sufficiently guards the
accused against the danger of being deprived of his liberty on fallacious grounds.
In the first place, no proceedings under the proposed law would put the convict
into custody even for a day, except by the verdict of a jury; unless, indeed, he
should forfeit his recognizances by not appearing to take his trial, when he
would subject himself to the well-known consequences of such a contempt.

Suppose him, then, 011 his trial, and observe how he is fenced round with pro-
tections, " covered," as Erskine expresses it, " from head to foot with the panoply
of the law." In the first place, his accusers must satisfy the jury that he was
at the time of his apprehension in the course of life which they charge upon
him, not merely that he was so before his conviction. This evidence he will
rebut, if he can, either by impeaching the character of the witnesses, showing
that their statements are false or inconclusive, or by explaining away the facts
established against him. And in this part of his case, as in all other parts, he
may adduce witnesses of his own. But suppose him to fail in meeting the
charge, he then falls back on his second defence, and shows the manner in which
he subsists. Now, if he have in truth an honest income, it is not very easy
even to imagine a set of circumstances which disable him from proving a fact so
emphatically within his own knowledge. But we will go on to suppose him
defeated in this second defence. Even then, unless he is altogether bereft of
honest friends, having confidence that he will not commit crime, he finds bail
and remains at liberty.

Now, gentlemen, the species of objection to which I thought my proposal
most obnoxious is, that it offers too many chances of escape to be practically
efficient for the restraint of criminals. On this head, however, none who are
conversant with the life and habits of the class in question have the least mis-
giving, nor has that objection ever been advanced. On the contrary, the nu-
merous attacks which the plan has undergone have been always directed against
the danger of committing injustice on the convict. That such a miscarriage is
within the limits of possibility I must admit, but that such trials as I propose
are more open to this reproach than trials for specific offences, or so open, I do
take upon myself, speaking from a very long experience in criminal courts, con-
fidently to deny. No tribunal is infallible. No discovery has yet been made
which supplies a sure touchstone to human testimony. And if the lamentable
fact that innoccnt men are sometimes convicted were sufficient for tlie condem-
nation of criminal jurisprudence, no mode of trial that the wit of man has ever
.invented could stand. But from the strain in which some writers have indulged,
it might be supposed, if experience had not recorded a very different result,
that trials for specific offences never failed of bringing out the truth, always
acquitting the innoccnt, and ascertaining with exactitude the criminality of the
guilty. One short statement will dispose of tlris fond belief, if any person is so
misled as to entertain it. The brother of the Lord Chancellor, Mr. Edward
"Wilde, was the benevolent instrument, during his year of office as Sheriff of
London, of saving six persons from death, showing on one occasion that the pri-
soner was clearly innocent; on others, that conclusions had been hastily drawn
from facts which did not justify them, and thus nullifying the proofs of guilt;
and with regard to the remainder, adducing evidence which went so far to miti-
gate their conduct, as to prove that to put them to death would be a most
unjustifiable measure of severity. Whoever to whom these events are known
as they were to me from time to time as they occurred?whoever reflects that
they happened in one court and in one year (nay, in less than one year, for Mr.
Wilde held office oidy for ten months), must see that confining the charge to
one specific transaction by no means ensui'es success in the attainment of the
truth. One sourcc of miscarriage is, indeed, peculiar to such trials, and that
happens to be the most frequent by which the administration of justice is beset.
I allude to mistakes as to the identity of the prisoner with the party really
guilty. Misconceptions of this kind belong only to moments of time (or at all
events to very short periods), and cannot occur when the question relates to
general conduct and the tcnour of a man's life. Moreover, when a specific
offence is charged, it is no conclusive answer (nor can it be) that the prisoner
liad means of livelihood, and therefore is not to be supposed guilty, which in
the prosecutions suggested by me it is always competent to furnish. And now
let me, gentlemen, ask a plain question. Is a man who has already been con-
victed, whose conduct is such that a jury is satisfied he is still a malefactor
who, being then called on to explain how he obtains his livelihood, has no answer
to give, who is so distrusted by all the world that he cannot find bail for his
good conduct; is that man?that pest of society?to remain at large ? Ought
we, on the mere surmise that errors may creep into the trial of such persons
(in spite of all the care which has been taken to exclude them), to hold back
from the exercise of a jurisdiction of admitted potency for the attainment of its
object, when that object is clearly of such vital importance? Gentlemen, the
crying necessity of this jurisdiction so presses itself on my mind that I cannot
refrain from adverting to it once more. But few days have elapsed since the
part of England in which I reside (the county of Somerset) was the scene of an
appalling outrage, filling the district with indignation and horror. A girl, fifteen
years old, was left by her parents alone at their dwelling, during the necessary
attendance at the neighbouring market of Erome. On their return home, they
found her dead body stretched on the floor and dabbled in blood. In the open
day?in a house not distant from others of the hamlet, and near to a main road
?had this unhappy girl lost her life in the defence, and, alas ! in the unsuccess-
ful defence, of her purity! The pangs of death were sharpened by the cruel
ignominy of violation. How much less hideous had been her fate?how much
less bitter the grief of her bereaved parents, had she been devoured by a beast
of prey! Her image would then have dwelt in their memory unsullied by those
revolting associations of pollution with which it will now for ever be mingled.
Is the convict, then, I ask, to exhaust all our sympathies ?

Are we to have no thought for the myriads of honest and faithful subjects
exposed to the same frightful perils, deeply feeling the want of protection, the
comfort of whose lives isofttimes destroyed by the perpetual fear which harasses
their minds ? But, gentlemen, we almost always find that an over-wrought
strictness in one direction is balanced by some glaring laxity in another.

Writers who evince the greatest trepidation at the proposal to which your
attention has been drawn, themselves urge the adoption of an alternative in-
finitely more perilous to innocence than the most distorted imagination can
figure to itself out of mine. Deliberate advice has been given, that each man
should defend his dwelling with fire-arms. Let us pause for a moment to
examine what this advice implies. It implies that a person suddenly aroused
from sleep, in the dead of night, and in all the disturbance of mind which an
impending conflict must produce, is, while pointing his blunderbuss and draw-
ing the trigger, to accuse, try, and condemn a suspected burglar, discerned for
an instant in the dark, and to execute upon him the irrevocable doom of a
capital punishment. Surely, for such very fastidious legislators, this is a some-
what startling recommendation. But what has resulted from the promulgation
of this advice ? Gentlemen, within a very short interval of time, two innocent
persons, one of them an officer of,' police?a protector, instead of an assailant?
have fallen, by the hands of clergymen too, who (as we should all agree), if the
power could be safely exercised by any class of the community, are best entitled
to the trust, by the self-restraint and the merciful spirit which pertain to their
sacred calling, and by the reluctance which, above all others, they must feel at
sending a feliow-crcature to his account with all his sins upon his head. Never-
theless, gentlemen, if the law will permit known ruffians to remain at large,
these barbarous remedies, perhaps, cannot, and most certainly will not, be dis-
Sensed with; yet, who does not see that any method of trial, however rude and
efective, even Lynch-law itself, is infinitely to be preferred ? I have now,
gentlemen, I trust, shown that my plan is not open to the objections which
have been raised against it; but I cannot conclude without (paradoxical as it
may appear) avowing that I am far more gratified than disconcerted at these
objections. They prove how deeply Englishmen are imbued with instinctive
reverence for the liberty of the subject. This, like every other sentiment, may
be carried to an unwarranted length. On the question before you I think it has
been so treated; but I for one will ever bear in mind that personal freedom is
the surest foundation of our other liberties, and that hostility to any inter-
ference with it challenges my respect, even when it exceeds the limits of a
reasonable jealousy. If, then, on calm consideration, my proposal shall be
found, by the verdict of reflective men, unwisely to infringe on that noble
privilege, none will rejoice more sincerely than myself that I have not been taken
at my word. Grateful shall I be to those who will have saved me from the life-
long sorrow- of having inflicted injury where I had humbly hoped to suggest
an important benefit. Thanks, gentlemen, for your patience?your task is
finished.
