Practical Suggestions in the Training of Backward Children
============================================================

:Author: P. A. Barrons,
Headmaster, Woodlands Park Junior
Boys' School, Tottenham. Charles & Son
Ltd. 2/6.

For the teacher who laments that when
he wants "brass tacks" he is given so often
only theories, Mr. Barrons' book, " Practical Suggestion for Training the Backward
Child" will come as an agreeable surprise.
The book is short (77 pages only) but we
have no hesitation in saying that it contains
more in the way of practical material and
suggestions than the majority of very much
larger volumes on this subject.

Mr. Barrons' own theoretical appreciation
of the difficulties encountered in training
backward and dull children is remarkably
sound, but where he finds it necessary to
state theories, he does so briefly and lucidly
and follows up his statements with ample
illustration and suggestions for practical
work.

His essentially practical attitude is demonstrated further in his economy of words,
absence of involved description, and wealth
of diagram and illustration. All his material
is simple; most of it indeed can be made,
if necessary, by the children themselves, and
almost all of it is adaptable to a variety of
purposes, a great many of which are indicated, though undoubtedly others will arise
to meet further needs.

No attempt is made to lay down hard and
fast rules, or a " syllabus"; obviously
nothing would be farther from the author's
intention, but the work recommended is
graded so as to cover a sound grasp of the
" mechanics of learning" and, at the same
time, to stimulate the interest of children
who are likely to fail with a more formal
approach. Incidentally, and this is one of the
most commendable features of the book,
many of the suggestions will provide a
welcome change for average children in
ordinary infant and junior classes.
This is not merely a book to be " added to
the teacher's bookshelf ", its place is somewhere nearer at hand where it may be
referred to frequently.
M.D.
