Mental Welfare /45
====================

:Author: A. GRAHAM IKIN, M.A., M.Sc.

Psychologist, The Archbishop of York's Committee of Doctors and Clergy
SOME time ago, a medical psychologist said he wished the Church would
provide a sound consulting service for spiritual problems. Shortly afterwards, I came across an appeal from Dr C. G. Jung, a medical psychologist of
world renown. He first said that the real problem of hundreds of patients
coming to him from all parts of the civilised world was that of finding a
religious outlook on life, and that none of them was really healed who did
not regain his religious outlook. He then added : It is high time for clergy
and psychotherapists to join forces to meet this great spiritual task."
This double appeal to the Church led me to write a little book, " Religion
and Psychotherapy," as a definite plea for co-operation between doctors and
clergy in order to meet the needs of the vast number of those in mental
distress. " Only nerves " may be a common cry, but it frequently expresses a
state of mind near to hell for the sufferer concerned, who has got so entangled
in himself or herself that life no longer seems worth living. Early help in
such cases can prevent much mental distress and frequently avert serious
breakdowns.

Soon after this, I received invitations to lecture to clergy and others on
the subject. As a result of the interest aroused, the Archbishop of York
decided that if a Committee of doctors and clergy, of which he was prepared
to be Chairman, could be formed to support my work, it would be helpful if
I could be given a full time appointment under it. Such a measure of joint
authorisation by members of both the medical and clerical professions, it was
felt, would enable me to expand more effectively the work I had begun to
do voluntarily. It was also hoped to raise a stipend to cover living expenses
and the necessarily considerable expense involved in travelling and correspondence, through an appeal issued by the Committee. This it was hoped
might be secured for five years in order that the work might be planned with
a view to continuity.

Such a Committee was formed and I began work officially under it from
October 1st, 1936. But though engagements came in as fast as I could respond
to them, the necessary money is proving very difficult to raise and funds are
still urgently needed to make the position financially secure. The work
already done under the Committee has confirmed us in the necessity and
importance of this attempt to promote co-operation between two professions
so closely concerned with human needs, especially in connection with those
engaged as pastors in giving spiritual direction and those engaged in medical
psychology in healing broken personalities, in which work Christian principles
are directly relevant.

My work is very varied and interesting, bringing me into personal contact
with workers in many fields. But I must make it quite clear that I do not
undertake to treat cases myself. My aim is on the one hand to stimulate
interest in the principles of psychological medicine amongst clergy, both in
order to help them to deal with moral disorders, either in the confessional
or in vestry talks, or private visiting, and to enable them to avoid some of
the failures in spiritual healing which result from ignorance of such principles
?n the part of the healer. On the other hand, it is hoped to stimulate the
medical profession to realise the importance of psychical and spiritual factors
in the prevention and cure of disease.

The fact that medical psychologists and clergy alike have to deal with
the specific " sins, negligences and ignorances " of their patients and penitents
respectively, brings their work into close relation.

We are finding that so called " nervous breakdowns " are not primarily
breakdowns of the nervous system, but of the mind controlling it. " Personality disorders " would be a far more useful term, and would lead to the
recognition that character deficiencies such as bad temper, self-righteousness
and many forms of sexual maladjustment, result from similar psychological
processes to those concerned in the production of hysterical or other nervous
symptoms. In both cases, " treatment" rather than " punishment" is
necessary, and understanding is essential if this is to be effective.

My work therefore consists in lecturing to clerical societies or meetings
of doctors and clergy to promote mutual understanding,* and in starting
groups for study or research. It also includes getting into personal touch with
doctors and clergy in various large towns to enlist their co-operation. In time
we hope there will be a panel of doctors and clergy who recognise the overlapping of their spheres and are prepared to co-operate practically when
expedient. I so often get letters asking me to put someone in need, in touch
with someone who could help in a particular neighbourhood, and at present
often have to say there is no one near who is competent to deal with the case.
Some parts of the North are very poorly served in this way; there is a great
dearth of medical psychologists over large areas, and every competent man or
woman is getting more work than any one person should have to handle.

Nor is there a sufficient number of clergy adequately trained to help the
countless thousands who might be saved from breakdown by timely help.
The function of clergy so trained would not be to supersede the doctor
in cases of actual breakdown: serious " psycho-neuroses," as they are technically called, are best treated by the medical psychologist who has himself
a spiritual background. But there are thousands of cases where a little
help along psychological lines could be given by properly trained clergy which
would prevent the medical psychologist being needed later. Such prevention
is essentially part of the work of the Church. But this particular branch of
it can only be effectively carried out by clergy who have a thorough knowledge of psycho-pathology (i.e., who have studied abnormal psychology and
gained an insight?preferably through some analysis of themselves?into our
various ways of trying to escape from unpleasant realities).

My appointment will justify itself if it arouses both doctors and clergy
to the need for specialising to deal with the increasing number of cases in
which psychological rather than physiological disorder is primary, and can
stimulate more members of both professions to train to meet the need.
We can no longer rest content with the view that doctors are concerned
with our bodies, and clergy with our souls. The unity of personality is fundamental : through it, we adapt on the one hand to the material and animal
world: and on the other, we adapt to the spiritual world in a community of
intelligent co-operation with our fellows, which leads to its fulfilment in
fellowship with the Divine Ground of our being which we call God.

* One scries of lectures has recently been published by Allen & Umi'in Ltd. under the title
"The Background of Spiritual Healing; Religious and Psychologicalof which a review
will appear i>i the July number of Mental Welfare.

The sphere of " disorders of personality " (whether expressed in functional
disturbances which bring the patient to the consulting room of a medical
psychologist, or in sins which lead him to the confessional, or in crimes which
land him in the dock) offers a real meeting point between religion and science.
It is a unique opportunity within the history of man, since the sphere within
which spiritual healers, in the religious sense, spiritual directors and medical
psychologists all work, is the field of human personality. There could be no
direct contact when science was concerned only with the material side of
existence and religion with the spiritual. But the Incarnation seems to indicate
that neither can be adequately considered apart from the other. The forces
of spirit have converged upon a common task, and we must tackle it together
if we are to bring the Kingdom of Heaven, the kingdom of the Real, to earth
within the lives of those whose unconscious evasions of reality have landed
them in the morass of mental or nervous disease. The importance of sound
religious beliefs cannot be overstressed. The ego which has not grown up
enough to realise its dependence upon and its kinship with God, cannot stand
up to the challenge of life, and tends to blame God or the Devil, or both, for
the consequences of its own childishness. The host of psychoneurotic ailments
to-day is a sign of our lack of faith, and a challenge to all who realise the
importance of the spiritual aspect of life to co-operate to eliminate this
mountain of agonising disability.

Here both religion and psychotherapy have a part to play and it would
be a disaster of the first magnitude if the synthesis between them which is
just becoming possible, were not effected. It falls to the lot of our generation
to envisage the possibility of such a synthesis and to bring it into effective
being, uniting the religious and scientific response of the spirit of Man to the
Reality in which he lives and moves and has his being.
