The Fight for Our National Intelligence
=========================================

:Author: R. B. Cattell. London.
P. S. King & Son, 1937. 8/6.

In recent years, many people interested in social problems have been
alarmed by dogmatic statements that
the number of mental defectives in this
country is increasing and will soon
become an intolerable burden on the
rest of society. It is asserted that the
nation breeds too much from those of
inferior intelligence and capacity, and
that, as like breeds like, a decline of
national intelligence is inevitable.

Dr R. B. Cattell, working under
the auspices of the Eugenics Society,
recently undertook extensive field research to investigate this question. His
findings are presented in this book. It
is not a technical book for specialists
only. Rather, it is an exposition for
all those interested in mental hygiene
of Dr Cattell's thesis that the national
intelligence is indeed declining, and that
in future generations western civilisation is in danger of being swamped
beneath vast numbers of citizens of
inferior quality.

Dr Cattell carried out his research
in two contrasting parts of England.
He chose an urban district?Leicester
city?and a rural district?part of
South Devon. In the earlier chapters
he describes in detail his method of
investigation, and his results. In each
area, he applied his own non-verbal
intelligence tests to all the 10 year old
children in the special, elementary and
other schools. 3,700 children were
examined. The mean intelligence was
normal in the urban district, but was
definitely subnormal in the rural district. Dr Cattell relates this rural
poverty of intelligence to a greater
readiness of the more intelligent families to migrate to the towns.

Dr Cattell also noted the number
of brothers and sisters of each child
he tested. He found that, in general,
the brighter the child the fewer
brothers and sisters it had. This trend
was remarkably constant throughout
the whole range of intelligence. In
the urban area, children with an intelligence quotient of 70 to 80 had the
largest number of brothers and sisters.
In the rural area, those children with
intelligence quotients from 40 to 60
had the largest number of brothers and
sisters.

Dr Cattell then applied his intelligence tests to the parents of 100
families. He found that the order of
intelligence of the children corresponded to that of the parents. Clever
parents had clever children, and dull
parents dull children. Other evidence
for the inheritance of intelligence is
summarised, and it is concluded that
environmental factors, such as poverty
and malnutrition, have but little effect
on intelligence.

From these figures indicating the
relation between birth-rate and intelligence, an estimate has been made of
the rate at which the national intelligence is declining. A decrease of three
points of I.Q. per generation is
indicated. This is an alarming figure.
Taking a generation to cover thirty
years and assuming that present conditions continue, it means that in the next
generation there would be a 30 per
cent, increase in mental defectives, and
that in 300 years half the population
would be defective. It is admitted
that this estimate is only an approximate one, and that other factors have
to be considered, particularly that the
incidence of childlessness may not be
the same at all levels of intelligence.
It seems that sufficient allowance has
not been made for the influence of this
last factor, as it is known that persons
of very low intelligence are comparatively infertile. However, the author
assumes that his estimate of the decline
of intelligence is near the mark, and
more than half the book is taken up
with a full discussion of the probable
social effects of this drift into defect,
and of the means which could be used
to avert the national decay.

The appalling effects on the structure of society of a large number of
defectives are graphically described.
We are reminded that "the noblest
thoughts of Greece went begging for
a home when the germ plasm carried
by Homer and Plato died," and we
are invited to contemplate " all the
frustrated love, the courage, the hard
thinking, the self-sacrifice, the sweat
and agony that have been paid for
smaller advances in mental capacity
than those which we, in the name of
sentimentality and in the spirit of slothful complacency, are allowing to perish
in this generation."

Dr Cattell would deal first with the
"subcultural" social problem group,
which comprises 10 per cent, of the
population. Our concept of the feebleminded should be enlarged to include
the subcultural social defective. This
group should be recognised, cared for
and employed in special state factories.
Other remedies suggested are that
the income tax allowance for children
should be greatly increased, and that a
maintenance allowance should be given
to scholarship children, so that an able
child would be an economic asset to its
parents.

The universal availability of birth
control is essential.

The later chapters discuss a great
many topics from a eugenic aspect :
poverty, unemployment, the crudity of
social morality, the penny press culture,
the idea of immortality and modern
war are rapidly reviewed. Provocative
statements are hurled at the reader,
who is stimulated to do some clear
thinking. As the title suggests, the book
is a call to battle, a call to those in
authority to do something to avert the
calamity which this writer believes
threatens England. Whether or not we
agree with Dr Cattell's conclusions,
his book vividly illustrates the enormous importance of mental health.
T.A.M.
