Sex and Personality
====================

:Author: L. M. Terman and
Catherine C. Miles, assisted by others.
McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. Price
25/-.

This book, admirably printed as usual by
McGraw-Hill, is a major contribution to
factual psychology and will be regarded in
the future as a classic of its kind. It reports
the results of some eleven years of research
work, undertaken with the assistance of
grants from the American National
Research Council. Its object is aptly stated
as that of doing for the study of masculinity-feminity what Binet did for intelligence testing.

The book describes a Masculinity-Feminity
test, disguised under the title "AttitudeInterest Analysis Test", and a prodigious
number of results obtained by its use. The
test itself is given in two parallel forms,
each with seven exercises which the subject
tackles much as he would perform a group
intelligence test, except that no time limits
are set. A fore-sheet asks the subject to
estimate his amount of interest in such
pursuits as travel, sport, religion, literature,
etc. In Exercise No. I, the subject is
required to select one of four words that
seems to go best with a given word, e.g.,
Train?engine; gown; travel; whistle.
In this example it is hoped, presumably,
that a masculine-minded person would select
the word engine, whereas the feminine
person might select gown. Similarly, each
of the other exercises samples the subject's
knowledge, opinions, interests, emotional and
ethical attitudes, etc., and thereby his
tendency to a masculine or feminine personality. Scores on the test range from
approximately 200 (the most male score) to
?200 (the most female).

Jt can be said at the outset that Terman
and his co-workers have placed their test at
once in the front rank of all personality
schedules. They have validated it, studied
the correlational structure of its parts, and
have sought for correlation between it and
other well-known tests, amongst which may
be mentioned mechanical ability tests,
athletic ability, introversion-extraversion,
scholarship, and tests of marital compatibility (divorced women and unhappily
married men, it is shown, tend to rate more
masculine than individuals who are blissfully
married).

The trend of M-F score at different ages
is investigated. At 10 years of age, males
have a score of +40 or so on the average;
this mounts to +70 for 18-year-olds, and
then with increasing age the score declines,
until at 60 years, the average mala has a
score round about 0.00. Females, on the
other hand, apart from a slight flutter
masculine-wards during adolescence, maintain a steady average score of approximately
?90 at all ages. Similarly, with commendable labour and completeness, the relation of
M-F scores to occupation, and the effects of
interests and domestic milieu on the test,
are investigated.

So far only some 280 of the book's 600
pages have been covered, all concerned with
what might be called the statistical structure
of the M-F test. No personality test has
hitherto been given so much attention in this
respect.

The second half of the book describes
work on homosexuals, delinquents, and
studies of sex differences in interests, sentiments, dispositions and temperamental
characteristics revealed by the M-F test.
The briefest possible summary of this work
occupies two pages of closely printed matter.
The M-F score for 77 " passive" homosexuals (males), 17-44 years of age, was ?28
approximately, by far the most femininetesting group of males the investigators ever
encountered. A group of 46 " active " male
homosexuals gave a bi-modal distribution of
scores, on the average only slightly more
masculine than that for the passives. Much
attention is devoted by the authors to a
suggested scale for the measurement of
sexual inversion in males.

On general psychological matters many of
the findings are what we might expect. The
male professes to be the more adventurous,
aggressive, mechanically-minded, and emotionally "hard"; the female professes to
?e gentle, sympathetic, artistic and humanitarian. But there are many unsuspected
findings, or results which supply evidence
that has been lacking hitherto. The sexes,
for instance, are shown to diverge more for
fear than for anger responses. Pages 470
onwards consist of Appendices, giving tables
or norms, percentiles, etc., and a complete
copy of each form of the test.

Only a few pages are devoted to interpretations and conclusions. The point is well
made that the M-F contrast is more
obviously and certainly rooted in structural
dichotomy than the popular cycloid-schizoid,
introversion-extraversion, or similar bi-polar
contrasts. The authors ask whether nature
or nurture contributes most to the formation of M-F attitudes and temperaments, but
they leave it as a problem for future
workers to determine what part is played by
parental influences upon the sex temperaments of their children.

What, then, are we to say in a critical
way about this study? It is not in place,
here, to attend to minor details but this, however, can be said at once. The study is
typically American. The prodigious search
for facts, and insistence upon them,
dominates the whole work, something that
we can admire and envy, for it represents an
achievement that makes other testing and
rating studies of personality seem mere
child's play?mere pin-pricks at their subject
matter. On this side of the Atlantic, however, we miss certain theoretical formulations. Insistence on facts is a first essential,
but one feels that Terman, having done so
much, could justifiably develop his interpretations much more completely and
adequately. There is surely little excuse in
a work of this major kind, for complete
disregard of psycho-analytical work on
homosexuality. Freud is not even mentioned,
nor is Havelock Ellis, nor any other analyst
as far as I can now remember. This is an
unreasonable austerity, and as a consequence
the concluding interpretations seem almost
amateurish compared with the factual construction, which is eminent and important.
The book, of course, is essentially one
for research workers, and for clinical use
in the fields of delinquency study, medical
psychology and the like.

Wm. Stephenson,
Institute of Experimental
Psychology, Oxford
