A Class in a South London School
===================================

Modern Educational Experiments IV.
CLASSES FOR RETARDED CHILDREN IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS

From Mr. H. R. Henry, an assistant master in an L.C.C. Jun. Mixed School, we
have received an interesting account of the methods used in the Backward Class
of which he is in charge, from which the folloiving extracts are takeiv:?
The children for the class are selected from classes 2, 3 and 5, their ages
ranging from approximately 9 to 11. All are suffering from retardation, in some
form or other. On the roll of the class there are 35 children, though it is
realised that 25 would be a more satisfactory number.

Practical methods of teaching are used wherever possible, and handwork is
used both as a subject and a method. To help the children in Arithmetic, the
class room?which is abnormally large?contains a shop, stocked with dummies
and equipped with counter, till, show-cards, etc. For teaching " long measure "
distances are marked on walls and floor, desks, tables, etc., whilst liquid measure
is taught by means of an improvised dairy.

History and Geography are taken on project lines (e.g. London and the
River Thames). Science deals with the objects with which the child is familiar,
such as the Thermos Flask, electric torch, water tap, telephone, etc. The amount
of time given to written composition is reduced, but the children practise the
writing of short notes to tradesmen, letters of thanks, etc. They are encouraged
to relate experiences, describe how they made an article and why, etc., even to
the whole school assembled in the Hall. One period a week they spend in the
School Library selecting their own books.

A strong point is made of Physical Training which definitely gives confidence
to the nervous and backward child. During Health Talks the children are taught
what to do in case of common emergencies and are encouraged to take a pride
in their personal appearance.

The time-table is left quite fluid and contains two or three long optional
periods. The children are required to enter up very briefly in a note book how
they have occupied each of these periods. These are found to be of particular
value.

The children work in Groups, owing to their varying standards of attainment,
and in co-operative effort, gain some idea of working for the common good.
Freedom of movement is allowed and as much variety as possible is introduced
into all subjects and methods. Responsibility is also inculcated by giving the
children definite jobs, such as Milk Monitor, Blackboard and Cupboard Monitor,
etc.

It is as yet too early to assess results, but so far the general response
aroused in the children, has been encouraging. The Class is regarded as an
integral part of the School, and the children share the Art and Singing lessons
given by Specialist Teachers, and take part with the others in the Friday afternoon
" Hobbies." They have no idea that they are regarded as "backward" but are
under the impression that they are merely being taught by new methods to
see what progress they make. The Head Teacher takes a very real interest in
the Class and give it his whole hearted co-operation.

A Class in a Bradford School
Miss M. Murgatroyd, a Bradford teacher, contributes another interesting account
of a "Practical Class" formed two years ago in one of the Bradford
Elementary Schools.

At the outset, roughly 7 to 8 per cent, of the children in the school were
selected for the new Class, the total number on the toll being 20 plus and
the age range being from 6 to 11. The children were originally selected as
being " dull and backward " but it was quickly found that the group also included
many " problem " children.

There is no fixed syllabus or time-table, each child setting its own pace
and working along individual lines, taking also its share in certain group activities
to which it contributes. Children showing special aptitude in any subject rejoin
the ordinary classes for these periods.

Many " methods " are used, though the approach is chiefly on perceptual
levels. All sorts of new ways of presentation of a subject are tried, and the
" Project Method " has been found to be particularly stimulating, especially in
the three R's. Art has proved a good medium for children who cannot express
themselves in written or spoken English and through it, a child's real interests
are often revealed.

The children are free to move about and to converse with each other, to
work in groups or to study alone. They have the full use of apparatus but are
responsible for its good condition and for repairs. Each child has some weekly
or daily task for which it is made responsible.

Since the formation of the class, some children have been transferred to
the Modern School, some to the Open-Air School and others back to normal
classes. Records are carefully kept showing not only educational progress but
all-round development of personality, the gradual disappearance of delinquent
tendencies, changes in moral and social behaviour, etc.
