The Abilities of Man: Their Nature and Measurement
=====================================================

 :Author: C. Spearman, Ph.D.
F.R.S., Grote Professor of Philosophy of
Mind at the University of London. Mac-
millan & Co., London : 1927. lGs. net.

Professor Spearman's new book consists of
an analysis of the intellectual abilities of man,
with special reference to the mental differences
between individuals. The volume falls into
two parts. The first describes the chief rival
theories on the subject propounded from the
days of Plato onwards. The second consists
of a summary of all the available evidence bear-
ing- upon these various views.

The data brought together in the second half
consists for the most part in the results of ex-
perimental tests carried out, in London schools
or at the psychological laboratory of University
College, London, by Professor Spearman and
his colleagues during the past twenty years.

Of all this research work the most important
result has been the demonstration that a single
central factor underlies all our intellectual pro-
cesses. This central factor Professor Spear-
man has named g : it may be roughly identified
with what is popularly known as general
intelligence. The other determinants Professor
Spearman calls specific factors; and, according
to his view, the most striking characteristic of
these specific factors is their narrowness and
specificity. For the existence of broad facul-
ties, like observation, memory, pr reasoning,
he finds no evidence whatever. The mind or
brain he likens to a series of separate engines
driven by a single source of energy : the sum-
total of a man's innate mental energy is identi-
fied with the man's general intelligence; the
localised areas of the brain, actuated by this
general fund of energy, are identified with the
specific intellectual factors, partly innate, but
mainly developed through education and ex-
perience.

It is obvious that the problems raised have a
close and intimate bearing upon the psychology
of mental deficiency. Professor Spearman
begins by distinguishing cognitive processes
from processes that are called effective or
conative; or, in less technical language, the
intellectual from the temperamental and moral
aspect of the mind. The detailed discussion
of conation he leaves for another volume.
But, from his brief references in the present
work, it is clear that he considers the mental
activities of man to be determined largely by
two outstanding- general factors : besides the
better-known factor of g (or " general in-
telligence ") underlying intellectual abilities,
he recognises a second factor, called w, which
has tentatively been termed self-control
(though Professor Spearman thinks the name
misleading), and which underlies moral and
emotional activities and so affects the chief
qualities of temperament or character. This
distinction is itself of great practical import-
ance. It supplies a theoretical sanction for
the familiar classification of the mentally de-
fective into two main types?what have been
called the intellectually defective on the one
hand and the temperamentally defective on
the other hand, those who fail in school work
and in social life mainly from lack of intelli-
gence, and those who fail mainly from an
instability of character, arising from instincts
so violent and uncontrolled that they seem like
propensities to vice and crime.

In the former and commoner sense, mental
deficiency might almost be defined as an innate
defect in g, that is, in the central factor of
general intelligence. It is, however, some-
times argued that limited defects should also
be recognised as forms of mental deficiency :
and that the children who, though normal in
general intelligence, are suffering from what is
called word-blindness, or from special dis-
ability in arithmetic, should also be transferred
to special schools. Professor Spearman, it is
true, admits the existence of certain limited
and supplementary capacities; but he main-
tains that these are all extremely specific, and
are often more likely to be acquired than
inborn. This agrees with the characteristics
of the defective child as commonly met with in
our special schools. He is not merely back-
ward in certain specialised directions : he is
backward all round. The cases of special dis-
ability are exceedingly rare; and, as investiga-
tion shows, it is often doubtful whether the
underlying defect is really innate.

Professor Spearman's theories, therefore,
are of the utmost significance for the practical
worker. His book forms an admirable sum-
mary of the doctrines held, and of the data
collected up to the present time; it should be
studied by everyone interested in the psycho-
logy of the mentally deficient. We shall
avvait? with the greatest eagerness, his further
volume on the emotional and moral qualities
?f man.

Cyril Burt.
Psychology. Its Methods and Principles.
By F. A. Clay Perrin and David Ballin
Klein. Methuen & Co. 8/6.
Professors Perrin and Klein have taken a
study of behaviour as a basis for the study of
Psychology.

I he authors have devoted the first part of
their book to the structural mechanism of
behaviour, giving an excellent description, with
diagrams of the various sense organs, the en-
docrine glands, etc., and their connections
VVlth the nervous system.

1 he psychological foundation of behaviour is
found in reflex action. These actions are
subsequently modified by experience, and in
the higher animals integrated into simultaneous
0r successive patterns. Instincts are described
as habit complexes, their fundamental import-
ance is denied, and the term regarded as
misleading and useless.

^he next section is devoted to the motivation
?f behaviour. This is relegated to two groups
factors, namely, physiological drives and
Motional changes, with which they are
^timately associated. The experiments of
Gannon, Carlson and Wada are quoted in
Support of this view.

f he experimental studies on the influence of
yarning on behaviour have led lo the conclu-
sion that kinesthetic impulses afford the prin-
cipal help to man. Although the subject may
said to be attentive, it is misleading to
hink that consciousness effects learning.
Ihe difficulty of distinguishing a psycho-
?8"ical from a mental process is discussed; the
authors reject the proposition that mental acts
can be defined in terms of consciousness. By
tracing the genesis of mental activity, they
strive to prove that the starting point of a
developing mind is effected by the substitution
language, as a stimulus for a reflex act.
speech is continually associated with a parti-
cular stimulus, it gradually takes the place of
the latter, the child responds to speech and is
said to understand spoken words. Tracing the
urther development of thought, the importance
language increases as a stimulus to thought,
and leads to the conclusion that mental reaction
ls only language reaction or that thought is
0nty a form of behaviour.

The authors have included the account of
many experiments, and have added a list of
references, making- the book both valuable
and suggestive. From the standpoint of a
behaviourist, it would serve as an excellent
introduction. It does not, however, give any
adequate knowledge of other interpretations
of human behaviour. A beginner seeking a
general introduction should use this book in
conjunction with the exposition of other points
of view.

G. W. H.
Industries and Occupations for the Men-
tally Defective. By P. J. Deely,
M.I.H., A.R.S.I. 1927. Obtainable
from the Manor, Epsom. 7/6.

This book has been written by the House
Steward of The Manor, Epsom, and he has
been guided by his experience at that Institu-
tion. It describes the various industries and
occupations which are considered suitable for
mental defectives, treating nearly fifty, and
includes sufficient details to give a clear idea
of the methods adopted, materials used, and
tools handled.

The usefulness of some of the industries
described as a means of assisting defectives to
contribute to their own support is not, by
reason of the little demand for the manu-
factured articles and outside competition, free
from doubt; but the majority of them, if super-
vised constantly by qualified instructors so that
excellence of workmanship is always main-
tained, will provide valuable training of a pro-
fitable nature. The author has written of
Brushmaking, both " drawn " and " set "
work, at considerable length, and in a manner
that should enable anyone to grasp its rudi-
ments without difficulty. The same can be
said of some of the other occupations. Re-
ference is made to the employment of the
defective in the Colony, " in the industry for
which his capabilities can best be utilised for
his own well-being and advantage to the
Institution." If it is suggested in one occupa-
tion only, I think there are many more advan-
tages if, at least for a year or two, alternative
occupations are provided for.

As stated in the preface, occupations are
essential for the happiness and development of
mental defectives?occupation, in fact, is the
keynote of success in the treatment of these
persons. The author alludes to the enquiries
86 Mental welfare.

frequently received concerning" the various
industries, of which I have personal know-
ledge, and this descriptive work, though
" likely to be principally helpful to those about
to associate themselves with this branch of
work," should also prove suggestive to others;
more particularly if a study of it is combined
with visits to Institutions where the industries
and occupations are carried on.

I should like to have seen a chapter included
in the book on the characteristics of the suc-
cessful supervisor or instructor, these being of
equal importance.

Charles -W. Mayer.
London County Council Annual Report,
1926. Vol. III. Public Health. P. S.
King & Son. 2/6.

This volume of the L.C.C. Report contains
Dr Menzies' Report in his capacity of Medi-
cal Officer of Health and of School Medical
Ofiicer. Apart from the usual valuable infor-
mation of the L.C.C. area, it contains some
details of exceptional interest regarding Men-
tal Deficiency.

Dr Fairfield has analysed the notes of the
cases of those women dealt with under the
Mental Deficiency Act who have at some time
given birth to one or more illegitimate chil-
dren. They are 32 in number :?

" 23 women have given birth to one child.
4 ,, ,, ,, two children.
4 ,, ,, ,, three children.
1 woman has ,, ,, nine children.

The total number of children born was 47.
Although most of the births are very recent,
16 of the 47 children are already dead. Of
the 32 womenj two are married, but both of
the latter group have had illegitimate chil-
dren. One of them is the mother of nine
children. She evaded recognition during
school days, married, had eight children, six
of whom died, two being saved by the care of
relatives. After her husband's death she gave
birth to an illegitimate child, who died of
venereal disease. Her two surviving children
are mentally defective, as was the only one of
the seven deceased children who survived in-
fancy. The history of the 32 mothers shows
that seven came from provincial schools (one
being a Special School), and 24 from London
schools. Of the latter, 13 were educated in
ordinary elementary schools and only 11 had
been tp Special Schools for defective children-
Five of the 11 left school before the Mental
Deficiency Act came into being-, one being- at
school when the disaster happened. In one
case, a petition to put the defective in an insti-
tution had been dismissed by the magistrate;
in two cases, the names had been notified by
the Education Committee, the girls leaving
school at 16. In two cases, the girls were
under voluntary supervision." (p. 53.)
Though these statements make depressing
reading, they should not be taken as evidence
against the value of supervision, for it must
not be forgotten that the figures refer to 32
cases, whereas the total of those dealt with
under the M.D. Act for 1926 by the L.C.C.
was 4,390.

The gradual standardisation of the exami-
nation for mental defect in the schools is
interestingly described (p. 136) :?
" When the schools were first commenced
in 1892 by the late School Board for London
there were no statutory arrangements
governing the conduct of such classes, ad-
mission to which was arranged by the in-
spectorate, any medical supervision being of
a voluntary character. In 1898 the Medical
Officer of that day was directed to supervise
the classes and in the following year two
part-time assistants were delegated the task
of visiting the schools and examining en-
trants. After the passage of the Elemen-
tary Education (Defective and Epileptic
Children) Act, 1899, the medical work was
placed on a statutory basis from which time
the records have been preserved.

" There is no question but that, at that
time, the Special Schools were ' schools of
recovery,' and that the term ' mental de-
fect ' had not its present connotation sug-
gestive of a need for permanent care, super-
vision and control.

" . . . From the end of the war on-
wards the standard of suitability for admis-
sion to special schools has been, broadly,
that a child should have a mental ratio of
between f and | the normal with some
serious educational retardation, always sup-
posing that retardation could not be ex-
plained on other than mental grounds."
(p. 137.)

Figures are given to show that the standard
has remained practically constant in the last
nine years.

The figures for mentally-defective children
school age dealt with by the L.C.C. are as
Allows (p. 157) :?

Feeble-minded (cases not notifiable to the
Local Control Authority).

Boys. Girls. Total.
-Attending- certified schools
f?r mentally - defective
children   3,506 2,685 6,191
Attending public elemen-
tary schools ... ... 6 5 11
At other institutions ... 333 211 544
At no school or institution 47 49 96
Notified to the Local Control Authority
during- the year.
feeble-minded   53 90 143
lrnbecile  76 51 127
Idiots ... 10 7 17
