Obituary Notice
=================

The Late Dr Francis Warner.

The recent death of Dr Warner in his eightieth year, is an event which must
command the sympathy and regret of the readers of Mental Welfare.

For many years past he had been retired from active work, but in the l'atter
part of last century his name was one of the best known among those working in
the field to which this journal is devoted. He was, indeed, a leader in the way
in which he approached the subject of mental deficiency, emphasising, as he
d;d, the indications of defective brain action that could be obtained by the close
and skilled observation of movements and postures. He pointed out that from a
careful study and appreciation of certain physical signs, a fair inference as to the
nervous stability, brain action, and mental capacity of the child could be deduced.

On this basis he conducted an extensive enquiry into the mental and physical
conditions observed in 100,000 school children, and deduced many valuable
conclusions therefrom. It was an enquiry demanding great industry and much
time, and was followed by others on similar lines. His teaching was expounded in
several books, and particularly in " The Study of Children and their School
Training " (Macmillan, 1897). The evidence based upon these statistical
researches which was given by him before various Government Committees of
enquiry produced its impress on legislation for the benefit of the Blind and Dumb,
the Defective and Epileptic, and on measures dealing with Education and Physical
Training. To further his teaching he was largely concerned in the formation
of the Childhood Society, which was later amalgamated with another Society, and
still carries on its work as the Child Study Society. His work and teaching were
in the days before the Medical Inspection of School Children had been established,
and there can be little doubt that its introduction owed not a little to his researches
and to his persistent advocacy of such a scheme.

He was physician to the London Hospital, and also to the East London
Hospital for Children, and interested in the study and teaching of botany, from
which he drew much inspiration in his work. Altogether he was a man who did
a vast amount of good and original work for the good of suffering children and for
the enlightenment of his fellows, and he leaves a memory deserving of honour.
