A Fettered Mind
================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1917, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. X, No. 9
February 15, 1017
:Author:  Lightner Witmer, Ph.D.,
University of Pennsylvania.

I recall my first impression of Marie,?a small slight figure
with prominent shoulder blades, the muscles of her face contracting
and twitching constantly, the eyes rolling back, the mouth drooling,
the feet dragging as she walked. The hands were never quiet, the
whole frame in fact appearing to be strung on wires,?wires which
were hopelessly tangled and crossed. Her speech was almost unintelligible, thick and indistinct, and she seemed to understand nothing
of what was going 011 around her,?constantly saying, "What?

What was it?" in a puzzled way to her aunt and mother. In consultation with a neurologist of New York City I first examined this
little girl when she was just seven years old. She was the fourth
and last child of parents who had reached the age when they ceased
to expect an addition to the family. Her mother was forty-two, and
was ill before Marie's birth with what was diagnosed as kidney
trouble. She was too ill to nurse the child, who was nourished on
prepared foods under the direction of the family physician.
Three older children were all of normal mental and physical
development, but Marie, from the time of her birth, had been
afflicted with what several specialists diagnosed as an incurable
disease. At the age of one year she could not crawl or even
move from the reclining position. When placed upon her belly
on the floor she could move her arms and legs about, but she
was incapable of coordinate progression. At the age of twenty-six
months she began to walk without having previously crawled. Somewhat later she began to talk. Her intentional movements had
always been incoordinate. The mother called her nervous and
spoke of the child having jerking and tremulous movements. The
severity of her symptoms may be judged from the fact that when
about three years of age a specialist on children's diseases diagnosed
her condition as dystrophy. This naturally involved an extremely
unfavorable prognosis.

At about the same time a neurologist diagnosed the case tentatively as infantile cerebral palsy. The condition of her motor system is shown by the fact that she could not walk upstairs without
holding on to the banisters, that she stumbled easily, that she could
not help herself to rise if she lay on her back. If rolled over on her
belly and lifted gently by putting a hand under the abdomen she
got up. There was nothing in this that suggested dystrophy. The
leg muscles were well developed, but not hypertrophied; the knee
jerks normal; the pupils responded normally. Her eyes were
Mongolian, the internal canthus being adherent. Rickets was
excluded in the diagnosis.

The child had always suffered from constipation. She was tall
for her age, and her parents thought her mentally up to the other
children who have all been normal.

Marie was seen again by the neurologist six months before my
first examination. The most important symptoms then were the
choreiform movements, and the over-activity of purposive movements. In the four years she had been given exercises under the
neurologist's direction, looking to the removal of the incoordination.
She could walk up and down stairs. She even skipped a little.
There was no pronounced spasticity in her gait, but rather an overactivity of the muscles. When the limbs were tested separately,
there was no spasticity apparent. The symptoms were much worse
when the child was tired or excited. A few months later she was
again brought to the neurologist, after she had been taken to one of
the most distinguished physicians in this country, who pronounced
her case a hopeless one and advised that very little could be done
for her.

At the time of my examination Marie possessed a fairly
well formed body; her head was normal in formation, the face
slightly asymmetrical, the right side being plus. The physiognomy
suggested adenoids, and the palate was high, the teeth irregular.
The mother admitted that the child was susceptible to colds, but
denied that she had ever been a mouth breather, even at night.
There had been no ear symptoms.

She was able to stand erect, and to take the normal sitting
posture. There was manifest awkwardness in her gait. The hip
joints, and to a somewhat less extent, the knee joints appeared to
be stiff. The toes turned in badly. There was no true spasticity,
either in intentional walking or in the manipulation of the limbs.
In walking, the arms made an associated flail-like movement, being
bent at the elbow and the hands moving about on the fore-arms,
approximating the horizontal position. She could pick up a coin
with the right or left hand, but she had trouble in picking up three
coins at a time with one hand. Her coordination was very imperfect,
and was associated with excessive flexor movements. When asked
to extend the arms in front of her with the fingers fully extended, the
arms were held out fairly straight, but the back of the hand was
overextended and the fingers flexed and spread apart. When the
hands were supported complete extension was possible. The incoordination appeared only 011 intentional innervation of the arm
muscles.

Associated with all her movements, even present when the child
was seated, were contractures of the facial muscles, producing
a continual grimacing. She was able, however, to sit quietly,
and at these times the movements almost disappeared. The mother
claimed that when sitting at table the most that she observed was a
nodding motion of the head.

Marie's articulation was very imperfect, slurred and rapid.
Her voice was weak and rather toneless. All vowels and consonants
were more or less affected, but even in my first examination she was
able to repeat by imitation most of the articulate elements of the
English language. She was unable to narrate the simplest occurrence in coherent form; she was invariably substituted for he, many
words were left out and connecting links in the narrative were apt
to be missing. At home she was treated in many ways like a baby;
everything was done for her and nothing but obedience was exacted
in return. She was entirely untaught, but she knew money, could
count to twelve, and subtract one and two from numbers up to ten.
She did not know her letters, or how to read.

To the trainer who was sent into Marie's home, the task seemed
indeed Herculean. How could this strange, incoherent, grimacing,
stumbling child be helped, altered, made? For if the training was to
be successful she had to be remade; it must be a new birth, only to
be attained after months of painful effort on the child's part, of
endless tact and patience on that of the trainer. The treatment suggested was examination of the eyes, and of the naso-pharynx for adenoids. The following corrective measures were prescribed: (1) diet,
baths, and general hygienic rules of life and exercise; (2) special training (a) to produce a quiescence of the over-active muscles, (b) to produce intentional movements without associated movements, (c) to
confine the essential motor activity to the performance of simple
tasks, walking, and running, and stop the involuntary movements of
the face and tongue; (3) articulation exercises; and (4) the beginning
of mental training, teaching the letters and simple problems in addition, subtraction, etc., in conjunction with the articulatory exercises.
Care was taken to guard against over-exertion. It seemed to me
that at the beginning Marie could stand little more than a few
minutes of work with any intense application of attention. Two
kinds of exercise were therefore recommended: (1) those in which
the child was required to give a maximum of attention and was held
rigidly to an assigned task. These were to be performed at frequent intervals during the day. The intermission and frequency of
such exercises were to depend upon the observation of signs of
fatigue in the child. (2) Free exercise in the form of games and
play in which the child's attention was relaxed or was gained
through interest and held without effort.

Three years from the date of the trainer's entrance on the work,
she and the child lunched with me at my home. That day the contractions of the face were not present (though at some other times
they persisted). This enabled one to appreciate the beauty of the
soft, fair hair, the dark blue eyes, and darker lashes, the delicate
contour of the little face. She was the life of the party. Her
enunciation, quite clear and distinct, was easy to follow while she
told anecdotes of a recent wedding in the family at which she had
been present?anecdotes which revealed unusual quickness of observation, insight and humor. She handled her knife and fork well in
spite of the fact that at times the contractions and jerks in the arms
were very noticeable. Her mind was alive, she heard and understood all that was said, laughed gleefully at the little jokes, and
added her quota with keen delight. After luncheon she rested on the
couch and at my request she dictated to Mrs. Witmer the following
anecdote, one of a number which had greatly entertained us at table
and which I desired, if possible, to get word for word as she told them.
She interrupted her narrative at intervals to interject special directions or remarks which I will put in parentheses.
" I suppose you know who Mr. and Mrs. Black are. Well, they
always ask me if I am glad to go home or if I like the place I am in.
The other day at table Mrs. Black asked me, 'Are you glad to go to
Atlantic City, Marie?' (Spell it without the a; she always pronounces it M'rie.) I said, 'Yes, but there is some other place I want
more to go to.' 'Where?' she asked. 'To Philadelphia, to see
Caterina,' I answered. She looked at Mother with an inquiring gaze,
and Mother answered, 'She becomes very much attached to everybody who is with her and is nice to her.' (Please underline race!) I
said, with a spark in my eye (Is that too fancy?) 'Caterina is not
everybody.' (Please underline everybody.) And I did not speak to
her nor look that way through the meal. After dinner, I said,
'Mother, I want to speak to you in private about that everybody.'
When I got her alone I said, ' I want you to understand that Caterina
is not everybody.' 'Who is nice to you, I said,' repeated Mother,
'I wouldn't like you if you were not that way.' 'Everybody?' I
repeated. 'Oh, well, it is taken for granted you would be with nice
people,' protested Mother. 'That may all be, but if you think you
can take Caterina away from me and that I will be just as happy
with some one else, you will be very much mistaken.' 'What would
you do if Caterina married?' Mother asked. I said, 'Caterina is
not a hired girl to marry and let me go out of her life.' "
Later when she went down town with the trainer, her walk was
like any other child's and in the street car she attracted no attention
whatever. Apparently she had only a step to take to join the ranks
of normal children. Little of her former self remained, except the
muscular contractions, and these varied with her physical and nervous
condition.

By what process was this metamorphosis attained? How had
it been accomplished? Against what odds? Imprisoned within this
jerking, delicate little body, cut off from all the joys of childhood,
there was a mind which for seven years had waited to be set free.
And bit by bit, tearing down here, building there, strengthening,
replacing old with new, the trainer under my direction had rebuilt
the house, let in the doors and windows, set free the imprisoned ego,
?and to her surprise and delight this ego was artistic, fanciful,
imaginative, humorous, charming.

The first year the greater part of the time was devoted to
articulation, and to exercises for improving the gait. These would
have been practically valueless without the correction of each step
taken and of each word uttered. It was through countless commands of "Lift your feet, turn them out. I do not hear you; say
it again plainly," that after three months a slight but distinct
improvement was manifest. Very soon she was able to articulate
all sounds with the exception of ng and th, but these she mastered in
six months. From the beginning the trainer taught her singing,
and it proved of the greatest value. It was found that she could
articulate correctly; it was combining sounds which proved most
difficult. The drill therefore was on sentences, or verses, and she
had to repeat one line at a time after the trainer. It must be remembered that all the time she had allied against her the motor disturbances of face and limbs, and her extreme frailty, which prevented
the lessons being longer than a few minutes at a time?then rest, or
play, then another lesson. It is not to be wondered at that at first,
though very sweet tempered, the child rebelled over and over against
the constant battering at formed habits, against the deadly tedium
of correction. This showed itself in bursts of tears, in tearing and
clawing at the trainer's clothes like a small enraged animal. Three
years later she was able to talk to the trainer about this period and
confessed that then she hated one whom later she learned to adore.
Very soon she was taught to play cribbage, and this alternated with
her work in articulation and later in writing, as it proved a pleasant
way to introduce a little arithmetic.

After a year's work, the gait was much better as a whole though
there were lapses owing to bodily weakness. Dancing was begun
with good result. She was taught the simpler fancy dancing with
arm as well as leg movements. The rolling back of the eyes had
almost ceased, and the enunciation at its best was understandable.
She had learned to use her voice in the singing of scales and old
French nursery songs. In the beginning she could not even control
it sufficiently to call any one's name so that the sound would carry.
She was taught French as part of her articulation work, for the
value of its lip training and also with the idea that in a new language
she would not have the old speech habits to combat, and this supposition proved correct. She learned to read a little French, her
accent being unusually good.

Adenoids had been discovered when the child was two years
old but the mother had refused to have them removed. It was only
through my insistence after she had been in my care for two years
that it was finally decided upon. The surgeon who removed the
tonsils as well as the adenoids is reported as saying that it was one
of the worse cases he ever operated on. No immediate effects
of the operation were observed but the following winter was the best
she had ever had.

Marie was bored with the toys most children love. This was
especially true of dolls. When the trainer arrived she found Marie's
chief pleasure and excitement had been in dressing up. She never
wearied of it, and when one of the little girls of the neighborhood
came to play with her, she pressed her into the game also. There
were several reasons why the trainer thought it wise to discourage an excess in this one direction. It was always rather exhausting,
and left the child over-tired; then all her peculiarities of look and
manner seemed to be accentuated by the silks and laces and ribbons
in which she was decked, and it was thought best to limit this indulgence to once a week. Instead, the trainer encouraged the dramatic
instinct dormant in the child by telling her fairy tales. Then,
when these palled?principally it appeared because "they lived
happily ever after"?she read aloud Charles and Mary Lamb's

A FETTERED MIND 247

"Tales from Shakespeare." Here certainly there was no surfeit of
happy endings, especially as Hamlet, and Romeo and Juliet were the
favorites, and were called for again and again. The quarrel between
the two great Houses made a deep impression. It was straightway
related to the cook?a firm ally?who must have thrown new light
on it,.for the next question to greet the trainer was?"Didn't you
say Juliet was a cantaloupe? Well it commences with a K anyhow."
She learned by heart parts of these two tragedies and the contrast
between the frail, shaken, little figure and the force she threw into
such lines as, "As thou'rt a man, give me the cup; let go, by
Heaven, I'll have it," made the recitals memorable. This dramatic
appreciation was shown also in her drawings, which made up in boldness of conception what they lacked in correctness of line. The small
trembling fingers had always loved to draw, the sense of color being
extraordinarily good, and most of the stories told were forthwith
illustrated on paper with colored crayons. Even at the time of the
trainer's advent the child could pick out in a moment not only
every separate color but could differentiate between a pink lilac and
a blue lilac and other delicate gradations of tone.

After Shakespeare's tales, came the stories of the operas, German and Italian, which the trainer told with as few necessary changes
as possible. The stories of the German operas took the strongest
hold on her imagination and were each illustrated in turn. The
meeting of Vanderdecken and Senta was especially beloved and on
this she tried her hand again and again. A phonograph and a playerpiano which she pedalled herself made many of the leading motifs
familiar. Thus, little by little through these various channels, there
came to the child, light, color, music, people who did and said interesting things, a new and fascinating world.
In the fall of the second year she was practically unable to read,
but only one year later she was reading "Cranford" aloud to her
trainer, and laughing at Miss Mattie and Miss Deborah. Sewing
she loved. She would outline patterns in various colored silks,
sometimes, owing to the motor disturbances, making ten trials before
she finally hit the right spot with her needle.

These muscular contractions were a subject of much thought
and discussion between her and the trainer. They were known
familiarly as the "gorgons" and it was understood that as far as it
lay in her power they must be fought and ultimately conquered.
In time the child herself entered intelligently into the work with a
better understanding of what the struggle meant to her.
Marie differed more from other children in her mental life than
in her outward appearance. In Scotland she would have been called
an "innocent," and here probably was the key to her unlikeness.
For the little girls of her own age who came and went were in no sense
innocents. They were their mothers, aunts, grown sisters in miniature with the standards of the little town in which they lived. Beside
them Marie shone out as one who knew no evil, lived in a dream
world, loving, unselfish, tender hearted. Take an instance of these
early days. The trainer had been painting her a future of glorious
color, the reward of her patience under the rigorous training. "And
what will you be doing, Caterina"? "I do not know. Does it
matter"? "Why, yes"?a little shyly?"I want you to be happy
too."

Up to the end of the first year of training, Marie had rarely, if
ever, gone through the process known as thinking. All that the
child's clouded mind could grasp had been instantly retailed to the
family or servants. It seemed to the trainer that to make Marie
distinguish what ought to be and what ought not to be repeated
was in the nature of an intellectual exercise, and had a marked
educational value. Therefore in their daily intercourse this discrimination was exacted, with the result that by the end of two years
the trainer found herself out-distanced in the difficult art of discreet
repetition.

Marie had always been subject to outbursts of weeping which
left her exhausted. Her family had taken the attitude that when
these fits of crying were over, the child was to be praised and petted,
and given something she liked as a reward for stopping. The trainer
attacked these emotional out-breaks at once, and used very different
methods. The tears were referred to as "turning on the water
works," and in time Marie was made to see that the injured person
was not herself but her teacher. She grew to take pride in narrating
how she had fought and conquered one of these fits of crying. When
left alone with her family for several months, this emotional weakness would reappear, together with other bad habits which were
held in check by the trainer's influence and watchful care.
Marie never saw anything as she walked along the street, never
in her own house heard any of the conversation which went on
around her. When questioned on these points, she said, "I seem to
be off somewhere." As soon as her gait had been noticeably
improved, she was taught to bow to the people on the street who
spoke to her, and to notice persons and objects on the road.
In the beginning of the third and as it happened, the last year
of training she was taken to a well known aurist who pronounced her
hearing defective. This accounted in some measure for her inabilA FETTERED MIND 249
ity to take in general conversation, and also for her constant " What?
What was it?" After her deafness was known, the trainer always
spoke very distinctly but never repeated her remarks or answered
the child's frequent " What? " In spite of this Marie could invariably
repeat what had been said to her, showing that inattention and
absent-mindedness played a large part in her failure to comprehend.
She ceased in time to say "What?" to her trainer, finding it useless,
but in her intercourse with her family it was constantly on her lips.
She included these petitions in her morning and evening prayers,?
"To speak plainly, to be as quiet as possible, to pay attention to
what goes on around me, to sit up straight and be brisk." The
"quiet" referred of course to the motor disturbances. She had
always been allowed an indefinite time to make up her mind about
anything. This had grown into a torpidity of thought, hence the
petition to be "brisk". She understood that it was her thought
and not her body which was being hurried up.

By the following spring it had become increasingly evident that
the work could not go on much further under the existing conditions.
The child's famify were holding her back, through ignorance as to
the physical requirements in the case, as well as through inability
to grasp the value of the work and to assist in its progress.

The proposal was therefore made to them that they should
allow the child to come to Philadelphia with her trainer and be under
my direct supervision and in the care of certain physicians for a
trial experiment of six months. This they absolutely refused to do
and I was therefore reluctantly compelled to give up the case and
recall the trainer.
