The Phenomenon of Scattering in the Binet-Simon Scale
======================================================

By J. E. Wallace Wallin, Ph.D.,
Psycho-Educational Clinic and Special Schools, Board of Education,
St. Louis.

It has been said that feebleminded children are more uneven
in their intellectual development than normal children. According
to Binet and Simon1 "a defective child does not resemble in any
way a normal one whose development has been retarded or arrested.
He is inferior, not in degree, but in kind. The retardation of his
development has not been uniform. Obstructed in one direction
his development has progressed in others. ... So far as certain
faculties are concerned, he remains at the level of a younger child;
but in respect to others, he is on a level with normal children of his
own age. An unequal and imperfect development is consequently
his Specific characteristic. These inequalities of development may
Vary to any degree in different subjects. They always produce
a want of equilibrium, and this want is the differentiating attribute
of the defective." The difference between the feebleminded and
the normal is qualitative rather than quantitative.

We assume it is on the basis of these sweeping generalizations,
which, we are led to conclude, represent merely the personal opinion
of the authors as no supporting facts are adduced, that the conclusion
has been drawn that the feebleminded "scatter" more in the BinetSimon scale than do normal children, i. e. they fail on more tests
m lower age levels while passing more tests in various age levels
above the basal age than do the normals. This alleged fact has
almost been given the significance of a pathognomonic sign by
which we are able to identify those who are "potentially feebleminded," and by which we are thus enabled to make an early prognosis of feeblemindedness in the case of doubtful children who
scatter" considerably, but who cannot be diagnosed as feebleminded on the basis of the degree of mental deficiency which they
evince. Thus we find Doll2 affirming that "In general a normal
child develops intellectually more consisently than a potential
defective. The component mental processes which determine the
intellectual capacity develop uniformly in the former and not so
1 Mentally Defective Children, 1914, p. 13.

Preliminary Note on tbe Diagnosis of Potential Feeblemindedness, Training School Bulletin, 1916, May.
uniformly in mental defectives. In the Binet tests the typical
normal child has a basal year not more than one year below his
chronological age and passes but a few tests beyond his chronological
age. The potential feebleminded, on the other hand, has the basal
year more than one year below the chronological age or at least
seriously below the total mental age rating and may have more
than one basal year, that is to say, he 'scatters,' failing in tests
one would expect a normal child of that age to pass, and succeeding
in others not expected. Thus a normal child 'testing' 8 may have
a basal year of 7 and pass 3 tests at 8 and 2 at 9, whereas the potential
feebleminded 'testing' 8 may have a basal year of 5, pass 4 tests
at 6, 4 at 7, 3 at 8, 2 at 9, and 2 at 10. The normal child thus tests
7.5 and the potential feebleminded 5.15, the total rating in each
case being1 8. This brings us to a second premise, namely, that
although the individual Binet tests at any age are of equal difficulty
for normal children, they are of somewhat unequal difficulty for
mental defectives."

It is evident that if unevenness in a child's mental development,
as indicated by scattering on the Binet-Simon scale, is an indication
of potential or actual feeblemindedness, it is worth while determining
whether feebleminded children do, in point of fact, "scatter" more
than normal children. We do not know that any one has thus far
presented any experimental data in support of the correctness of
this hypothesis. Doll's conclusions are admittedly tentative:
"It is at present only a result of observation that such differences
do exist and experiment has too often demonstrated that observation is mistaken." We have ourselves already called attention to
the extensive scattering on the Binet-Simon scale by epileptics
(which we noted as early as 1910) and by insane subjects.1 From
our data which have thus far appeared in print it has not been
possible to determine the extent of the excess of scattering found
among the epileptics and the insane as compared with other classes
of persons. During the last eight years we have occasionally noticed
that some feebleminded subjects scatter very widely on the BinetSimon scale, while other feebleminded subjects scatter very little.
We, however, deemed it inadvisable to attempt to compile definite
figures until we had a considerable accumulation of data available.
We now have records for thousands of subjects whom we have
personally examined and diagnosed (with the aid of cooperating
physicians), but, owing to the lack of time to work up all our records
Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives, 1912, p. 22. Problems of Subnormality, 1917. p. 161f. The
Individual Tests in the Binet-Simon Scale, The Psycho1.. Clinic, 1917, p. 79. Wide Range versus Narrow Range
Binet-Simon Testing, Journal of Delinquency, 1917, 315f.

(and the unfortunate circumstance that nearly a thousand of our
records are not now accessible to us), we are obliged to limit this
study to 840 consecutive1 cases examined in the Psycho-Educational
Clinic conducted by the Board of Education in the City of St. Louis.
These cases were diagnosed as follows: normal, 5.5 per cent; retarded,
7.9 per cent; backward, 38 per cent; borderline, 12.5 per cent;
deferred, 6.4 per cent; and feebleminded, 29.4 per cent (morons,
17.1 per cent and imbeciles 12.2 per cent). The average chronological age of the boys was 11.10 years; of the girls, 10.87; and of
both sexes, 11.07.

Results.
Table I shows the number of advance points which were earned
by the pupils in the different classifications. The results differ
somewhat according as we follow the 1908 scale or 1911 (Vineland)
scale. Turning to the 1908 averages for the two sexes, we find that
the smallest number of advance points were won by the pupils
designated as normal, followed by the borderline and backward,
who earned the same number of points, while the highest number
of points were earned by the "deferred" cases (i. e. the diagnosis
was deferred because the classification was uncertain) and the
morons. The same number of points were earned by the retarded
and the imbecile children. The greatest difference in the number
of advance points earned is between the normal and the deferred,
amounting to .58 of a year. Exclusive of these two categories the
greatest difference amounts to one-fifth of a year, or only one point.
The difference between the four of the seven .categories which show
the smallest differences varies from 0 to .04 of a year, an insignificant
amount.

The smallest number of advance points among the boys, 1908
scale, was earned by the normal cases, followed by the retarded
and backward whose averages are the same; and among the girls,
by the normal, followed by the borderline. The greatest number
of advance points among the boys were earned by the deferred,
followed by the morons (the borderline and the imbeciles earned
the same number of points); and among the girls, by the deferred,
followed by the retarded and morons, who earned equally many
points. The greatest difference among the boys amounted to .46
of a year, and among the girls .86 of a year, in both cases between
the normal and the deferred. Exclusive of the two extreme categories,
the greatest difference amounts to .18 of a year among the boys
* The exceptions to this statement have been noted in Wide Range versus Narrow Range Binet-Simon
Testing," Journal of Delinquency, 1917, p. 315f, which should be consulted for other facts which we do not repeat
here. The subjects here considered are those included in11 Group I' in that article.
and .34 of a year among the girls. The normals earned the fewest
and the deferred the greatest number of advance credits among both
the boys and the girls. The difference between the categories
seems to be slightly larger among the girls than among the boys.
Table I.?Advance Points Earned According to the 1908 and 1911 Scales.

Normal
Retarded..
Backward..
Deferred...
Borderline.
Morons
Imbeciles..
Boys
No.
37
53
246
35
81
93
59
1908
Points
4.1
4.5
4.5
6.4
4.8
5.4
4.8
1911
Points
8.0
7.0
7.3
7.1
6.9
6.5
6.8
G:rl?
No.
1908
Points
2.9
6.5
6.0
7.2
4.8
6.5
5.3
1911
Points
7.3
6.0
7.0
6.8
6.6
6.2
6.2
Both
No.
47
67
320
54
105
144
103
1908
Points
3.8
5.0
4.8
6.7
4.8
5.8
5.0
1911
Points
7.8
6.8
7.2
7.0
6.8
6.3
6.5
1908
Years
.76
1.00
1.34
1.16
1.00
1911
Years
1.56
1.36
1.44
1.40
1.36
1.26
1.30

To convert the advance credits in points to advance credits in years multiply the points by .2. This has
been done in the last two columns for the two sexes.

The figures for the points represent averages.

Turning to the 1911 scale, averages for both sexes, the smallest
number of advance points were earned by the morons, followed by
the imbeciles, while the greatest number were earned by the normal,
followed by the backward. The same number of points were earned
by the retarded and borderline. The greatest difference in the
number of advance points earned is between the normal and borderline, amounting to .30 of a year. Exclusive of these two categories
the greatest difference amounts to only .14 of a year, while the
difference between those four of the seven categories which show
the smallest difference varies from 0 to .10?differences which, in
either case, are rather negligible.

For the boys, 1911 scale, the smallest scattering is among the
morons, followed by the imbeciles; and for the girls, among the
retarded, followed by the morons and imbeciles, whose averages
are the same. The greatest scattering for both the boys and the
girls is among the normals, followed by the backward. (The scattering is the same among the girl morons and imbeciles.) The result
for the two sexes are in complete agreement with respect to the
groups which scatter most, but in less close agreement with respect
to the groups which scatter least. The extreme difference among
the boys amounts to .30 of a year, between the normal and the
morons; and among the girls, .26, between the normal and the
retarded. Exclusive of the two extreme categories, the greatest
difference amounts to only .10 of a year for the boys and .16 of a
year for the girls. With the 1911 scale the difference between the
boys and the girls is not significant, while with the 1908 scale the
variation between the categories was slightly greater for the girls.
The difference between the different categories is greater with the
1908 than with the 1911 scale for both the boys and the girls.

It is apparent that the two scales yield discrepant results so
far as the mean tendencies are concerned. According to the 1908
scale it is the deferred and the morons, but according to the 1911
scale the normal and the backward subjects who scatter most,
while according to the 1908 scale, it is the normal, the borderline,
and the backward, and according to the 1911 scale the morons
and the imbeciles, who scatter least. The difference between the
extreme categories is greater with the 1908 scale than with the
1911 scale, but the differences are not'very pronounced with either
scale.

In order to lessen the number of categories, which may bring
out more clearly the alleged tendency of the feebleminded or subnormal to scatter more extensively than the normal, we have
reclassified the subjects in table II into three groups. The "normal"
group comprises the backward and the retarded, who are certainly
not feebleminded, as well as those who were technically classified
as "normal" in table I. The subnormal group includes the borderline, deferred, morons, and imbeciles, all clearly below normal,
while the feebleminded group is limited to those who have been
classified as morons and imbeciles.

Based on the averages for the two sexes the greatest scattering
occurs among the normals and the least among the feebleminded,
when using the 1911 scale. But the difference amounts to only
?16 of a year. The difference between the normal and the subnormal categories is greater (.12 of a year) than the difference between
the subnormal and the feebleminded (.04). On the other hand,
when using the 1908 scale the scattering is least among the normals,
while it is the same among the subnormal and the feebleminded.
The extreme difference, again, amounts to only .16 of a year.
With the 1908 scale the least scattering for both the boys and
the girls occurs among the normals. The scattering is the same
among the subnormal and feebleminded for the boys, but it is
slightly greater among the subnormal than among the feebleminded
for the girls. The greatest difference among the boys amounts
to only .14 of a year, and among the girls to only .04 of a year.

Table II.?Advance Points earned according to the 1908 and 1911 Scales.
Bots
Normal (including 'backward," "retarded" and
"normal")
Subnormal (including "morons," "imbeciles," borderline" and "deferred")
Feebleminded (including
"morons'' and " imbeciles ")
No.
1908
Pts. Yrs.
1.04
1.04
1911
Pts. Yra.
7.3
6.6
1.46
1.36
1.32
Girls
No.
138
1908
Pts. Yr3.
1.16
1.18
1.20
1911
Pts. Yrs.
1.38
1.26
1.24
Both Sexes
No.
1908
Pts. Yrs.
.94
1.10
1.10
1911
Pts. Yrs
1.44
1.32
1.28

The figures for the points and years are averages.
With the 1911 scale, the scattering is the smallest among the
feebleminded and the greatest among the normals for both the boys
and the girls. The greatest difference among both the boys and the
girls amounts to only .14 of a year.

The above data are based on the averages?the average number
of advance points gained by the average child in each classification.
As is well known, however, the average sometimes obscures the
real nature of the phenomenon under investigation. It tells us
nothing respecting the frequency or distribution of the different
scores or measures. It is therefore desirable to present the data
in the form of a table of frequencies. Table III shows the number
of subjects in each classification who earned from no advance point
to 18 advance points. It is possible to determine from this table
the proportion of subjects in any classification who earned one,
two, three, four, or any other given number of advance points.
A casual inspection of table III shows that as many as 16
advance points were scored by individual normal, backward and
"deferred" subjects with the use of the 1908 scale, while with the
use of the 1911 scale one backward subject earned 18 advance points,
and one moron 17 advance points. The figures in this table, as
arranged, however, are quite unwieldy. In order to throw the
outstanding facts into bolder perspective, we give in table IV the
percentage of the subjects in each classification who earned less
than six advance points (i. e. 5 or less), less than eleven points (i. e.
10 or less), more than ten points {%. e. 11 or more), and from six to
ten points, inclusive. The percentages have been computed only
in round numbers.

We again find certain discrepancies between the 1908 and
1911 scales. According to the 1908 scale the proportion of subjects
Table III.?Distribution of Advance Points earned by Subjects in
Different Classifications.

ACCORDING TO THE 1908 SCALE
Normal
Retarded
Backward
Deferred
Borderline
Morons
Imbeciles
ACCORDING TO THE 1911 SCALE
0 11112 11
11 1 116171 1 213
21 1 22 10 5 15 1122 2437
3123516 18 2 20 21331435
44 4628 16 3 19 528639 19 6 25
5 2 2 8 2 10 23 9 32 4 1 5 11 7 18 8 5 13
6 5 2 7 6 1 7 35 9 44 1 4 5 14 3 17 13 7 20
7 3 1 4 3 1 4 28 7 35 1 2 3 16 3 19 13 7 20
87 7516 25 13 38 63982 10 771
9 3 3 6 6 1 7 17 11 28 5 1 6 10 2 12 11 3
10 1125 5 23 7 30 33662871
11 2134 4 12 2 14 2 22 243
12 3 1 4 13 2 15 1 1 2 2 2
13 2 2 10 1 11 1 1 1 1
14 2 2 4 4
15 3 3 3 1 4 1 1 1 1
16 112 1 1
17
18 1 1

who passed the greatest number of advance tests (i. e. more than
10 each), was greatest for the deferred subjects and the morons,
and least for the imbeciles and borderline. On the other hand,
the proportion of subjects who were able to pass only five advance
tests or less, was greatest for the normal and backward (followed
closely by the imbeciles, borderline and retarded), and least for the
deferred and morons. These results are fairly consistent with those
based on the averages for the 1908 scale given on p. 181.

According to the 1911 scale, the proportion of subjects, each
of whom passed more than 10 tests, was greatest among the normal
and backward (followed closely by the retarded), and least among
the borderline and morons (followed closely by the imbeciles).
On the other hand, the proportion of subjects among those who
were able to pass only five advance tests or less, was greatest for
the retarded and morons (followed closely by the deferred and
imbeciles), and least for the normal and backward. These results,
again, are fairly consistent with the results based on the averages
for the 1911 scale given on pp. 182-3.

Table IV.?Percentages op Subjects earning Number of Advance Points
AS INDICATED.
Normal
Retarded..
Backward.
Deferred..
Borderline.
Morona...
Imbeciles..
1908 Scam
Less
than
6 Points
74
61
63
38
61
47
62
than
11 Points
91
91
93
85
94
86
99
More
than
10 Points
6
14
5
13
0.9
From 6
to 10
Points
1911 Scale
Less
than
G Points
Less More
tlwn I than
11 Points lOPoints
21
14
15
11
5
7
9
From 6
to 10
Points

The difference between the group which showed the highest
percentage who passed more than ten advance tests and the group
which showed the lowest percentage was 13.1 per cent with the
1908 scale and 16 per cent with the 1911 scale.

According to the 1908 scale the proportion who passed less
than 11 advance tests was greatest among the imbeciles and least
among the deferred and morons, while according to the 1911 scale
the proportion was greatest among the borderline and morons and
Wst among the normal and backward. The proportion of those
who passed from 6 to 10 advance tests according to the 1908 scale
was greatest among the deferred and morons (closely followed by
the imbeciles), and least among the normal, retarded and backward; while according to the 1911 scale the ratio was greatest among
the borderline and imbeciles (closely followed by the normals),
and least among the retarded and morons.

It is evident, therefore, that the scattering according to the
1908 scale is greatest among the morons and deferred children,
some of the latter of whom will probably later prove to be feebleminded, and least among the imbeciles and the borderline, some in
the later group being cases of so-called potential feeblemindedness.
On the other hand, the scattering according to the 1911 scale is
greatest among the normal cases (specifically the "normal,"
"retarded" and "backward") and least among the mental defectives?i. e. the "borderline," "morons" and "imbeciles." Most
of these results harmonize with those based on the analyses of the
averages, pp. 181 to 184.

If we adhere to the assumption which is usually made that the
1911 scale is more accurate than the 1908 scale (we shall consider
this assumption in a separate communication) we should have to
conclude that a high degree of scattering is not symptomatic of
either feeblemindedness or potential feeblemindedness. Owing
to the lack of higher tests in the 1908 scale, we are probably justified
in rejecting the results bearing on the limited amount of scattering
among the normals when using this scale, as will appear from the
analysis of the mental status of the normal cases by the 1908 scale,
to be made presently.

The data we have tabulated permit us to make yet another
comparison. In table Y we give the average range of ages in which
one or more tests were passed by the subjects in the different classification. The "range" for each subject includes all the ages between
and including the basal age and the highest age in which at least
one test was passed. It does not necessarily imply that one or
more tests were passed in all the ages between the "basal" and the
"highest" age, although this was usually the case. In the 1911
scale the "adult" age was rated for the sake of the computation
as age 15, while the supposititious ages 13 and 14 were counted
as two ages. In consequence of this arbitrary adjustment we count
less ages than we would be entitled to do in the first case (since
the adult age is assumed to be higher than Age XV, which is supplied
in the scale), but more ages in the second case than actually exist
in the scale when tests are passed in Age XV or the adult age. In
all cases except one, however, when a plus was scored in XV, a plus
was also scored in the adult age. On the other hand, the absence
of tests in Ages XIII and XIV makes it impossible for subjects to
pass tests in those ages who would have done so had the tests been
supplied. An earlier study has shown that so uneven is mental
development that children will score passes not only among the
easier but also among the more difficult of higher age tests.1 We
should also emphasize that the difference between the higher ages
is, in general, smaller than the difference between the lower ages,
while Age XV and the adult age are largely hypothetical. It is
evident that the errors which arise from the above shortcomings
affect particularly the older or more intelligent cases. Space limitations will restrict the comparisons to the averages for the two
sexes.

Table V.?Average Number op Ages in which Tests were passed.
Bots
1908
1911
Girls
1908
1911
Both Sexes
1908
1911
Normal...
Retarded..
Backward.
Deferred..
Borderline.
Morons...
Imbeciles..
2.7
3.1
3.3
3.6
3.3
3.6
3.5
4.1
4.2
4.6
4.2
4.1
4.0
4.0
2.5
3.5
3.6
3.8
2.8
3.5
3.7
4.0
3.7
3.9
3.7
3.6
3.9
3.8
2.6
3.2
3.4
3.5
3.2
3.6
3.6
4.1
4.1
4.4
4.1
4.0
4.0
3.9

According to the 1908 scale the lowest average range of ages
in which tests were passed is found among the normal subjects,
and the largest range among the deferred cases, followed closely
by the morons and imbeciles. The difference between the normal
and the deferred amounts to 1.2 of a year, while the maximum
difference between the other classifications amounts to only .4 year.
We cannot conclude from these data, however, that the scattering
is confined to the smallest range of ages among the normals, for an
examination of the unabridged tables, which are not here reproduced,
shows that a large proportion of the normal subjects graded in the
higher Binet ages?by which we refer to a base of X or above?

while a merely negligible number of those in the three other classifications reached a X-year base. Forty-two per cent of the normals
'Wide Range versus Narrow Range Binet-Simon Testing, Journal of Delinquency, 1917, p. 315ff.
SCATTERING IN THE BINET-SIMON SCALE. 189
had a base of from X to XIII,1 while only 1.8 per cent (one case)
of the deferred and 7.6 per cent (11 cases) of the morons reached a
X-year base. The basal age for most of the deferred wap below
VI. None of the morons reached X except those with a X-year
base. Only one imbecile reached a VH-year base and only two a
VI-year base. It is clear, therefore, that the reason the passed tests
did not scatter over a wider range of ages for the normal subjects
is that almost half of them had such a high base that it was impossible to give them as many higher tests as could be given to the
subjects in the other groups, owing to the lack of tests in ages above
XIII and the relatively few tests available in ages XII and XIII?
and the further fact that the tests in XII and XIII are admittedly
too hard. That the normal subjects, in point of fact, were given
fewer tests,2 than the pupils in any other classification appears from
table VI.
Table VI.?Extent of Advance Testing by the 1908 Scale.
Average Number of Full
Years Tested Above
Basal Age3
Boys
Girls
Both
Average Number of Tests
Given Above Basal
Age
Boys
Girls
Both
Normal...
Retarded..
Backward.
Deferred..
Borderline.
Morons...
Imbeciles..
2.7
3.0
2.5
2.9
3.0
3.1
2.9
2.4
2.6
3.0
3.3
3.2
3.1
2.8
2.5
2.9
2.9
3.0
3.0
3.1
2.8
9.3
11.1
11.0
17.7
13.5
15.2
18.4
6.4
13.5
14.4
19.6
13.1
16.4
18.9
8.7
11.6
12.1
18.4
13.4
15.6
18.6

The average number of ages above the basal age in which all
the tests were given was .3 less for the normals than for the imbeciles,
who were given the next fewest number (we are using only the
averages for the two sexes); and .6 less than for the morons, and
.5 less than for the deferred and borderline, who were given the
greatest number of complete ages. In the same way, the average
number of single tests given to the normals above the basal age
was 2.9 less than for the retarded subjects, and 3.4 less than for the
1 Thirteen had a X-year base, 2 a Xl-year, 3 a XH-year and 2 a XUI-year base.
* Sometimes due to this lack of higher tests in the scale, and sometimes due to the fact that the diagnosis did
not present any difficulty, in consequence of which the examinations were occasionally curtailed because of the
limited time at our disposal.

1 Only those ages are included here in which all the tests were given. Because of time limitations it was sometimes necessary to omit the longer tests in certain ages.
backward subjects. These three classes were given the fewest
advance tests. On the other hand, the groups which were given
the greatest number of advance tests, the imbeciles, deferred and
morons, were given 9.9, 9.7 and 6.9 more tests, respectively, than
the normals were given. From the standpoint of the extent of the
advance testing, it would be natural to expect that the scattering
should be the greatest among the imbeciles, deferred and morons,
and least among the normals, retarded, and backward. We have
already seen that this has proved largely to be the case. According
to the 1908 scale, the highest average number of advance points
were made by the deferred and morons, and the least by the normal,
backward, and borderline, while the largest proportion of subjects
who earned more than ten advance points was found, again, among
the deferred and morons, while the smallest proportion was found
among the imbeciles, borderline, and backward. The fact that
the deferred cases and the morons pass the highest number of advance
tests in the 1908 scale may thus be ascribed to the fact that they
were more extensively tested rather than to the alleged fact that
they vary more in their mental make up. It is to be noted, however,
that the imbeciles, who were given the greatest number of advance
tests, scattered over a less wide range than any other group in the
1908 scale?we are referring to those who passed more than ten
advance tests?but the imbeciles are followed by the borderline
group, which contains cases of potential mental deficiency. As a
matter of fact, we have already shown by analysis of experimental
data that the groups of subjects who have been extensively tested
by the Binet-Simon tests invariably make a higher rating than those
who have been less extensively tested.1 This analysis, so far as it
went, showed that "the amount of the credit earned depends upon
the extent of the testing and not upon the grade of intelligence
of the pupils."

Turning, finally, to the range of ages in which tests were passed
in the 1911 scale (table V), the average is the lowest for the imbeciles,
morons and borderline, and the highest for the backward, normal,
retarded, and deferred. The difference between the extremes,
the imbeciles and backward pupils, amounts to only .5 of a Binet
age. Possibly the range is slightly exaggerated for the groups
which passed tests in the adult age. The range extended to the
adult age for 10 per cent of the normals, 14 per cent of the backward
(who passed tests in most ages), 13 per cent of the retarded, and
4 per cent of the borderline, while the highest age in which the
morons passed any test was XII, the deferred cases Age XI and the
1 Wide Range versus Narrow Range Binet-Simon Testing, Journal of Delinquency, p. 315ff.
imbeciles Age X. Nevertheless, the results are in harmony with
the findings for the 1911 scale, which Ave have already detailed:
The imbeciles and the morons earned the lowest average number
of advance credits, and the normal, backward, and deferred the
highest average number, while the proportion who earned more
than ten advance tests was the smallest for the borderline, morons,
and imbeciles, and the largest for the normal, retarded, and backward.
Conclusions.

1. The facts revealed by the foregoing analysis do not support
the supposition that feebleminded children show more unevenness
or greater variation in their mental development than do normal
children. On the contrary the variation we have found among our
normal children, as indicated by scattering on the Binet-Simon
scale, is greater than the variation found among our feebleminded
children. We do not consider, however, that this difference is of
any considerable significance. We believe that a considerable
amount of variation (scattering) in the development of different
mental functions is a perfectly normal or typical phenomenon
among all classes of human beings. That is, some individuals in
any group of individuals, whether so-called normal, abnormal or
subnormal, will show a considerable amount of unevenness in the
strength of different mental traits, while other individuals will be
uniformly or evenly developed. Some normal persons will scatter
much, others little. Some feebleminded persons will scatter much,
others little. Some insane persons will scatter much, others little.
The data presented in this article indicate that the feebleminded
do not vary more than the normal, and, therefore, the assumption
of Binet and Simon that "unequal" development is the "specific
characteristic" of the mentally defective child is not justified.
Do the insane and the epileptic vary more than the feebleminded
and the normal? None of the original records of our survey of a
village of epileptics is now available to the writer, so that an adequate
comparison is impossible. But it was the extensive scattering found
in our epileptic group of subjects on the Binet scale which first
called our attention to this phenomenon. Only a part of our original
records for the insane patients are available. These permit of
adequate comparison with our normal and subnormal cases, but
the conclusions drawn must be tentative, owing to the few insane
records available.1 The insane group was given more advance
tests than our normal-subnormal group in all the ages permitting
of comparison except one (no advance tests could, of course, be
1 Cf. Problems of Subnormality, pp. 157-163.
given in either group to those who graded XIII).1 The difference
between the averages amounts to 10.6 tests in Age IV, 14.4 in VIII,
8.4 in IX, 1.8 in X, and 1.7 in XI?and 5.5 in II, the sole age in which
more advance tests were given to the normal-subnormal group.
In spite of this fact, the insane earned only 4.6 tests (average) above
the upper base, which is .1 less than for our normal group, and .9
less than for our subnormal and feebleminded groups in Table II.
I do not believe, however, that we can accept these figures at their
face value, owing to the fact that 28 per cent of the insane passed
Age XIII, and therefore could not earn any advance credits, because
of the limitation of the scale, while only .47 per cent of the normalsubnormal group passed Age XIII.2 As a matter of fact, the average
number of advance credits won by the insane patients who graded
below X was 7.3 (median 6.5), which is somewhat higher than for
any of the normal-subnormal classifications, while for those who
graded X and above, it was only 2.2 (median 0), or 4.8 (median 2)
if those grading Age XIII are excluded. Our general impression
is that the scattering is slightly greater among the insane and the
epileptic than among the normal and the feebleminded. Binet
and Simon,3 discussing senile and paralytic dementia, state that the
old conception of dementia, according to which it is a "quantitative
diminution of the intelligence" or "an injury of all the faculties,"
is wrong. They hold that we must replace this interpretation of
dementia with the conception of "individual errors of functioning,
of defects of every sort, which by their multiplication lower the
intellectual level and which present the two following characteristics:
irregularity and extensiveness relative to the level of the subjects."
In our judgment more extensive data are needed to establish this
thesis. It has not yet been experimentally demonstrated that the
mental "irregularity" is so much more pronounced in dements
than in other types of the insane or in the epileptic or feebleminded
that this phenomenon can be used as a pathognomonic sign of
dementia. The amount of irregularity, as measured by BinetSimon scattering, is not greater among the few dements that we
have examined than among the feebleminded.

2. In consequence of the above facts it is not safe to attempt to
diagnose any one as potentially feebleminded or actually feebleminded on the basis of unevenness of mental development, as
evinced by extensive scattering on the Binet scale. It is possible
for an expert who is familiar with the entire symptom complex of
1 Cf. Problems of Subnormality, p. 163; and Wide Range versus Narrow Range Binet-Simon Testing,Journal
of Delinquency, 1917, Table I, p. 316.

2 Table I, Wide Range versus Narrow Range Binet-Simon Testing, Journal of Delinquency, November, 1917.
8 Binet and Simon. The Intelligence of the Feebleminded, p. 296.
special types of mental defectives to make a reliable diagnosis in
the case of young children, even though the extent of the mental
deficiency at the time is not sufficient to constitute the child feebleminded. But the number of mental deficients who can be thus
reliably diagnosed early as feebleminded is probably smaller than
has been ordinarily supposed. So far as the majority of cases are
concerned we are not justified in making a diagnosis of feeblemindedness, unless we find a pronounced degree of backwardness and
unless we are reasonably sure of its permanent character. Feeblemindedness, psychologically considered, means ineradicable arrest
of mental development, dating from birth or from early life, of a
very serious degree. This is of primary moment; whether or not
the child is uneven in his mental development is of secondary
importance.

3. The assumption that the essential difference between the
feebleminded and the normal is qualitative and not quantitative
is not sustained, so far as that assumption is based on the alleged
extensive "scattering" or unevenness of mental development among
the feebleminded. On the contrary, we believe that the qualitative
differences are ultimately resolvable into quantitative differences.
When it is said that the normal child has a logical memory and the
feebleminded child a rote memory it is not implied that the feebleminded child is utterly devoid of logical memory, so that he is unable
to memorize or retain through a comprehension of the logical context.
He has logical memory, but far less of it than the normal child.
What he has is probably of the same kind as the normal child, but
it is weaker in degree.

4. There has been a tendency throughout this and other countries, to which we have called special attention elsewhere,1 to assign
so-called potential mental defectives to special classes which were
definitely established for "mentally defective" or feebleminded
children on the assumption that such children would eventually
prove to be feebleminded. In consequence of this tendency, a
large proportion of children who are dull, slow or backward, but
not feebleminded, have been assigned to classes instituted for, and
largely attended by, feebleminded children. We believe that this
practice is educationally and socially unwise. The non-feebleminded and doubtful types of mentally backward children should
be assigned to ungraded classes, where the work can be more adequately adjusted to their needs. We have elsewhere outlined a
plan for the organization of such classes, the practical workability
1 Problems of Subnormality, 1917, Chapter I.

of which we have already demonstrated in some measure, in a large
city system.1
5. The assumption that there would be less scattering with the
1911 than with the 1908 scale, because of the alleged greater accuracy
of the 1911 (Vineland) scale, is not sustained by our records. The
scattering is invariably greater with the use of the 1911 scale in all
the classifications in tables I and II, where the figures are based
on the averages, the difference in some cases amounting to from
two to four advance credits. The cases of extreme scattering (more
than ten advance credits) are more numerous in the 1911 than in
the 1908 scale, in all the categories, except the borderline, while
the cases of least extensive scattering (less than 6 advance points)
are decidedly more numerous in the 1908 than in the 1911 scale
in all the classifications (table IV). The range of ages in which
tests are passed is likewise greater with the 1911 than with the 1908
scale in all the classifications (table V). The advantage of the
1911 (Vineland) over the 1908 scale clearly does not consist in the
lessened amount of scattering which obtains in the former scale,
for the facts are exactly opposite.

The reason for the increased scattering with the 1911 scale,
however, may be the more rigid passing standard used in this scale.
All the tests of a given age standard must be passed to get credit
for that age in the 1911 scale, while the age standard is passed in
the 1908 scale even if one test is missed. The result is that the
subject frequently drops to a lower base in the 1911 than in the
1908 scale, while it very rarely happens that the 1908 base is lower
than the 1911 base. This is strikingly shown by the figures in
table VII, which gives the percentage of subjects who have a lower
base (a) by the 1911 scale than by the 1908 scale, (6) by the 1908
scale than by the 1911 scale, and (c) who have the same base in
both scales. There are a few instances in each classification in
which the 1908 base is lower than the 1911, but the highest ratio
of cases in which this is so is only 7 per cent, based on the averages
for the two sexes, namely, among the retarded children. On the
other hand, the ratio of cases in which the 1911 base is lower than
the 1908 varies from 39 per cent, among the deferred cases, to 70
per cent, among the normal cases. In five of the seven classifications
the 1911 base is lower than the 1908 for more than half of the subjects. In two classifications the bases are the same for more than
half of the subjects, while the percentage having equal bases in
the other classifications varies from 27 to 45.

It is evident, from the above figures, that one reason, at least,
1 Problems of Subnormality, 1017, pp. 278-331.

for the greater scattering in the 1911 scale is the more rigid passing
standard which causes many of the subjects to drop to a lower base.
In other articles we shall compare the scattering in the 1911
Table VII.?Percentage of Subjects whose 1911 Base is Lower than the
1908 Base, whose 1908 Base is Lower than the 1911 Base, and whose
1911 AND 1908 Bases are the Same.
Normal...
Retarded..
Backward.
Deferred..
Borderline.
Morons...
Imbeciles..
1911
Base Lower
Boys
67
60
61
40
54
40
Girls
80
35
45
37
50
43
59
Both
1908
Base Lower
Boys
0
7
1.6
0
1.2
3.2
0
Girls
10
7
2.7
10
0
Both
21
7
1.8
3.6
1
4
4
1911 AND 1908
Bases Equal
Boys
32
32
37
60
44
56
30
Girls
10
57
52
53
60
51
31
Both
27
37
40
57
45
54
30

and 1908 scales when the subjects are classified according to BinetSimon age, compute the differences in the mental-age rating by the
two scales, and analyze the data for the individual tests. We also
expect in future to study the scattering in another scale which we
are now using. Thus far we have found just as much scattering
in this revision as in the older versions.
