Retarded School Children in Madison Wisconsin
===============================================

:Author:  Smiley Blanton, M.D., \J
University of Wisconsin.

The ordinary school curriculum taught by a teacher of average
skill and patience is probably as good a test of a child's mental
ability as the Binet-Simon and similar mental tests. The curriculum tests the child's mental capacity in a vital way: memory, attention, abstract reasoning are all used in mastering the various
subjects. The argument that the ordinary school does not fit the
child for life and does not give him a useful training has no bearing
on the point in question?the ability of the school work to test the
child's mental capacity. The point is that the great majority of
children are able to learn in a certain length of time a certain minimum proportion of the subjects which they have to study while in
school. There is, however, in every school system a small percentage of children who either cannot learn at all this minimum
amount of what is being taught them, or they take twice or more
the amount of time required by the average. David Mitchell,1
in his report of the survey of the Cleveland schools, says that all such
children, three or more years behind their grade, may be considered
suspects and Goddard's2 experience teaches that when these suspects
are carefully examined at least two-thirds of them will be found
to be feebleminded. Again, he says3 that the child who gets three
years behind has, as a rule, stopped development and seldom progresses appreciably beyond that point.
Method of Procedure.

It is usually conceded by educators that when a child is three
years behind his grade without good reason, there is something seriously wrong. It is obvious, however, that there are many children
several years behind their grades with good reason and who are not
in the least dull and backward. There are doubtless people in this
country with brilliant minds who cannot pass the second grade,
because they never had the chance to go to school. It would be
1 Mitchell, David. Schools and Classes for Exceptional Children. Survey Committee of the Cleveland
Foundation, 1916,
1 Goddard, H. H. Journal of Educational Psychology, May, 1916, p. 288.
? Ibid, p. 291.
(250)
absurd to assume, for example, that an illiterate Southern mountaineer lacked mental ability because he could not read or write.
From this survey was excluded every child who was backward from
any good reason and all those who were behind their grades:
1. Because of absence from school due to illness.
2. Because they had lived in the country where school facilities
were actually lacking or very poor.

3. Because they had traveled about a great deal and had lost
several years in changing from school to school; or had
come from a different system, as from England or Scotland.
4. Because, although more or less regular in their attendance,
they had yet had so much illness that it had affected their
progress in school.

The figures were gathered by a personal survey. Each grade
was visited and the ages of the children determined by the roll book.
It was assumed that the normal age for those entering the first grade
was about six years, for the second grade about seven years, and so
on up to the eighth, where the child should not be over fifteen when
finishing this grade. As was said, when the backwardness was due
to entering school late, or irregularity in attendance, or changing
schools, these cases were not counted. Only those were counted
who entered school at the usual time, and though they had been
regular in attendance, yet had not been able to keep up with their
classes, and had dropped back to the extent of three years.

After determining from the roll those who were three years
behind the age that had been allowed for the grade, they were each
questioned as to the age at which they entered school, if they had
been absent frequently from illness, as to the reason why they felt
that they could not pass their grades, etc. The Binet-Simon tests
and the Knox-Healy tests were given to fifteen of the worst cases
to determine the amount of mental retardation. In every case, the
opinion of the teacher was obtained as to the general intelligence of
the child. Thus, by consulting with the teacher and questioning
the child, most of the cases of backwardness due to the beforementioned normal causes were excluded. There is probably a very
small percentage of error in the figures obtained.

It is obvious that this method of not counting the child backward until he is three years behind his grade does not give a failestimate of the backward cases in the first and second grades. There,
children are found who are backward and even feebleminded, who
have been in the grade for only one or two years. When such children were encountered, they were included, even though they had
been in the grades for only one or two years. Great care was used
in selecting these cases, and only those were included who were
undoubtedly dull and backward, and who the teacher declared would
not pass the grade. Probably no child of this type was included
who will ever be able to pass the fifth grade, 110 matter how long
he remains in school.

Twelve schools were visited, in which the aggregate attendance
was 3631 pupils. Of this number, there were found 105 cases, or
2.9 per cent, who were three or more years behind their classes, and
a few cases in the first and second grades who were obviously backward, but had been in school for one or two years only. Of the
children examined, there were then about three per cent who were
I II III IV V VI VII VIII
Curve Showing Percentage of Retarded Children in the
Different Grades
l
unable to stand the test of mastering the school curriculum to the
extent of passing from one grade to another in the average time.
These are the same figures found by Mitchell in the Cleveland survey. He finds that 2077 children, "approximately 3 per cent of
the school population, have been in the schools three or more years
longer than the grade in which they are would indicate." And
Goddard1 states that 2 per cent of all the children attending the
public schools are feebleminded. The percentage of the backward
children found in each class is seen in the curve. It shows
that by far the greatest percentage occurs in the fifth grade.
The reason for this is that the feebleminded child can never do more
than fifth grade work, and when he reaches this point in his school
development, he sticks here and is unable to make further progress.
Reasons Given by Teachers for Retardation.

It is interesting to analyze these cases as far as possible and
find out what is the cause of backwardness. The teachers, with a
very few exceptions, gave three reasons for the condition:?

1. Laziness and lack of application.
2. That the child had been moving about from school to school.
3. The parents' lack of interest in the child's school work.
Now, although these causes may play some part in the retardation of the cases noted in the survey, they play only a minor part.
A normal child, no matter how lazy he is, will manage to pass his
grade in some fashion. He can usually absorb enough from the
classroom to pass the minimum requirements. And if we find a
child who is so unusual that he refuses to apply himself and fails
to pass his grade year after year, then something is wrong and the
child should have a mental examination to determine what is the
trouble. All backward cases from the second cause were not
included. The third reason given is not sufficient to prevent the
child from mastering his school work, especially during the early
grades where the work is done in the school and the child is not
expected to get his lessons at home. Of course, if the parents are
immoral, drunkards, and do not furnish the child with proper food
and shelter, the child's work will suffer. But where we find terrible
home conditions, as immorality, drunkenness, and extreme poverty
in a town such as this, a prosperous well-to-do town of the middle
west, it probably means that the parents are defectives, even feebleminded, and the child also is probably not of normal mentality.
1 Goddard, H. H. Diagnosis of Feeblemindedness, read at Chicago Medical Society, June 2, 1913.
It is very hard for the teacher to admit that the child she has
worked with so faithfully, and to whom she has probably become
attached, is of subnormal mentality. Binet points out that the
backward child is usually so quiet and well-behaved that the teacher
feels quite kindly toward him, and does not like to admit that he
is feebleminded. Goddard1 says that teachers and physicians have
insisted that any child, no matter what his record, if he did not
show certain stigmata of degeneration, certain conditions recognized
as belonging to the imbecile, must come out all right. . . . "These
children, besides being well-formed and pleasing to look on, are
usually very affectionate, and we cannot believe that such children
are incurably defective." Often the teacher will not admit any
abnormality even in the face of overwhelming evidence. In one
school, there was a girl, H. M., sixteen years and ten months old in
the sixth grade. She had not passed the fifth grade, but she had
been put in the sixth because she had been two years in the fifth.
She was overgrown, well-developed sexually, good-looking, but dull.
The teacher gave as a reason for her backwardness that her parents
did not take a proper interest in her school work. It was found
that she had entered school at six years and had been two years in
every grade. She had not really passed even the minimum requirements of any of these grades, but had been pushed on automatically
after two years. Her brother and sister had both had a similar
history. Neither had managed to pass the fifth grade. The sister
was a houseworker and the brother a farm hand. When the teacher
was told of the record of the brother and sister, she replied, "That
just shows how little interest the parents take in their children's
work." The girl was undoubtedly a moron, who would never be
able to pass the fifth grade work, and her defect was probably shared
by the other members of the family. Her backwardness may be due
to heredity.

I would classify the 105 cases under five heads. The classificarion, though not logical, is helpful:
1. Feeblemindedness. Due to heredity and conditions at birth
and early infancy.
2. Dulness. Due to same causes.
3. Backwardness. Due to some abnormality of the internal
secretions.
4. Specialized defects.
5. Neuroses, preventing the child from adjusting himself to the
school curriculum.
1 Goddard, H. H. Diagnosis of Feeblemindedness.
RETARDED CHILDREN IN MADISON, WIS. 255
Of the 105 cases, 22, or 20 per cent, were placed under the
first head, feeblemindedness. This is .60 per cent of all children
examined. This is smaller than the percentage given by Goddard
and other observers. The percentage they give is between one and'
two per cent. This .60 per cent includes only the obvious cases that
can be diagnosed by their history and a casual examination.
Undoubtedly many of the cases classed under the heading dulness,
if they were given a thorough mental examination, would be found
to be feebleminded.

By feeblemindedness is meant a lack of mental capacity to
develop into an adult with ability to "float" in society. Measured
by the Binet-Simon standard, it means that the child will never
develop beyond the mentality of a twelve-year-old child; that no
matter how long the child goes to school, he will never be able to
master more than fifth grade work. Of course, such children may
occasionally be found in grades above the fifth, if it is the custom of
the school authorities to push the child on to the higher grade,
regardless of whether he has mastered the lower grade. Only five
cases under the heading feebleminded were given a mental test;
the rest were cases that by means of their family history, their school
history, their appearance, and a brief oral examination, were determined beyond any reasonable doubt to be feebleminded.
The following is a list of these cases, giving a few facts from which
the reader can draw his own conclusions.

1. First grade, age 9 years. Has been three years in the first
grade. Keeps to himself on the playground, and does not join in
play with the other children. Incontinence of urine during the day
as well as at night. The child looks and acts "half-witted."
2. Kindergarten, age 5 years, 10 months. He does not talk,
acts peculiarly. Teacher says the child is "foolish."
3. First grade, age 11 years. Four years in the first grade.
4. Second grade, age 12 years. Two years in the first and three
years in the second grade. Cases 3 and 4 are brother and sister.
Mother and father drink, teacher reports.

5. Sixth grade, age 16 years, 10 months. Two years in each
grade. Brother was not able to finish grade, he is now a farm-hand.
Sister left school after finishing the fifth grade, and is now a houseworker.
6. Second grade, age 11 years, 10 months. Has been five years
in the first and second grades. He cannot learn numbers and cannot
write legibly.

7. First grade, age 7 years. Although this boy is not three
years behind grade, it is apparent from his appearance that he is
decidedly abnormal. The teacher cannot teach him to count.
She calls him "half-witted."

8. Fourth grade, age 14 years. This child has repeated each
grade. The principal reports that one brother is "half-witted."
9. Fifth grade, age 15 years, 10 months. Has repeated each
grade, he looks stupid and has the thick slovenly speech so characteristic of the feebleminded.
10. Sixth grade, age 16 years, 4 months. This case really does
not belong in the sixth, but she was put here because she had been
two years in the fifth. She has repeated all her grades.

11. Fifth grade, age 16 years, 2 months. Repeated every grade.
12. Fourth grade, age 14 years, 1 month. She started to school
at the age of six, spent two years in the first, second, third, and
fourth grades, and after two years in the fourth, she will not be able
to pass it. This girl is good-looking, sexually well-developed, and
with her poor mentality she must receive careful protection if she
is to escape ruin.

13. Second grade, age 10 years, 9 months. Two years in the
first and in the second grade and cannot yet pass the work. Teacher
reports that both parents drink, and that the boy had a brother who
could not pass the third grade after several years' work.
14. Second grade, age 10 years, 9 months. Two years in first
grade and has been two years in the second grade and still cannot
master the work sufficiently to pass on to the third grade. The
report of the. teacher is that "he is very dull and stupid." This
boy has a brother nine years old in the second grade.
15. Second grade, age 11 years, 8 months. "Very dull and
stupid" is the report of the teacher. A decided microcephalic.
16. First grade, age 11 years, 1 month. "He just cannot learn,"
says the class teacher. After four years in the first grade, he was
placed in a special class where he is doing second grade work.
17. First grade, age 11 years, 8 months. After five years in
the first grade without any progress, he was placed in a special
class.

18. First grade, age 10 years, 2 months. After four years in the
first grade without making any progress he was placed in a special
class where he is doing about first grade work.

Cases 17 and 18 are brothers. Teacher reports that father is
epileptic and mother is immoral and obviously incompetent mentally.
19. First grade, age 8 years, 1 month. After spending three
years in the first grade without profit she was placed in the special
class where she is doing about first grade work.

20. Second grade, age 13 years, 8 months. This boy was
several years in the first grade, and was then placed in the special
class, where he has been for three years doing about second grade
work.

21. Second grade, age 11 years, 2 months. Four years in the
first grade without progress, then placed in the second grade. Has
been here for two years doing about second grade work. This girl
is good-looking and is just beginning to develop sexually, lacking
the proper inhibitions because of her poor mentality. Unless she
is watched and directed with the greatest care a stormy future can
be predicted for her.

22. Third grade, age 12 years. He spent two years in both the
first and second grades, and has been two years in the third grade
without absorbing enough knowledge to pass. Since the age of
six, he has been in the habit of running away from home and staying
away until late at night. If now his parents discipline him to make
him remain off the streets, he runs away and stays until morning.
He looks dull and stupid. He has a sister in the ungraded class and
another sister did not have the ability to finish the eighth grade.
From the records of these cases, it is clear that these children
are not receiving any good from the ordinary school curriculum and
that some special work should be devised for them. A few of them
have been placed in special classes, but the majority are still in the
regular classes. Some are so bad that they should be sent to an
institution where they can be properly cared for. Cases 17, 18, and
19 are obviously cases for an institution. They can never make
their way in society, and if left alone they are bound to become
public charges, the boys becoming criminals and paupers and the
girls in many cases becoming prostitutes. Goddard1 says- "the
feebleminded are potential paupers, criminals, prostitutes, and
drunkards?if we would go into the schools to-day and pick out
those children and take care of them, we could bring it about that
they would become happy and contented and partially useful persons." The frequency with which these cases commit crimes is too
well known to need discussion.2 The unfortunate part is that in
most cases society takes no steps to help matters until the crime has
been committed. School serves to keep these children off the streets,
and beyond this it gives them little help.

When it is realized that one feebleminded boy in a class can
greatly retard the work of the class and take up a large amount of
1 Goddard, H. H. The Criminal Imbecile.

2 Since writing this article, Case 20 has been arrested and sent to an institution for burning a grocery store
and later a barn.

the teacher's time that should be given to the other children,
parents of normal children will be more eager to meet this problem
of the feebleminded in the schools.

The problem of the dull and backward cases is different from
that of the definitely feebleminded. The backward cases can
maintain themselves in society, if they are given an education
fitted to their needs and mentality. Their failure to grasp the material taught in the ordinary school shows clearly that they are. not
receiving the education they need. The ordinary curriculum may
be all right for the ordinary child, but these children, backward and
feebleminded, get little benefit from it. They cannot grasp what
the teacher is trying to teach them, and as a result they drop farther
and farther behind their grades, and become discouraged with their
almost constant failures. They hang on to their disagreeable tasks as
long as the law compels them, and then drop out to fight life's
battles without a training that has fitted them to make a living, and
with a mentality below the average. In most cases, unless
the environment is very simple, failure awaits these cases no less
than it does the feebleminded. The tragedy of these backward
cases is that they could have been saved from social failure by the
proper training.

But how shall we determine what kind of an education is
needed for these cases? This should be determined by an expert
psychologist who should give a thorough mental examination to
each child to determine the mental status and what special abilities
and disabilities the child has. The psychologist could not only
determine the mental condition, but he could point out the work
which the child is best fitted to do. It may be said that little time
should be wasted with these cases, in teaching them the abstract
subjects. All efforts should be placed on making the boy or girl an
efficient worker in the world. Some of these children show a surprising amount of talent or skill in certain lines. For example, I
saw a little boy of about twelve who had not been able to pass the
second and third grades, but who could draw and paint so well that
he had received a fifty-dollar prize in an art contest. He was just
on the border line between feeblemindedness and backwardness.

But if he is educated along the line of his special ability and properly
looked after, he can make a good living out of his drawing and painting. Others have great skill in making things, and this ability
should be encouraged, and the child be allowed to devote himself to
this work almost exclusively. Some have special abilities in music.
The psychologist could prevent such cases from entering a profession
that they are not fitted for. If the individual lacks the ability to
make quick decisions and is not able to make quick motor reactions,
it is clear that he should not be, for example, a chauffeur.
Before this problem of the backward children in our schools can
be properly handled, parents must have a better understanding of
it. Every parent hates to admit that his child is not bright, and so
in most cases he keeps the child in the regular classes as long as
possible, and bitterly resents the placing of the child in a special
room, or even the suggestion that he shall not receive the ordinary
education that the other children are getting, but rather a special
education that will fit him definitely for a job. The average parent
is determined that his child is to have all the culture that is
coming to him.

One of the cases under the second head of dulness illustrates
this point. H. S. is an overgrown, rather dull-looking boy of 16
years and 9 months. He did so poorly in the seventh grade, failing
to pass after two years, that he was placed in a special seventh
grade. All of his brothers and sisters failed to go very far in school,
but the parents are determined that this boy shall go through college, so the teacher reports. Frequently, the mother visits the
school and wants to know why her boy is not advancing more rapidly.
Of course, the boy is doing as well as he can with the mind that he
has. He has a rather hang-dog look, and when asked why he did
not get along better in his school work, he said, "Aw, I can't do
arithmetic!" I asked him what he did like, and he said, with a
perceptible brightening of his face, "Oh, I like to make things, tables
and chairs and such things." I learned that the boy did very well
in his work in wood and manual arts. He might be trained to
become a cabinet-maker or something of the sort. Certainly he
will never fulfil his fond parents' wishes by becoming a university
man. His present work in school only serves to make him more and
more discouraged with the whole business.

Parents would probably take the word of a trained psychologist
regarding their child's mental condition and the need for special
education much quicker than that of the teacher or principal. And
if the principal wished to place the child in a special class and the
parents objected on the ground that the child was of normal mentality, they could be referred to the psychologist, who could show
them the mental tests given and the record of the child, and thus the
impressions and judgment of the teachers and principals could be
backed up by an authoritative mental examination.

Under the heading of "Backwardness due to some abnormality
of the internal secretions" are included only three cases. It is realized that many, if not most, of the feebleminded and backward
cases may be due to some abnormality of the internal secretions,
especially of the thyroid and the pituitary glands; but we have
included here only those cases that show other signs of abnormality of
the internal secretions beside that of mental retardation.
31. First grade, age 9 years. Very fat and lazy, moves slowly
and is very large for his age. There is probably some abnormality
in the secretion of the pituitary gland.

32. Sixth grade, age 14 years, 6 months. This boy is five feet
and ten inches in height, and weighs about 140 pounds. He is loosejointed and has a shambling gait. He looks stupid and foolish.
This is a case of overgrowth, almost of giantism, and is due to some
abnormality of the pituitary gland.

33. First grade, age 9 years. Dwarf, not three feet tall, stubby
fingers, characteristic of some abnormality of the thyroid gland.
Probably both thyroid and pituitary are affected.

These children require medical treatment which is expensive
and prolonged. This could only be obtained at the clinic of some of
the hospitals or medical schools in the large cities. And even there
it is not certain that they would be benefited, though there is a good
chance that they might be. Treatment consists in supplying them
with the secretion which they lack, the secretion being obtained
from the glands of the sheep or the ox.

Under the heading "Specialized Defects'* are included those
cases that are backward because of some special defect and not
because of an all-round dulness. Seven cases are included under
this head.

24. Second grade, age 10 years. This boy cannot read. He
has been two years in the first grade and two years in the second
grade, and his failure to pass has been due chiefly to his inability to
read. His vision tested 20-20 (normal).
25. Fifth grade, age 14 years. This boy stutters badly, his
retardation is due chiefly to his speech defect.
26. First grade, age 10 years, 4 months. This boy has a facial
tic, and also is a bad stutterer. Retardation caused chiefly by this
speech defect.
27. Fifth grade, age 14 years 2 months. Cannot do arithmetic.
Has to do summer school work to pass the grade even after two
years.

28. Sixth grade, age 15 years. This girl cannot learn arithmetic.
She repeated second, third, fourth, and fifth grades. She was
just passed along into the sixth, though she never passed the mathematics work of the fifth grade.
RETARDED CHILDREN IN^MADISON, WIS. x 261
29. Third grade. This girl's chief difficulty is in grasping
arithmetic. She is fair in her other studies.
30. Seventh grade, age 16 years 2 months. This boy repeated
the first, second, and third grades. He cannot read as well as a
child in the third grade, and he cannot do the spelling of the seventh
or .sixth grade. This defect in spelling is not an ordinary one. He
seems to have little comprehension either in reading or spelling or
writing of the sounds of the language. There is no defect in his
hearing. For example, he spells:

Mosquito ? musto
Horse ? hrorse
Adjective ? adjectiveably.
These words were given orally and he was made to repeat them
before spelling them by writing them. In reading, we find the same
defect. When he came to the word "enemy" he could not pronounce it. He was asked to spell it aloud. He did so, and then he
pronounced it "enmy", and he could do better after his attention
was called to the "e" in the word. This boy does fair work in his
other studies.

All of these cases of specialized defects require careful study by
a trained psychologist to determine what is the cause of the defect.
Such cases are a burden to the teacher who breaks her patience day
after day trying to teach the child something that he cannot learn.
The stutterers should receive some special training that would help
them to overcome their difficulty. There should be some provision
made to find these cases of speech defect as soon as they begin, and
not wait until they have become fixed in the life of the individual.
There were only three cases of neuroses found. There were
undoubtedly more than these, but the brief survey did not discover
them. By neurosis is meant a lack of mental adjustment, a mental
conflict that prevents the child from moulding himself to the school
routine. There is not lacking normal mental ability, but because
of the lack of adjustment, the child is unable to use his mental
powers to their full advantage. Perhaps stuttering should have
been included under this head, for this is a neurosis caused in most
cases by some mental conflict, but in the case of stuttering the
neurosis shows itself through such a definite defect that we placed
these cases under the heading of specialized defects. The three
cases included under this head show no special symptom, but a general lack of adjustment.
34. Fourth grade, age 14 years, 4 months. Boy was reared in
an orphanage. He does not know when he started to school; takes
no interest in his school work, and is a playground bully. He does
not seem dull, but impresses one as having some mental conflict,
and to lack adjustment. It is probably that his rearing has made
him quite anti-social.

35. Fourth grade, age 12 years, 10 months. Teacher reports
that this boy's mother is immoral. The boy has a shamed look all
the time. He lacks interest in his studies. There is probably a
mental conflict here due to home conditions that keeps the boy from
giving his mind to his school work.

36. Third grade, age 11 years, 10 months. This boy has a
facial tic and is very nervous and high-strung. The school routine
is probably not adapted to his needs.

It is well to remember that the school routine is made for the
average child, and there may be some whom the curriculum does not
fit, even though they may have ordinary, and even above the ordinary, mentality. Are not school authorities inclined to act like
Procrustes, who cut people off or stretched them out to fit his bed?
I know of an individual who was never able to pass the fourth grade
and who had to get her education in reading and observing and who
is nevertheless splendidly educated, and quite capable of carrying
on large affairs. The too hot and dry air of the school room, the
hard and ill-fitting seats, the dull, uninteresting routine were more
than her sensitive nervous system could stand. There was such a
perpetual unrest that application to her studies was impossible.
All of these cases of neuroses require a careful mental analysis
to discover the root of the conflict and as far as outside circumstances
allow, to adjust the child's life so that good work is possible.
In every school system, there are from two to five per cent
of the children who are not being educated, despite the best endeavors
of the teachers. The reasons for this are not simple, but are quite
complicated. The problem cannot be dismissed by saying that the
child is lazy or that he receives no encouragement at home. Adequately to meet the problem of the backward and retarded child
in the school requires the services of a trained psychologist, assisted
at times by a competent neurologist who has had experience in
dealing with neurotic and backward children. A psychological
clinic should be a part of every school system that numbers as many
as three or four thousand children. Such a clinic will really save
money, for it will take a burden off the teachers and enable them
to do more and better work with the normal children. The backward and feebleminded should receive special training in special
classes taught by specially trained teachers, the neurotic and those
with specialized defects should be studied and given such treatment
as needed. Often the principal is convinced that the child has need
of special training, but he has no authority to say that the child
must be placed in a special class. If there were a trained psychologist to make the examination, the parents would be more likely to
abide by the decision of the expert in mental examination. This
mental testing should not consist of the Binet-Simon test alone, but
should include as many other tests as may be necessary to form a
decision concerning the child's mental ability in language and
abstract subjects, as well as his motor control. In this way only
can the backward and retarded children be saved from sure suffering and failure. A properly organized psychological clinic, and
special classes for the training of the backward are as necessary for
the school as is medical inspection.
