American Psychological Literature
==================================

Art. V.-
■A. Pressure of domestic intelligence, relative to tlie special subject
°f this journal, has alone prevented us from bringing prominently
before our readers the various papers that have appeared from
time to time in our able transatlantic contemporary, the American
Journal of Insanity. We always read this peiiodical with much
pleasure and satisfaction. It is conducted in a liberal, humane,
enlightened, and philosophic spirit, free from all those narrow and
restricted views that so frequently destroy the practical operation of
all psychological inquiries. The editors and contributors to the
American Journal of Insanity are physicians immediately connected
with asylums, and practically conversant with the treatment of the
insane. This gives great force and value to their writings. In the
recent numbers of the journal, Dr Kirkbride has been publishing a
series of important papers on the " Organization of Hospitals for the
Insane," replete with valuable suggestive matter. These papers have
appeared in a separate volume, which will be reviewed on another
occasion. Dr Kirkbride writes like a man who has made good use of
his eyes. It is said, that " to see is not always to observe but I)r.
Kirkbride demonstrates to us that he is able to exercise both powers,
and that his faculty of observation is as keen as his sense of sight.
We particularly call the attention of all connected with the manage-
ment of our institutions, both public and private, to this valuable
series of papers. The memoir of Dr Bell, in the October number, is
written in a kind and Christian spirit, and, as the record ot the life of
a man who devoted his best days in promoting the interest of the
insane, it is well worthy of perusal. Dr Gait's " Essays on Insanity
in Italy" are highly valuable. The proceedings of the " Association of
Medical Officers of American Hospitals for the Insane" are fully re-
ported in various numbers of this journal, and are deeply interesting.

We cannot allow this opportunity to escape without thanking the
editors of the American Journal of Insanity for the kind and
generous way in which they invariably have spoken of our humble
labours to promote the advancement of psychological literature. The
last number of this journal contains a review of Dr Tuke's prize
essay on the " Moral Management of the Insane." The writer of the
criticism makes the following sensible remarks on the subject of
" Mechanical llestraint in the Treatment of the Insane
" Dr Tuke, after calling to mind the management of the insane
prior to 1792, traces the progress of that reform which was com-
menced simultaneously at that period by Pinel in France and his own
progenitor, William Tuke, in England. He views with great satisfac-
tion the prevailing disuse of restraint, and though he does not dis-
tinctly favour its entire abolition, yet he intimates that, by the aid of
certain practicable substitutes, it may be almost, if not altogether,
dispensed with. He pretends to no original ideas on the subject, nor
does he go into a very elaborate examination of the merits of the ques-
tion. This we rather regret, because the friends of the non-restraint
practice must now be able, if ever, to meet the objections which have
been offered against it. That they never have been fairly disposed of,
we firmly believe. On the contrary, if there is any one fact in the
management of the insane better settled than any other, we are con-
vinced that it is this—that there are cases of insanity, more or less
frecpient, in which the highest welfare of the patient is promoted by
mechanical restraint.

"Considering how little restraint has been used, for many years, in
the principal English establishments, we cannot help thinking that the
importance of this question has been greatly over-rated. If the super-
intendent of a hospital has reason to think that a case occasionally
occurs—one or two in a hundred—which is benefited by mechanical
restraint, why should he not be allowed to use it ? Why should uni-
formity be required in the matter more than in any point of treat-
ment ? If he may be allowed to use narcotics, for instance, or cold
baths, or hot baths, to an unprecedented degree, and be praised, per-
haps, for his boldness, it is not very obvious why he should be de-
nounced, or regarded as behind the age, because in a few cases he ap-
proves of confining his patient's limbs with a bit of leather. If, in
1S15, when the monstrous abuses of the English hospitals were brought
to light, the cry of'No restraint' had been raised, it would have been
abundantly justified. But it was just at the time when the spirit of
improvement had reduced the amount of mechanical restraint to almost
nothing—when, in short, this remarkable reform might be safely left
to take care of itself—that the public was agitated with this contro-
versy about non-restraint. In the Lincoln Asylum it seems that, from
1829 to 1837, the amount of restraint steadily diminished from thirty-
nine, the number of patients being seventy-two, to two, while the
number of patients had risen to 130. And yet, in the face of this ex-
perience, it was resolved, in the last-mentioned year, to abolish the use
of mechanical restraint in every case whatever. A similar piece of
history, we presume, would be furnished by many other establishments.
We have always supposed that in England the hostility to restraint arose
from the fact that in their very large establishments it was quite impos-
sible for the physicians to regulate the application of restraint by their
own knowledge of the exigencies of the case, and thus prevent it from
becoming, in the hands of attendants, an intolerable evil. Some of the
distinguished advocates of non-restraint, we are aware, place themselves
upon higher ground than practical expediency. They oppose restraint
because, they say, it is never necessary, and always injurious. This
conclusion, however, appears to be more like an extravagant expression
of warm and earnest feeling, than the result of careful experiment or
extensive observations.

" The manner in which this subject has been forced upon the public
notice has led, we fear, to another kind of restraint more to be de-
plored than any that was ever placed on the limbs of the insane. When
conversing on this question with the superintendents of hospitals, while
in England, a few years ago, we thought we sometimes perceived a
fear oi maintaining individual convictions against a public sentiment
which had become Intolerant and proscriptive. When a vexed ques-
tion has a popular side to it, there is no longer freedom of opinion,
^or real progress; because, rather than incur the popular odium, a
man will be apt to keep his opinions to himself, instead of permitting
them to shape his own practice, and, as far as they deserve, the prac-
tice of others. We have no hesitation in saying that the state
°1 feeling and thinking on this subject ol restraint, in England, is
not that, exactly, best calculated to advance the interests of science
or humanity.

" Dr Tuke burns, as we say of children playing at hide and seek,
when he declares that the non-restraint system can never become prac-
ticable nor beneficial, unless the government of the asylum is of a very
high moral character. If the character of the management is so
effectual in preventing the incidental evils of non-restraint—in making
it, as he says, a blessing instead of a curse—it would seem to be an
easy inference that it would be equally effectual in preventing the
abuses of restraint. So that, in fact, as it respects the welfare of the
insane, the really important issue is not between restraint and non-
restraint, but between a government which is actuated by high moral
considerations, using every available means to promote the good of the
patient, and by kindness and vigilance averting every unnecessary
abuse, and one careless and indolent, swayed by one idea, and anxious
only to catch the popular breeze.

" In this country, fortunately, the question of restraint or non-
restraint has always been viewed as one of subordinate importance. We
seldom hear it spoken of; and in the meetings of the Association of
Superintendents of Hospitals it has never, to our recollection, been a
subject of discussion. And yet, we apprehend, it is not often used to
an unnecessary extent, even in those hospitals which are most poorly
endowed with what Dr Tuke regards as indispensable substitutes for
restraint. It seems to be understood among those who are devoted to
this department of the profession, that every one must judge for him-
self whether the amount of restraint shall be reduced to one per cent,
or to zero, and that his conclusion on this point, whatever it may be,
cannot fairly subject him to censure. Here, as well as everywhere
else, the privilege of free and independent inquiry cannot be invaded
without ultimate injury to the cause. If the time should ever come
when the superintendents of our hospitals will be obliged to enter upon
their duties with the details of their management all prepared for them,
seeing everything with the eyes of others, and governed by popular
sentiment rather than the sense of right, that time would witness the
end of all genuine progress. Let us beware how we allow the first
step to be taken in this direction, and resist every attempt to prescribe
opinions and practices which should flow only from one's own honest
and deliberate convictions."

In noticing the two medico-juridical trials, reported in the October
number of the "Psychological Journal," viz., the will case, Hoharts v.
Kerslalce, and the criminal case of Mrs. Brough, the editor ex-
presses his concurrence in the medico-legal view taken by the editor
of this journal of these two important cases. This cannot be other-
wise than highly gratifying to our feelings. Of the former case, the
editor observes, after detailing the salient points given in evidence,
" A careful perusal of all the testimony leads to the conclusion that
Mr. Roberts was insane when he executed his will. The act itself,
right and proper as it may have been, does not argue that the mind
of the testator was sound."

In reference to the case of Mrs. Brough, the editor remarks,—
" We have given all the important testimony in this case, which
Dr Winslow justly remarks, is destined, ' from its peculiar features, to
take a permanent position among the causes cclebres of British criminal
jurisprudence.' The acquittal of the prisoner 011 the plea of insanity is
a recognition of a form of mental disease—or, to speak more correctly,
a phase of mental disease—which has usually been regarded by English
and American courts as simply the exhibition of ungoverncd passion,
the consequences of which, if injurious to others, should subject the
individual to punishment. Every one at all familiar with the insane
knows the power ol the passions and impulses over the actions, when
the self-conscious, self-governing principle is impaired or suspended.

In the case of Mrs. Brough we have a mother who has always been
kind and indulgent to her children, and had just nursed them through
a long illness. She had previously suffered from cerebral disease and
paralysis. She is detected by lier hushand in what he believes to be a
criminal intimacy, and he at once leaves her. Now, here is a great
moral shock — a sufficient cause for the sudden development of a
paroxysm of mania in a person whose brain was already diseased. But
it is said that the act was prompted by revenge,—that she had been
detected in infidelity to her marriage vow, and fearing that her children
would be taken from her, and that she would be thrown, an outcast
from society, upon the world's cold charities, she deliberately and with
inalice committed the horrid deed. The history of the case, however,
precludes such an opinion, and we are pleased to see a decision founded
alike upon justice and humanity."
