Oinomania; Or the Mental Pathology of Intemperance
===================================================

THE JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINE AND MENTAL PATHOLOGY

APRIL 1, 1855.
Art. I.

Ik our last Number we briefly referred to a noble effort now in
progress in the United States of America to establish an " Inebriate V(£ -f. J"Q.
Institution" for the reception and treatment of that form of insanity, or
monomania manifesting itself principally in a morbidly uncontrollable
propensity for alcoholic stimulants. We do not refer to drunkenness
or intemperance in the popular signification of the terms, but to a phase
of disordered mind, of cerebral disease, the prominent symptom being an
irresistible yearning for intoxicating drinks. The experienced physician
and pathologist may easily distinguish between ordinary habits of in-
temperance and "fits" of drunkenness and the form of insanity to which
we allude. This mental disorder exists to a frightful extent in all
classes of society, from the highest to the lowest grade, and is destruc-
tive, beyond all conception, to domestic happiness, to national pros-
perity, and to social and private morals. It is a form of alienation of
mind which has,to a great degree, escaped medical and general observa-
tion, and may therefore be classed among the unrecognised phases of
mental derangement. The subject, we admit, is a delicate and difficult
one to grapple with, mainly in consequence of the prevailing fallacies
existing in the public mind with respect to morbid affections of the
intellect. This must not, however, deter us from breaking ground upon
so important a matter.

There have been large contributions to the literature of drunken-
ness in England of late. Twenty years ago a numerous Committee of
the House of Commons collected a vast mass of information on the
subject by special inquiry.* Dr Carpenter has recently published a
* "Report of an Inquiry into Drunkenness,"ordered by tlie House of Commons
to be printed, 5 August, 1834.

valuable essay on the subject,* and we have just received an eloquent
and well-written work on the Pathology of Drunkenness, from the pen
of an intelligent Scotch physician.t To these, other names of English
authors might be added. Very able writers in Germany, Sweden, Den-
mark, &c., have also added largely to our knowledge. Amongst these
may be mentioned Friedreich, Briihl-Cramer, Barkhausen, Most,
Heinroth, Lippich, Rosch, Huss, &c. Twenty years of uninterrupted
inquiry, and an experience of the affection most widely extended, must
be considered sufficient for a thorough elucidation of its general
pathology and therapeutics.

Polydipsia ebriosa, or drinking to drunkenness, shows itself
in various ways. First in order comes the habitual sot—the man
or woman who drinks from early morn to dewy eve, and who is
either always drunken, or more deeply drunken, either at night or
twice in each day. This, for practical purposes, may be termed con-
tinuous drunkenness. Next is the intermittent form, in which there
are two or three days of continuous drunkenness, then two or three
days of entire or partial abstinence from alcoholic drinks. This is seen
most typically in mechanics of drunken habits, who drink from
Saturday night to Monday night or Tuesday morning, and then, going
to their usual employments, continue sober for the rest of the week.
This intermittent drunkenness is, for the most part, unconnected with
any morbid changes in the nervous system; and in this essential
respect it differs from continuous drunkenness, and from an inter-
mittent form, which recurring at much longer intervals may be termed
paroxysmal drunkenness. Writers mention other forms, but they do
not present points of difference sufficiently important for recognition
as distinct from the preceding, being, in fact, those forms in varying
degrees of intensity, or commingled, or else instances complicated
with other diseases of the nervous system.

Polydipsia ebriosa, we hardly need say, is not necessarily insanity,
for the "thirsty soul" may usually be rendered amenable to those
motives which regulate the conduct of rational or sane men. That
drunkenness can only be designated insane (Polydipsia ebriosa insana,
Dipsomania, Oinomania) which is induced by the action of an impulsive
desire for stimulant drinlcs, uncontrollable by any motives that can be
addressed to the understanding or conscience : in ivhich self-interest,
self-esteem, friendship, love, religion, are appealed to in vain; in which
the passion for stimulant drinks is the master-passion, and subdues to
* " On the Use and Abuse of Alcoholic Liquors in Health and Disease." Prize
Essay. By William B. Carpenter, M.D., F.R. S., &c. 1850.

f "The Pathology of Drunkenness : a View of the Operation of Ardent Spirits
in the Production of Disease." By Charles Wilson, M.D. 1855.
itself every other desire and faculty of the soul. We say stimulant
drinks, for we speak of intoxication in the ordinary sense of the
word; but, in truth, the mania has a wider range of victims than the
drunkard, and includes all those who indulge uncontrollably in nar-
cotic and stimulating drugs, as the drunkard indulges in alcoholic drinks.
The confirmed opium-eater is, therefore, virtually, although not ety-
jnologically, in the same category as the oinomaniac; for he is equally
the slave to his insane appetite. A word is yet to be invented which
shall designate correctly the form of mental aberration to which we
refer. We will not venture the attempt, but will simply define it to
be an insane appetite for those agents which received into the blood
develop the pleasurable feelings of mental or corporeal well-being—a
state of contentment, ease of mind or of body, attributed, in popular
language, to "the spirits"—so as to raise "the spirits," and induce
satisfaction, happiness, and cheerfulness, or else antagonize the
opposite condition to this feeling of mental or physical well-being, and
so counteract unhappiness, " lowness of spirits," or depression of the
vital and mental powers.

The circumstances under which nervine stimulants are taken are very
various and widely different. The most general excitant of the appe-
tite is that condition of the mind in which there is simply a desire for
pleasureable excitement and little power of will to resist the tempta-
tion to gratify the desire. Persons of this class are numerous in the
world. They have hereditarily a large capacity for physical enjoy-
ment, conjoined with feeble intellect or judgment, or, if not feeble, are
highly susceptible to all painful and pleasurable impressions, and are
often the offspring of persons who have indulged in stimulants, or who
have iveaTcened the cerebral organization by vicious habits and undue
mental labour. Not unfrequently there is a hereditary tendency in the
family to hysteria, convulsive affections, eccentricity of character,
oinomania, suicide; perhaps, in one branch or member, great talent; in
another, a weakness of mind amounting almost to imbecility. The
immediate result of the action of alcohol upon the system of a person
in health is a more vigorous and agreeable discharge of all the vital
functions. The blood courses more rapidly through the bloodvessels;
the voice is more sonorous ; the eye more bright; the muscular system
braced up. But it is the nervous system which responds most readily
to the stimulus. The intellect is clearer, the imagination more vivid,
the memory more distinct, the thoughts more definite; in short, all the
faculties are exalted. As to the emotions—joy, exhilaration, and good-
fellowship are the principal results : as to the appetites, an increased de-
velopment. If the stimulus be taken in larger quantity so as to act as a
poison—i.e., to derange the functions—morbid phenomena in connexion
with the encephalic centres are induced. The individual, perhaps,
manifests more clearly his natural infirmities of character. The irri-
table and ill-tempered become quarrelsome; the silly, good-natured, and
the foolish are officiously urgent in offers of kindness, laugh wildly and
are tickled by trifles ; and the melancholic become maudlin sentimental.
Sometimes an individual passes through successive phases of mental
change—as thus : at the first half-bottle of wine he is energetic, dig-
nified, and decided, and his conversation is of affairs of moment. At
the second he is mirthful, and indulges in the song and the jest. His
motto is " cJuice est desipere in loco." At the third he is emotional
and sentimental, easily moved to tears, and becomes, perhaps, amorous,
or religious, as individual circumstances may determine. At the
fourth, he is quarrelsome and incoherent; at the fifth, the cerebellum
is manifestly more deeply involved, for he has now lost the power of
co-ordinating the muscular system, so that he totters and staggers, or
else is affected with motus vertiginosi—reeling movements—of various
kinds. At the sixth, total abolition of consciousness supervenes,
and that condition is attained in which the sot is said to be " dead-
drunk."

Now, strange as it may appear, this last is the condition desired by
many drunkards; it is the summum bonum of their mental and
physical existence. Smollett tells us that, in 1742, when distilled
liquors were very cheap (being free from duty), the retail dealers put
up boards inviting people to be drunk for the small charge of one
penny, and dead-drunk for two-pence, with straw free to lie on. Cel-
lars and places strewed with straw were actually provided for these
devotees of Lethe. It is to this grovelling felicity that the habitual
drunkard usually comes at last, however intellectual, witty, and gay
he may have been, when he first began his career.

It is obvious, however, that the stimulant will be taken in quanti-
ties and at times in accordance with the corporeal and mental character-
istics of the individual. With the educated, wine is drunk to make
glad the heart and to invigorate the social feelings. To these results
the lyrical poetry of the wine-cup invariably points. Anacreon
expressly repudiates the corporeal delights and bestial excesses of the
savage; he mingled water, like the ancient Greeks in general, with his
wine.

" No! banish from our board to-night
The revelries of rude delight;
To Scythians leave these wild excesses,
Ours be the joy that soothes and blesses !
And while the temperate bowl we wreathe,
In concert let our voices breathe,
Beguiling every hour along
"With harmony of soul and song."

To antagonize depressing' passions, as well as to exhilarate, is often
the end of conviviality. Care and anxiety, grief and sorrow, depress
the action of the heart, and if they do not make it literally ache, they
are often accompanied by a tendency to sigh and a feeling of sinking
in the epigastric region. The stimulus of wine has been from time
immemorial appreciated as the most ready and effectual antidote to
these depressing emotions and sensations.
" Behold! my boys a goblet bear,
Whose sparkling foam lights up the air;
Where are now the tear, the sigh ?
To the winds they fly, they fly!
Grasp the bowl; in nectar sinking,
Man of sorrow, drown thy thinking !"

A great proportion of persons who take stimulant agents suffer from
an indescribably painful feeling of languor and corporeal illness, which
a stimulus is found to remove. This feeling is intolerable to those who,
like the English opium-eater, " hanker too much after a state of
happiness," or who " cannot face misery with an eye of sufficient
firmness," so that the desire to relieve it becomes uncontrollable.
Amongst the causes of these sensations may be mentioned those
nervous affections which more particularly have their seat in that part
of the nervous system which is the seat of the feeling of well-being,
and which ministering to the functions of viscera in important
relation to life, involve, therefore, the instincts for life and well-
being. Certain diseases of the heart, impeding its functional activity
or rendering its action painful, induce this depressed condition. Morbid
states of the stomach and bowels, either inflammatory or irritative, in
which digestion is accompanied by pain and a distressing sensation of
weakness in the epigastrium, are amongst the most frequent causes
of habitual drunkenness and opium-eating. Of these, chronic gastritis
or enteritis are perhaps the most common. To some such state
the English opium-eater refers when he asserts that when he first took
opium, it was to mitigate a most painful affection of the stomach that
occurred under unfavourable circumstances, from depression of spirits,
and yielded to no other remedies. The same writer observes that the
Dean of    and a late under-secretary of state, both used the
same words to describe the sensation which induced them first to be-
come opium-eaters,—viz., " that he felt as though rats were gnawing
and abrading the coats of the stomach." Hepatic or splenic derange-
ment constitutes another not unfrequent and well-known source of this
intolerable mal-aise. Equally frequent, but less recognised, is a chronic
inflammation or irritation of the mucous membrane of the large intestine,
resembling that which attacks the stomach, and, like that, deeply influ-
encing the consciousness as to pleasure and pain. Morbid states of the
blood are also amongst the causes of the physical depression, especially
those induced by an imperfect supply of oxygen (as when a vitiated
atmosphere is habitually breathed), by an imperfect supply of proper
nutrient materials, or by the retention of excreta, as the biliary,
urinary, &c.. Or the morbid condition, on which the distressing feelings,
depend, may be a change primarily in those ganglionic centres we
have referred to, embedded in the cerebral mass, and are certainly
in relation with the whole sympathetic system of nerves, however im-
perfectly their anatomy may be known to the anatomist and physi-
ologist. Such a morbid condition may be classed with the true
neuralgia) or nerve-aches, inasmuch as the causes which induce the
latter are continually the causes of the former. Perhaps the most
common of all is the excessive use or stimulation of any portion of the
nervous system.

It is a law of the organism that after a period of action there shall
be a period of rest,—after excitement, comes repose. If the latter fail to
be induced, pain and morbid action result. The excitement and in-
creased action induced by vinous or narcotic stimulants, is not an
exception to the law. On the contrary, the need for repose is strongly
expressed by the organism in the general feeling of languor and
depression which succeeds to the excitement, so soon as the stimulant
effects of the agent have passed off. This feeling does not, however,
precede the tranquil rest and refreshing slumber that commonly follow
upon labour honestly and temperately pursued ; nor is the rest sweet,
as in the latter case Nature provides it shall be.

The depression which is felt treacherously points the sufferer to the-
cause as the remedy for the feeling, and since it effectually answers the
purpose—at least temporarily—the thoughtless and imprudent do not
hesitate to take it. They have now, indeed, a double inducement to
drink,—firstly, to dispel " the bluessecondly, to secure pleasurable
excitement. In this way a poison is. taken from day to day, and the-
man becomes at last the subject of the maniacal vice of continuous
drunkenness. He has, finally, induced cerebral disease, from the con-
sequences of which he can hardly escape with all appliances and means
in his favour that art can afford.

Let us now trace the pathological influence of alcohol on the brain, from
its first beginnings to the fatal close in mania, general paralysis,or death.

We have already cursorily described the ordinary phenomenon of a
fit of drunkenness. The principal characteristic is, that the power of
the will over the current of thought and over the actions is weakened,
and weakened for the most part, pari passu, with the amount of
stimulant taken. Now, as this is the principal characteristic of mania,
it may be stated that during a fit of drunkenness, the individual is in
a condition quasi his cerebrum, analogous to that of the insane person.
The action of alcohol is therefore concentrated on the brain. As to the
different parts of the brain implicated and disordered, it would appear
that they are affected from above downwards. Firstly, the cerebral hemi-
spheres, as the seat of intellect and imagination, manifest the action of
the poison, next the emotional centres are excited, then the more
animal passions are roused, the motor and sensorial centres are next
disordered, and finally the sympathetic system. Dr Carpenter thinks
that the specific exciting effect of alcohol upon the nervous centres
can only be accounted for by the theory of some special relation
between it and nervous matter. And this idea is fully borne out, he
thinks, by the results of the experimental researches instituted by Dr.
Percy, who found alcohol in the substance of the brains of dogs
poisoned by it, in a proportion considerably greater than in an equiva-
lent quantity of blood. In short, Dr Carpenter argues that the cere-
bral substance manifests an elective affinity for alcohol in the blood:
" the alcohol being thus specially drawn out of the circulating current
by the nervous matter, and incorporated with its substance, in such a
manner as even to change (when in sufficient amount) its physical as
well as chemical properties." Its action is thus described by Dr.
Carpenter:—

" The selective power of alcohol appears to lead it in the first in-
stance to attack the cerebrum, the intellectual powers being affected
before any disorder of sensation or motion manifests itself; and to this
it seems to be limited in what has been here described as the first stage
of intoxication. But with the more complete perversion of the intel-
lectual powers which characterises the second stage, we have also a
disturbed function of the sensory ganglia, upon which the cerebral
hemispheres are superposed; this disturbance being indicated by the
disorders of sensation, and also by the want of that control over the
muscnlar movements which require sensation for their guidance. In
the third stage, the functions of the cerebrum and sensory ganglia
appear to be completely suspended, and those of the medulla oblongata
and spinal cord now begin to be affected, as we see to be indicated by
the difficulty of respiration, the strabismus, the dilated pupil, and the
tetanic spasms."

There is considerable difference, however, in the temporary insanity
and the other phenomena of morbid cerebral action induced by
alcohol. It is certain that in some persons the influence on the motor
system is much more manifest than on the sensorial, for in the class
of cases to which we refer, while the individual sits still, he but
slightly betrays his devotion to the glass, and it is only when he
attempts locomotion that it is discovered he is too drunk to walk.
This and other special states are referred to by Dr Wilson.

" Sometimes a kind of reverie occupies the transition stage between
that of excitement and complete intoxication, and the individual
remains for a while in a state of simpering quiescence. With another,
one solitary idea, generally some real or fancied subject of offence,
seems to lay hold of all that is left of the intelligence, and he
mutters his resentment with stolid perseverance. In some, the
drunkenness sets in suddenly, after the drinking has been continued
for a time previously without any marked indication of its effects;
while in a few examples, the power of locomotion seems to be impli-
cated to a greater extent than that of the intelligence, and the
drunkard loses the faculty of rendering his movements co-ordinate, and
reels and staggers in his gait, though he still retains an entire consci-
ousness of his condition. Or there may be the contrary of this, which
is not of unfrequent occurrence, where the staring, vacant eye, and the
expressionless features, with the inarticulate speech, surprise one in an
individual who can still walk with almost perfect steadiness, though
with a peculiar air of indecision in his movements. In such instances,
which, in common with most observers, I have repeatedly had occasion
to remark, there are physiological grounds for believing that, in the first
description, it is the cerebellum, or smaller division of the brain, which
is chiefly affected; and in the latter, the cerebrum, or larger division."
Doubtless individuals differ widely as to the relative vigour of the
various divisions of the nervous centres, and as to their susceptibility
to assume a morbid condition on the application of morbific agents;
a difference to which may be obviously attributed the variety in the
phenomena of intoxication by alcohol. The congenital condition of
the nervous system, the education and employments, and the addiction
to other vices, as gluttony, debauchery, &c., are causes of fundamental
differences. The length of period during which the brain has been
subjected to the action of the poison, must exercise an important
influence. It may be stated, in general terms, that the phenomena of
intoxication are as varied as those of mental derangement.

We may with propriety here revert to another point in the
natural history of drunkenness, namely, the dangerous adulteration
of spirits and intoxicating liquors.* Poisonous ingredients may be
added either wilfully or accidentally. In England, common malt
liquors are rendered stronger, that is, more intoxicating, by the addition
of cocculus Indicus. In countries where spirits are distilled from pota-
toes and the cereals indiscriminately, it is probable that they are adul-
terated with some of the nervine-irritants and acro-narcotic poisons
common to a large number of fungi. Dr Huss is of opinion that the
brandy distilled from diseased potatoes contains some new principle,
termed by the Swedish distillers " brannsnyta," which is not to be
met with in spirit distilled from fresh potatoes or sound grain, and the
operation of which is similar to that of alcohol. In Germany, a some-
* Vide Dr Hassall's valuable work, recently published, "On Pood, and its
Adulterations." 1855.

what similar principle is obtained from distilled spirits, termed " fusel
oil." The common Lolium, and the JRaphania rajphanistrum, (a weed
growing in the corn-fields in Sweden and most parts of northern
Europe,) are both poisonous. Linnaeus, believing the latter to produce
the kind of phenomena known as Ergotism, (that is, the results of
poisoning by ergotted or spurred rye,) termed the disease Raphania.
Amongst these phenomena are enumerated epilepsy, delirium, insanity,
and idiotcy. Although the police in Germany interfere to prevent
the sale of spurred rye for food, they do not prevent its use in
distilling, nor the use of the poisonous cereals we have noticed. In
fact, any vegetable matter capable of the saccharine fermentation, is
used by distillers in Germany and the north of Europe—spurred rye,
mildewed grain, bad potatoes, husks of grapes, &c. Now, all these have
a very close connexion with microscopic fungi ; and hence the proba-
bility, that the known poisonous principles of these minute mushroom
growths are held in solution in these foreign kinds of spirits, and may
be the true source of the acrid stupifying properties which they especially
possess. Further, the fusel-oil itself is not pure, but contains metallic
oxides of known virulent action on the nervous system. One specimen
the concrete oil, when examined, was found to contain 32"3 per cent, of
these oxides, namely:—22*5 oxide of copper, 6*3 oxide of tin, and 3*5
oxide of lead! How much of the poisonous principle derived from the
lolium, or from the ergot, or from the poisonous fungi that constitute
the deadly vegetation of the distillers' refuse, enters into the hideous
compounds which the drunkard swallows hourly, it is not practicable
to determine, nor is it of importance to our subject. Certain it is, that
poisons of this kind are taken with the inferior spirits.
The action of opium, hasaieh, and other drugs upon the nervous
system, taken for the same purposes as alcohol, differs considerably
from that of the latter agent. As regards the mental powers,
opium seems to act almost exclusively upon those portions of the
cerebral hemispheres which constitute the seat of the intellect and
imagination. The " Confessions of an English Opium-Eater" contains
an instructive comparison of the effects of opium and alcohol:—
" Crude opium, I affirm peremptorily, is incapable of producing any
state of body at all resembling that which is produced by alcohol; and
not in degree only incapable, but even in kind; it is not in the
quantity of its effects merely, but in the quality, that it differs
altogether. The pleasure given by wine is always mounting, and
tending to a crisis, after which it declines; that from opium, when
once generated, is stationary for eight or ten hours; the first, to
borrow a technical distinction from medicine, is a case of acute—the
second, of chronic pleasure; the one is a flame, the other a steady
and equable glow. But the main distinction lies in this—that whereas
wine disorders the mental faculties, opium, on the contrary, (if taken
in a proper manner,) introduces among them the most exquisite order,
legislation, and harmony. Wine robs a man of his self-possession;
opium greatly invigorates it. Wine unsettles and clouds the judg-
ment, and gives a preternatural brightness, and a vivid exaltation to
the contempts and the admirations, the loves and the hatreds, of the
drinker; opium, on the contrary, communicates serenity and equipoise
to all the faculties, active or passive In short, to sum up alL
in one word, a man who is inebriated, or tending to inebriation, is, and
feels that he is, in a condition which calls up into supremacy the
merely human, too often the brutal, part of his nature ; but the opium-
eater (I speak of him who is not suffering from any disea'se, or other
remote effects of opium,) feels that the diviner part of his nature is
paramount; that is, the moral affections are in a state of cloudless
serenity, and over all is the great light of the majestic intellect."
The influence of these nervine poisons is not limited, however, to
the cerebral tissues. The entire nervous system participates in the
morbid action, and consequently the spinal and sympathetic ganglia
are also involved. As to these latter, opium and alcohol appear to
have widely different relations, for the immediate influence of opium
upon the viscera is almost exclusively sedative, of alcohol, stimulant.
This difference of action shows itself also in a marked manner in the
more permanent morbid changes induced by the two poisons; for
opium finally exalts sensibility, alcohol abolishes it. These more per-
manent changes merit inquiry.

The constantly recurring action of a nervine stimulus, follows in its
results on the appetite the law of habit; that is to say, it is at last a
necessary stimulus, and is urgently desired, in the same way as food,
drink, &c. But there is this difference between this morbid and a
natural appetite for a stimulus—that when the latter is artificial and
induces pathological changes, the need for it augments pari passu
with the changes themselves. In habitual drunkenness, and in opium-
eating, this is undoubtedly the case, although there are exceptional
instances even as to them. The quantity of alcohol taken occasionally
in these gradually increasing doses, is in some instances enormous.
Dr Farre mentioned to the Committee of Inquiry of the House of
Commons, the case of a gin-drinker, " the largest man he ever saw," who
had been known to drink seventy-two glasses of the usual drams at a
sitting. Dr Wilson mentions several similar instances. An inmate of the
workhouse at Hanover had been in the habit of taking from half a gallon
to a gallon of spirits almost every day. Chomel cites the instance of a
patient aged thirty-four, who had been in the habit of drinking fifteen
bottles of wine and four of brandy, daily, Esquirol knew another
instance in which 171 petits verres of brandy was the daily consumption.
The cause of this insatiable thirst for stimulants lies partly in the
state of the blood and the nervous centres, partly in the morbid state of
the stomacli. In the absence of the alcohol from the former, there is in
fact nothing to supply .its place, as in ordinary health ; while in the
inflamed and irritated state of the gastric mucous surface, there is a
direct excitant of the morbid sensations we have described as resulting
from this cause. Hence that indescribable feeling' of sinking and
oppression, which renders life intolerable to the drunkard, until the
nervous centres are again stimulated. As the action of the alcohol
gradually abates, in consequence of its being used up or eliminated by
the excreting surfaces, a fresh supply is continually taken to supply
the waste, except during sleep. This cessation from the action of the
stimulant during the night is the principal, though not perhaps the
sole, reason why the nervous depression is the greatest, and the thirst
for spirits so urgent, on awaking in the morning.

At this, the confirmed stage of alcoholic intoxication, the brain is
diseased, and both the motor and intellectual powers are, for the most
part, enfeebled. The sufferer (for such he emphatically is) ,is incapable of
any prolonged bodily exertion or continuous thought, and the incapacity
for fixing the attention may increase so as to amount to confusion of ideas.
Spectral illusions are not unfrequent, even although there be no actual
approach to delirium, and imaginary sounds and voices are heard. The
moral and emotional feelings undergo a degradation progressing pari
passu with the cerebral disease, so that the high-minded, honourable
man has become a cunning, selfish liar or cheat, the religious man
a sensualist, the faithful husband an adulterer, the indulgent father a
ferocious tyrant and a constant terror to his family. German writers
(as Clauss and Bemdt) take special note of this change in the moral
character of the drunkard, designating it Inhumanitas ebriosa. They
distinguish two principal forms, namely, JFerocitas ebriosa and Moro-
sitas ebriosa ; the former is seen in men of powerful frame, is charac-
terised by brutal violence, and often ends in furious mania; the latter
is seen in individuals of a more delicate organization, following seden-
tary employments, and is apt to end in melancholia or suicide. Nothing
is more certain in the progress of intoxication than this moral degra-
dation. The history of drunkenness abounds with illustrations of the
general principle so striking that they would be incredible if not con-
firmed by daily observation. We find the following in the Parlia-
mentary Report of 1834. A widow, the aunt of a most celebrated and
distinguished vocalist, fell into habits of gin-drinking and wasted her
fortune. One of her sons was in the employ of Mr. Samuel Herapath,
(who relates the history,) and lodged with a poor woman. He happened
to go home to his wretched mother one Saturday night, and the con-
sequence was, that while he was asleep she robbed him of his earnings,
and pawned his shirt and coat to spend all in drink. The boy being
ashamed to go back to his employer, she persuaded him to turn pick-
pocket, and he was ultimately transported. The same woman had
actually taken every tooth out of her head except two, and sold them, so
as to be able to purchase gin; and she would have sold these also, but
she could only get fourpence for the last one she had sold. Mr.
Poynder mentioned to the Parliamentary Committee the instance of a
man of the name of Smith, a drunkard, who was tried for setting fire
to his house, in Newgate-street, and whose wife died almost immediately
after he was suspected of doing it. The jury acquitted him on the
ground that it was possible his wife (also a drunkard) had done it.

On his death-bed he confessed that he actually had induced her to set
fire to the house, and had poisoned her as soon as suspicion fell upon
him, least she should betray his secret. Ferocious crimes of every kind,
prostitution, and the lowest licentious indulgence are also amongst the
moral degradations of the drunkard. Domestic virtue and happiness
are utterly annihilated. Mr. Broughton mentioned to the Parlia-
mentary Committee an instance of a family, the father and mother of
which were both habitual drunkards. The father was a respectable
mechanic, and, in addition to earnings of two guineas a-week, might
have had an income from property that came to him by will, of 200Z.
a-year. Yet his home was worse than a dog-kennel: it was one room ;
there was no bed, only a few old rags in a corner, into which his four
children huddled; all occasions of nature in both ways were done in
the room; and it was quite clear, from inspection, that for the com-
mon purposes of nature they never went anywhere else. As to the
development of the ferocious characteristics of man by drunkenness,
the police reports in the newspapers are full of the most painful ex-
amples. Brutal violence to the nearest and dearest relatives is a fre-
quent result of alcoholic poisoning.

The transition from this degradation of the moral and intellectual
faculties, as the result of morbid cerebral action, to actual and acknow-
ledged insanity, is but a step. All persons experienced in the treatment
of this disease are well conversant with the general fact, that drunken-
ness is amongst the more common causes of mental derangement, not
only, indeed, by the direct morbific action of alcohol on the enceplialon
of the individual, but also by the transmission of a special con-
stitution of the nervous system (thus acquired) to his offspring,
Avhich renders them peculiarly liable to nervous affections of every
kind, but more particularly to various forms of insanity, amongst
which may be specially mentioned that uncontrollable desire for stimu-
lants, termed oinomania. Delirium tremens, or the drunkard's deli-
rium, is, in fact, an acute paroxysm of mania running its course quickly,
and it is only in the acuteness of its progress, and the intensity of its
symptoms, that it differs from mania ebriosa, or a potu—a real insanity.

This latter affection appears under various forms, and is relatively of
frequent occurrence. In the statistical tables contained in the Report
of the Commissioners of Lunacy for 1844, illustrating the etiology of
insanity, 15 per cent, of the cases then under treatment were attri-
buted to drunkenness. Dr Carpenter justly observes, that of 4'6 per
cent., in which it is attributed to vice and sensuality, an excessive use
of alcoholic liquors must have shared. Moreover, in every case in
which hereditary predisposition was traceable, that alone was men-
tioned, although it is certain that such predisposition may remain
dormant altogether, if not excited into action by habitual drunken-
ness. It is probable that, at the lowest, the proportion of one-
fourth, or 25 per cent., of all cases of insanity may be attributed
to habitual intoxication, considered both as an exciting and pre-
disposing cause. This ratio will necessarily vary, however, according
as the general population is more or less given to drunkenness. In
the Report of the Commissioners, the proportion assigned to intem-
perance of the patients in nine provincial private asylums, is 32 g per
cent.; while, according to Macnish, of 286 lunatics in the Richmond
Hospital, Dublin, one-half were drunkards. Parchappe states that 28
per cent, of the cases at Rouen were due to drunkenness. At Turin,
Bonacossa found the proportion of drunkards to be 22 per cent, males,
and 2 per cent, females ; in Holland, 11 per cent, males, 1 per cent,
females. In Berlin, every third case of lunacy among the lower classes
is the result of intemperance. Habitual dram-drinking is more preva-
lent in northern than in southern Europe, and so is insanity. In Italy
the lunatics are in the proportion of 1 in 3785 of the population ; in
England, Sweden, Scotland, Denmark, Norway, the proportion is 1 in
783, 770, 575, 532, and 309, respectively. In our first volume we
gave a table (p. 314) of the relative proportions of insane persons in
Norway in 1825 and 1835, after the spirit-duty had been abolished for
ten years. The increase, allowing for the increase of population during
the clecennium, was, in the towns, 32-9 per cent., in the rural districts,
G9 per cent. In the various forms of insanity, the increase was, as to
mania, 41 per cent.; melancholia, 69 per cent.; dementia, 52 per cent.;
but most striking of all, as showing the influence of drunken parents
in the cerebral development of their offspring, congenital idiotcy had
increased 150 per cent.! In 1825, before an impulse had been given
to the use of spirits by an abolition of the duty, the congenital idiots
were only in a proportion a little more than one-third of the whole
lunatic population; in 1835 they were nearly one-half. Dr Howe
alleges as a fact, having a similar explanation, that of 300 idiots
in the State of Massachusets, whose history he investigated, 145 were
the children of intemperate parents. That dram-drinking is the pro-
bable cause of this large increase. (as Professor Hoist, to whom we
owe these statistics, affirms) is also shown by another consideration.

Drunkenness is a more frequent vice amongst men than women. There
entered, during one week of 1834, into fourteen gin-shops in London,
142,453 men, and 108,593 women—a great disparity, but greater if it
be remembered that probably a large number of the women went to
bring spirits home for their, husbands. Now woman, in virtue of her
special constitution, is really more predisposed to cerebral disorder
than man, yet in Norway we find the proportion of male lunatics
greater than of females, in all forms of derangement except melancholia.
The proportion of males was 1 in 1449 ; of females, 1 in 1763. The
preponderance of melancholic cases in the female population is. the
reverse of these proportions, and may perhaps be fairly attributed, in
some degree at least, to the domestic misery which habitual drunken-
ness of the father induces in a family. Other northern countries
-exhibit the same coincidence between the prevalence of insanity and
drunkenness. In Sweden, where the lunatics are in the proportion of
1 to 770 of the population, Professor Huss states that about half the
number of insane males have been intemperate. Of from sixty to
seventy men received into the asylum at Stockholm (we quote from
Dr Wilson), only ten were insane from other causes than drunken-
,ness. In the great asylum at St. Petersburg (the Russians are noto-
riously a drunken people), out of 997 admitted during ten years, 837
.were rendered insane, directly or collaterally, by intoxication. The
specific forms of insanity which alcoholic poisoning develops may be
classified under two or three principal heads. Firstly, there is the
temporary or acute mania, known as delirium tremens ; secondly, that
general loss of mental power known as dementia or imbecility ; thirdly,
the destructive maniacs and monomaniacs, more especially the homi-
cidal ; and fourthly, the perversions of the instinct for life and phy-
sical well-being, melancholia, and suicidal monomania. The.homicidal
fury of drunkenness, and the homicidal impulse which the vice excites,
are too well known to need special notice ; nor need we dwell upon the
cases of the demented and imbecile; the suicidal form is the most
instructive.

Dr Wilson distinguishes two forms of suicidal mania in the drunkard.
In the one there is an exercise of the reasoning powers; in the other,
the development of a blind impulse. The reasoning drunkard who
commits suicide, stung by remorse and shame, premeditates the deed.
Dr Wilson remarks:—

W. " Everything reproaches him. His bodily pains, his waning vigour,
his mental chagrin, his feelings of shame and repentance, yet his inap-
titude for reform; his failure, not only in his duties towards society,
but his habitual outrage of its purest principles, perhaps his loss of
fortune and the ruin of his family, are all sources of perpetual agony;
and he has besides systematically deprived himself of the best sources
of consolation. It is in this condition that the drunkard, sinking
deeper and deeper into despondency, begins to contemplate the possi-
bility of terminating his evils, in at least as far as this world is con-
cerned, at a single stroke ; and brooding incessantly over his purpose,
and carefully maturing its design, at last, in some moment of more
than ordinary desperation, or during the shame and depression conse-
quent on some more than ordinary excess, the fatal blow is struck."
The unpremeditated form of suicide is usually observed in the very
paroxysm of intoxication, and seems to be a blind impulsive act, ana-
logous to the blind ferocity of the drunkard, the result of that morbid
action which alcohol excites within the encephalon.

These statements will suffice to illustrate the cerebral pathology of
drunkenness ; we will now turn to that of opium-eating. The public
attention has not been drawn so strongly to this destructive habit as
to that of intoxication, partly because the baneful effects are less
public, partly because they are less injurious to the individual and to
society—we say less, only because the evil effects of alcoholic intoxica-
tion are literally incalculable. It is well known, however, that the
practice of opium-eating is much on the increase.

The pleasure induced by opium is dependent, almost exclusively, as
we have already observed, upon its action upon the cerebral hemi-
spheres. Its first influence is to refine and exalt the imagination and
the intellect. The "English Opium-Eater" denies that it produces,
of necessity, inactivity or torpor.

" Yet, in candour, I will admit that markets and theatres are. not
the appropriate haunts of the opium-eater when in the divinest state
incident to his enjoyment. In that state crowds become an oppression
to him; music, even, too sensual and gross. He naturally seeks soli-
tude and silence, as indispensable conditions of those trances, or pro-
foundest reveries, which are the crown and consummation of what
opium can do for human nature. * * # Oh! just, subtle, and
mighty opium ! that to the hearts of poor and rich alike, for the
wounds that will never heal, and for ' the pangs that tempt the spirit
to rebel,' bringest an assuaging balm ; eloquent opium! that with thy
potent rhetoric stealest away the purposes of wrath ; and to the guilty
man, for one night, givest back the hopes of his youth, and hands
washed from blood; and to the proud man, a brief oblivion, for
'Wrongs unredressed, and insults unrevenged
that summonest to the chancery of dreams, for the triumphs of suf-
fering innocence, false witnesses; and confoundest perjury; and dost
reverse the sentence of unrighteous judges;—thou buildest upon the
bosom of darkness, out of the fantastic imagery of the brain, cities
and temples, beyond the art of Phidias or Praxiteles—beyond the
splendour of Babylon and Hekatompylos ; and, ' from the anarchy of
dreaming sleep,' callest into sunny light the faces of long-buried
beauties, and the blessed household countenances, cleansed from the
' dishonours of the grave.' Thou only givest these gifts to man ; and
thou hast the keys of Paradise, oh, just, subtle, and mighty opium!"
Such is the Anacreontic prose of the gifted aiithor of " The Confes-
sions," in describing the primary psychological effects of opium. Its
action on the hemispherical ganglia is to excite the phenomena of
dreaming, both in sleep and in waking, and to virtually suspend the
influence of the will on the organ of mind. This result is attained
partly by its direct action on the latter; partly, probably, by its action
on the sensorial ganglia, and on the sensational periphery, in virtue of
which it arrests or obtunds those multitudinous impressions which
flow upon the sensorial centres from the organs of special sense, all
parts of the skin, and mucous surfaces of the viscera, and which, by
their continuous but varying operation, modify the states of con-
sciousness at every moment, through the varied changes they induce
on the ultimate structure of the vesicular neurine of the brain. The
external world is, in fact, in so far shut out that it cannot reach the will,
and operates no further than the cerebrum. It is from this continued
morbific operation of opium upon the sensorial system that the
sufferings of the confirmed opium-eater originate.

Opium, like alcohol, must be taken in continually increasing doses
to produce the desired effects, and, when taken to a certain point, it
also, like alcohol, becomes an imperious necessity, to which every-
thing in life must bend. The quantity taken in a day by confirmed
opium-eaters seems incredible. The " English Opium-Eater" took 320
grains per day, i.e., 8000 drops of laudanum—according to his own
estimate, 80 teaspoonsful—or what would amount to about ten ounces
of laudanum ; but this is little more than one-fourth of what Coleridge
took on one occasion in the twenty-four hours—namely, a whole quart!
Indeed, he had been long in the habit of taking from two quarts
of laudanum in a week to a pint a-day.

The operation of continuous opium-eating is, like that of alcohol, to
degrade and enfeeble the moral and intellectual faculties, as well
as the bodily powers. Dr Oppenheim thus describes the Turkish
victim of the drug :

" The habitual opium-eater is instantly recognised by his appear-
ance. A total attenuation of body, a withered, yellow countenance,
a lame gait, a bending of the spine, frequentty to such a degree as to
assume a circular form, and glassy cheeks, sunken eyes, betray him
at the first glance. The digestive powers are in the highest degree
disturbed ; the sufferer eats scarcely anything, and has hardly one
evacuation in a week; his mental and bodily powers are destroyed;
lie is impotent. * * # After long indulgence the opium-eater
becomes subject to nervous or neuralgic pains, to which opium itself
brings no relief. These people seldom attain the age of forty, if
they have begun to use opium at an early age. * * * When
this baneful habit has become confirmed, it is almost impossible to
break it off; the torments of the opium-eater, when deprived of this
stimulant, are as dreadful as his bliss is complete when he has taken
it; to him night brings the torments of hell, day the bliss of Para-
dise."*

The " English Opium-Eater" vividly describes the loss of all power
of the will and of intellectual effort, which are the morbid results
of the drug.

" But for misery and suffering, I might, indeed, be said to have
existed in a dormant state. I seldom could prevail on myself to
Avrite a letter; an answer of a few words to any that I received
was the utmost that I could accomplish; and often not that, until
the letter had lain weeks or even months on my writing-table.

* m * The opium-eater loses none of his moral sensibilities, or
aspirations; he wishes and longs, as earnestly as ever, to realize what
he believes possible, and feels to be exacted by duty; but his intel-
lectual apprehension of what is possible infinitely outruns his power,
not of execution only, but even of power to attempt. He lies under
the weight of incubus and nightmare; he lies in sight of all that he
would fain perform, just as a man, forcibly confined to his bed by
the mortal languor of disease, who is compelled to witness injury or
outrage offered to some object of his tenderest love:—he curses the
spells which chain him down from motion; he would lay down his
life if he might but get up and walk ; but he is powerless as an in-
fant, and cannot even attempt to rise."

Alcohol acts upon that portion of the hemispherical ganglia which
is the organ of the representative faculty, and in delirium tremens
excites the wildest phantasmagoria. So also opium, but perhaps less
coarsely, or with grander imagery. As the English opium-eater lay
awake in bed, vast processions passed along in mournful pomp, friezes
of never-ending stories, that to his feelings were as sad and solemn as
if they were stories drawn from times before CEdipus or Priam, before
Tyre, before Memphis. His dream partook doubtless of the character
of his imagination, which was filled, amongst other things, by oriental
imagery, and impressed "unimaginable horrors" upon him. "I
seemed every night to descend, not metaphorically, but literally to
descend, into chasms and sunless abysses, depths below depths, from
which it seemed hopeless that I could ever re-ascend." The states
of gloom which attended the gorgeous spectral phenomena of his
* "Ueber den Zustand der Heilkunde und Tiber die Volkskrankheiten in der
Europaischen und Asiatischen Turkie. Ein Beitrag, &c. Yon Fried : W. Oppen-
heim (1853), p. 93.

sleeping state amounted " at least to utter darkness, as of some suicidal
despondency, not to be approached by words." De Quincey's descrip-
tions of his dreaming phenomena is " a very interesting addition to
mental pathology." "We subjoin one of many illustrations :—
" I was stared at, hooted at, grinned at, chattered at, by monkeys,
by paroquets, by cockatoos. I ran into pagodas, and was fixed for
centuries at the summit, or in secret rooms; I was the idol, I was the
priest, I was worshipped, I was sacrificed; I fled from the wrath of
Brama through all the forests of Asia; Vishnu hated me; Seeva laid
wait for me. I came suddenly upon Isis and Osiris ; I had done a
deed, they said, which the ibis and the crocodile trembled at. I was
buried for a thousand years in stone coffins, with mummies and
sphinxes, in narrow chambers at the heart of eternal pyramids. I was
kissed with cancerous kisses, by crocodiles, and laid confounded with
all unutterable slimy things, amongst reeds and Nilotic mud."
This "cursed crocodile" became at last an object of more horror than
all the rest. The abominable head of the beast and his leering eyes
looked at him, multiplied a thousand times, and he stood loathing and
fascinated.

The corresponding action of alcohol has been vividly described by
one who has experienced its terrors, and the phenomena are interesting
in comparison with the preceding.

" Hideous faces (Mr. J. B. Gough remarks in his ' Autobiography')
appeared on the walls, and on the ceiling, and on the floor ; foul things
crept along the bed-clothes, and glaring eyes peered into mine. I was
at one time surrounded by millions of monstrous spiders, who [which]
crawled slowly, slowly, over every limb, whilst beaded drops of per-
spiration would start to my brow, and my limbs would shiver until the
bed rattled again. * * * * And then the -scene would change.
I was falling—falling—swiftly as an arrow, far down into some ter-
rible abyss; and so like reality was it, that as I fell I could see
the rocky sides of the horrible shaft, where mocking, gibing, mowing,
fiend-like forms were perched; and I could feel the air rushing past me,
making my hair stream out by the force of the unwholesome blast."
The operation of continued opium-eating on the sensorial system is
to develop its susceptibilities so that all ordinary impressions are
painful and irritating so soon as the drug ceases to be taken. The
"English Opium-Eater" thus describes the sufferings he experienced
when he resolutely emancipated himself from the tyranny of the
drug:—

" Meantime, the symptoms which attended my case for the first six
weeks of the experiment were these:—Enormous irritability and
excitement of the whole system; the stomach in particular restored to a
full feeling of vitality and sensibility ; but often in great pain ; unceasing
restlessness night and day; sleep—I scarcely knew what it was ; three
hours out of the twenty-four was the utmost I had, and that so
agitated and shallow, that I heard every sound that was near me ;
lower jaw constantly swelling; mouth ulcerated; and many other
distressing symptoms that would be tedious to repeat, amongst
which, however, I must mention one, because it had never failed to
accompany any attempt to renounce opium,—viz., violent sternuta-
tion ; this now became exceedingly troublesome, sometimes lasting
for two hours at once, and recurring at least twice or three times
a day. * * * * I protest to you that I have a greater influx of
thoughts in one hour at present, than in a whole year under the reign
of opium. It seems as though all the thoughts which had been
frozen up for a decade of years by opium, had now, according to
the old fable, been thawed at once—such a multitude stream in upon
me from all quarters. Yet such is my impatience and hideous irri-
tability, that, for one which I detain and write down, fifty escape
me; in spite of my weariness from suffering, and want of sleep, I
cannot stand still or sit for two minutes together."

Another form of drunkenness remains to be described,—namely, the
paroxysmal. This is the form which has been mentioned by writers
(first by Hufeland, who termed it Dipsomania) as a true mania, and
which is recognised to be such by all practically acquainted with in-
sanity. Erdmann first observed this affection in Russia, where it is
termed sapoi (sauf-sucht, drinking disease, or mania). Briihl-Kramer,
Erdmann, Friedreich, Henke, Guislain, and others, have also treated of
it. Broussais and Rayer adopted the term Oinomania. Many writers
have, however, treated of the affection as if it were a form of delirium
tremens, to which it is undoubtedly generically allied, but from which,
nevertheless, it is specifically distinct. Persons affected with the
paroxysmal form are for the most part of temperate or even abstinent
habits, and are only attacked at intervals with the disorder, which
consists in the gratification of an impulse to swallow stimulants in
enormous doses for a period of definite duration, when the paroxysm
ceases and the individual resumes his temperate or abstinent mode
of life. Dr Hutclieson, of the Glasgow Lunatic Asylum (Report
for 1842), has given the "best detailed account of the disease in the
English language. He notes three forms,—the acute, the periodic,
and the chronic. The acute is the rarest of the three, and occurs
as a sequel of exhausting causes, as fevers, puerperal or uterine hae-
morrhage, excessive venereal indulgence, &c., or in certain forms of
dyspepsia; in the latter case it is very apt to become chronic. The
periodic form is met with in persons who have experienced injury
of the head, or who have overworked the brain, or who are the off-
spring, directly or collaterally, of drunkards or lunatics. Women
are apt to become the subjects of it during pregnancy. The
chronic is simply the paroxysmal form changed into continuous
drunkenness.

When a person is about to have a paroxysm of oinomania, and it is
not induced by any manifest excitant, as alcohol, fatigue, &c., he
feels listless, uneasy, restless, and depressed, and is incapable of steady
application. These feelings are accompanied by a gradually increasing
craving for stimulants, which at last is yielded to. The individual, per-
haps, then disappears from his home or usual place of business, and spends
his days and nights in alternate sleep and intoxication, haunting the
lowest dram-shops, and associating with depraved persons. Or perhaps
he shuts himself up in his room, never leaving it for any purpose, and
rapidly gulps down glass after glass of liquor he has procured, reck-
less of all consequences to himself, his family, or his affairs. The
paroxysm being exhausted, a stage of apathy and depression succeeds,
in which bitter regrets for .his folly, and resolutions never again to
yield to temptation, are prominent. This period of temperance may
continue for some months, when, after an apparently trivial circum-
stance, the morbid cerebral condition which constitutes the paroxysm
is again developed.

Friedreich notes five stages of the affection, as follows:—1. The
premonitory stage. After a period of apparent health, and moderate
use of stimulants, the eyes present a wild "expression, there is spas-
modic action of the muscles of the orbit, a winking of the eyelids,
photophobia, flushing of the face, headache, disturbed sleep, loss of
appetite, indigestion, flatulence, anxiety, and dread. This stage con-
tinues for from a few hours to a few days. 2. The commencement of
the attack. Increased desire for spirituous drinks, which relieve the
restlessness for a short time, and to this end the patient takes them,
but always more and more rapidly. 3. Stage of development. The
desire for spirits is now more than ever urgent, and the relief given by
them less in time and extent; if the attempts to take them be forcibly
resisted, so that the supply is cut off, the want is immediately followed
by great distress, and feelings of anguish, fainting, and suffocation;
indeed, not unfrequently persons thus deprived of the desired stimu-
lants became actually insane or maniacal. 4. The crisis occurs
in 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, or 21 days. It is characterized by feelings of in-
tense distress, so that the patient loudly bewails his state, or groans
deeply, until at last urgent vomiting supervenes, when either " cor-
rupted" bile, or in many cases a watery fluid, is thrown up. To this
succeeds the greatest disgust for spirituous drinks, so that the person
who but a short time before urgently demanded brandy, now shudders
at the bare idea of it. 5. The stage of convalescence is marked by the
seqxielce of the affection, amongst which an excited condition of the
entire system is the principal. There are also sleeplessness, frightful
or disagreeable spectral illusions, and depressing and distressing
sensations,— the phenomena more or less, in short, of delirium
tremens.

The leading symptoms in the typical form of the disease are those
which show themselves in the thoracic viscera in connexion with
the appetite for stimulants,—namely, the feelings of anguish, rest-
lessness, and impending death by suffocation, and those which are more
purely mental, and in which the insatiable appetite is the most promi-
nent. To these may be added the direct results of the alcoholic
poisoning. In discussing the pathology of paroxysmal drunkenness, it
is necessary to determine carefully the order of causation. Now, it is
undeniably certain that in every case, whether it be acute or periodic,
there is a special condition of the cerebrum which predisposes the
individual to the paroxysm. This may be termed the predisposing
cause. "Without this, those circumstances upon which the outbreak
immediately supervenes, or in other words, the exciting causes, could
never take effect. The proximate cause is that condition of the cere-
brum which is developed by the exciting causes in a person duly pre-
disposed, which condition is necessary to the manifestation of the
paroxysm. The operation of these causes is best illustrated by cases.
A member of a liberal profession is subject to paroxysms of oinomania.
He is fully aware of his infirmity, and is a water-drinker on principle;
for, so long as he abstains from alcoholic stimuli, he is safe. If, how-
ever, he yields to temptation ever so little,—if he takes but a single
glass of wine,—he is lost. The irresistible appetite is excited, and
all the misery and disgrace of a paroxysm of drunken madness follows.
This individual has a near blood-relative, a man of superior talents,
who is equally predisposed to oinomania, and who, when attacked by
a paroxysm, disappears from his family and home, and is found in the
lowest haunts of vice and depravity, drinking with the most depraved.
Both these examples are members of a family in which insanity is
hereditary. In another similar case of an individual—a member of an
artistic profession—there is great natural talent and aptitude for busi-
ness, so that he gives the highest satisfaction to his employers; but
at varying intervals of time—from a few weeks to several months—the
oinomaniac is absent from his office for several days on a drunken
"spree." When he returns, great is his remorse, bitter his self-condemna-
tion, loud and resolutely expressed his promises to resist temptation.
For a while all goes on well; but, sooner or later, the temptation comes,
the alcoholic stimulant is presented, is irresistible, and a paroxysm is
the result, to end as before. Now the brother of this impulsive
oinomaniac is the victim of continuous drunkenness; the father of
both was a continuous drunkard, who believed himself to be a tea-pot,
to be made of glass, &c., and who, in a paroxysm of inebriate fury, burnt
a cat alive; and the grandmother''s brother was also an impulsive
and finally a continuous oinomaniac. It is related of this grand-
uncle, that his friends having taken away his clothes on a Sunday
morning, hoping to confine him to the house by the want of clothing,
he went into his warehouse, and donning a funeral-cloak, made his way
to the dram-shop ! These cases illustrate the hereditary transmission
of the predisposition from generation to generation.

Like insanity, epilepsy, and other analogous affections of the cere-
brum, oinomania may be periodic. Bruhl-Cramer mentions a case in
which the paroxysm occurred regularly every four weeks, at the new
moon, and Most remarks that he thinks he has observed in several
instances that the impulse to drink was the most urgent about the
same time. In Henke's " Zeitschrift fur Staatsarzneikunde (vol. 34),
a case is related of monthly periodic drunkenness prolonged for seven
years ; each attack occupied eight days. The patient was a mechanic;
orderly, industrious, and moral, until he was thirty-four, when he be-
came subject to paroxysms of oinomania, during which his whole cha-
racter underwent a change. After being for three weeks most indus-
trious and steady, he would return home of an evening in apparently
his usual health, but on going to bed he could not sleep on account of
great depression and a peculiar sensation in the head. About one
o'clock he would leap out of bed, run about the house, rush into the
street, in nothing more than his shirt, and shout and rave so violently
for spirit at the dram-shops, that the people were compelled to supply
him; this he would drink greedily and in large quantities, until he
lost the use of his limbs. Towards morning he would be taken home
unconscious, where he would be confined and bound. After lying in
that state, with half-closed eyes, for a length of time, he would raise
himself up, look round with a wild, melancholy look, the veins of the
forehead starting, his face bathed in perspiration, his pulse quick and
full, his hair dishevelled, his body almost naked: he would first be
abusive, twist about, and make violent efforts to free himself from
restraint, and then would piteously beg and implore for spirits, his voice
gradually becoming weaker. He rejected all food and drink except coffee,
demanding brandy only, for without it be felt he must perish. He was
usually given to drink, for the purpose of quietinghim, brandy-and-water,
in the proportion of one of brandy to three of water, which he would
drink off with the utmost eagerness, and immediately ask for more.
In this way he would go on without resting or sleeping for one moment
for eight days, having brandy-and-water given to him two or three
times a day, and taking hardly anything else. During this time he
became gradually weaker, and his voice more and more feeble, and at
last he would fall asleep, exhausted. On awaking, he had no recollection
of what had happened, felt weak, and trembled a good deal. The appetite
for food then returned; he would drink water only, abhorred brandy,
went back to his employment, and was an industrious, steady, tem-
perate man until the next paroxysm. This would return at the regular
period, whether he took brandy or not, and continued whether his
desire for brandy was gratified or not. As years went on, the duration
of the paroxysms became gradually shortened to six, five, and four
days. There was no very striking decay of the intellect, although at
last the termination of the case in imbecility began to threaten. He
died unexpectedly during a paroxysm on the third day, appearing as
if he had fallen asleep. During the paroxysms, his room was more like
that of an insane person than of a rational being, had a very offensive
smell, and was very filthy. The patient himself, also, looked like a
maniac. The father of this man was a confirmed drunkard, and com-
mitted suicide by hanging ; two of his brothers were drunkards,—only
a sister and himself of the family remained free from the vice; and he
showed no symptoms of oinoinania until he was thirty-four.

This case illustrates the disease in the acute form described by
Friedreich, and is specially interesting, inasmuch as by the character of
regular periodicity which it presented, it brings oinomania into the
general category of cerebral and cerebro-spinal affections, the majority
of which are thus periodic. It will occur at longer intervals, how-
ever, than the month, just as mania, epilepsy, somnambulism, &c.,
will. Cases continuing for one week, and recurring at intervals of
twelve weeks, have been observed.* In the first case which Guislain.
saw, the paroxysm occurred at still longer intervals ; it was that of a
music-master, who every year, or every two years, suddenly ceased
to practise his profession, and for about three months would be con-
tinually intoxicated. The paroxysm would then suddenly cease, and
the patient become scrupulously temperate, drinking nothing but
water, and avoiding all chances of temptation. Feeling during one
of these lucid intervals the premonitory symptoms of a paroxysm,
he committed suicide. In another case (a woman) mentioned bj
Guislain, the paroxysms came on after lucid intervals of from three
"to four years.

There are instances in which the affection seems to be analogous
to that strange perversion of the appetite termed pica, which is seen
in pregnant or hysterical women, or in persons affected with chronic
malarious disease, as the dirt-eating negroes. In these cases there is the
same irresistible appetite for some extraordinary article of diet, as in

Host's " Ausfuirliclie Encyclopadie der gesammten Staatsarzneikunde," vol
the oinomaniac for stimulating1 drinks, constituting in some a true
monomania. Dr Elliotson used to mention in his lectures as " an •
absolute fact," that a patient of this kind "has longed for raw flesh,
and even for live flesh." The Messrs. Griffin had a young lady under
their care of very delicate habit, who had been for a length of time
suffering from oppression and constriction of the chest, hysterical fits,
troublesome palpitations, and spinal tenderness, all which symptoms
were aggravated once on a time, when she was at the sea-side for
change of air. A blister was applied over the upper dorsal vertebrae,
as far down as the eighth or ninth, with the object of relieving these
symptoms, the operation of which was followed by an insatiable
thirst, so that she drank a whole bottle of ale in a few minutes, besides
wine, which she asked for repeatedly. She rested that night. The
sequel we subjoin in the words of the mother of the patient.
" The next day at dinner she ate boiled mutton, drank a bottle of
ale, and said that nothing but wine and ale would satisfy her. She
had an hysterical fit of crying, but soon became calm; and seemed
fairly that evening, except for the pain in her side, which, she said,
nothing but eating relieved. After tea she went to bed, and asked
for an egg and ale for supper; this she got, and asked for another.
* * * During that night she got seven glasses of wine and cam-
phor julep. At length I positively refused her any more, and en-
treated her to be still and calm ; for she was frightfully impatient,
talking incessantly, and begging for wine and ether. She had no
oppression, but had the palpitation that night, and very much the
following day. Her stomach at last grew sick, and she discharged
it, throwing off much bile: she seemed better afterwards, and grew
a little composed; next day I fed her thirst with slops and broth;
she was exceedingly ravenous. She is now much better.

The Messrs. Griffin, in commenting on this case, remark that the
patient, in her general state of health, had a very slight appetite, and
was never accustomed to more than the smallest quantity of wine or
ale at any time. They think the state described to be connected with
a feeling of nervous sinking, which is relieved by anything taken into
the stomach. It is an interesting example of the acute form of oino-
mania. Nothing is said of the hereditary predisposition in this case,
but, from the hysterical diathesis, and the peculiarity of the symp-
toms, one might infer a priori descent from a line of ancestors who had
taken alcoholic stimulants unduly.

Women are not unfrequent subjects of the disorder; in two exam-
ples that have come under our notice of the recurrent or paroxysmal
form in women, there were the usual symptoms of gastritis. The
* "Observations on Functional Affections of the Spinal Cord," &c. &c. By W.
aud D. Griffin, p. 52.
attacks were always ushered in by an intolerable feeling of distress
about the epigastrium, amounting, sometimes, almost to a sensation
of impending death. It was not easy to determine whether, in these
particular cases, the gastric affection stood to the oinomania in the
relation of cause or of effect; but we have seen one or two examples
of incipient continuous drunkenness in which the former undoubtedly
preceded the latter, and we are inclined to think that a chronic con-
dition of the digestive organs in which this sinking sensation is a
prominent symptom, and which is speedily relieved by a little hot
brandy and water, or negus, is a not unfrequent cause of habitual
intoxication in the sex. German writers designate it a gastromalacia,
and have advocated the view that the spleen is deeply involved
in the disorder. This is a feasible theory, for it is very certain that
changes in the nutrient materials or composition of the blood in con-
nexion with the supply of food and liquids, are amongst the most
common antecedents to the outbreak of uncontrollable appetites.
The preceding cases and comments will amply suffice to illustrate
the general pathology of this remarkable form of insanity, and it only
remains for us to determine its psychological relations with a view to
treatment. In the first place we may remark, that the mental con-
dition of the oinomaniac is analogous to that in man and lower
animals, in which there is an uncontrollable instinctive appetite de-
veloped, and the intellectual and moral faculties cease to act. The
states of extreme hunger and thirst, either conjoined or occurring
separately, are characterized by this uncontrollable impulse in irra-
tional animals, and in men whose power of self-control is feeble. So
also often the appetite for the natural food is impulsive, as when a
carnivorous animal sees or smells his prey, or, even, only smells or
tastes blood; or when herbivorous animals perceive that on which
they thrive best, after having been long deprived of it. The instincts
in relation with the reproduction of the species are equally impetuous,
equally uncontrollable in lower animals as the appetite of the oino-
maniac for stimulants.

" Nonne vides ut tota tremor pertentet equorum
Corpora, si tantum notas odor attulit auras ?
At neque eos jam frcena virura, neque verbera sseva,
Noil scopuli rupesque cavse, atque objecta retardant
Flumina, correptos nuda torquentia montes."

Concurrently with this morbid development of an appetite there is
a cessation or diminution of the action of the will. This is a very
important point in the history of oinomania, especially in relation to
those forms which are clearly to be traced to hereditary transmission,
either from insane parents or from those who have enfeebled their
cerebrum by nervine stimulants. Indeed, this infirmity of the will is
itself virtually a species of imbecility, not always, doubtless, accom-
panied by imbecility of intellect, but, on the contrary, occasionally
associated with the highest powers of thought and imagination. We
know of no more interesting illustration of this general fact than the
history of the two Coleridges, father and son. David Hartley Cole-
ridge was born on 19th September, 1796, a date probably antecedent
to that at which his father began to take laudanum, but we have
ample evidence that about this time his father's temperament and
mental state were very similar to his own. Thus, at the end of 1795
or beginning of 1796, Samuel Taylor Coleridge writes, " I am almost
heartless ! My past life seems to me like a dream, a feverish dream !
all one gloomy huddle of strange actions, and dim-discovered motives !
Friendships lost by indolence, and happiness murdered by mismanaged
sensibility !"* There are also abundant illustrations of his irresolute
will about this date. We have seen how completely the father surren-
dered himself to the practice of opium-eating; great was that father's
distress, nevertheless, when his son lost his fellowship at Oriel College,
Oxford, by intemperance, an infirmity which beset him through life.
The habitual procrastination and irresolution of Samuel Taylor Cole-
ridge re-appeared in his son Hartley with a difference, but in common
with other leading mental characteristics of the father. His brother
describes, in vigorous outline, the character of a man who abhors pain
as he would death, and loves pleasure as he would life, when he depicts
Hartley Coleridge as he was in childhood, and foreshadowed the
" coming-cloud."

" A certain infirmity of will had already shown itself. His sensi-
bility was intense, and he had not wherewithal to control it. He could
not open a letter without trembling. He shrank from mental pain ;
he was, beyond measure, impatient of constraint. * * * He
yielded, as it were, unconsciously, to slight temptations, slight in
themselves, and slight to him, as if swayed by a mechanical impulse
apart from his own volition. It looked like an organic defect—a con-
genital imperfection."*

In short, Hartley Coleridge was unsuccessful in life, because, to use
his brother's words, "he had lost the power of will." Of this he was
himself aware, as is proved by some lines he wrote in a copy of his
poems, in allusion to his intention of publishing another volume.
" Oh! woeful impotence of weak resolve
Recorded rashly to the writer's shame,
Days pass away, and Time's large orbs revolve,
And every day beholds me still the same,
* Cottle's "Early Recollections," vol. i. p. 170.
+ " Poems by Hartley Coleridge. With a Memoir of his Life." By his Brother ^
vol. i. p. lix. (preface).

Till oft neglected purpose loses aim,
And hope becomes a flat unheeded lie."
Individuals with this peculiar infirmity of will, and this engrossing
appetite for pleasure, manifest, occasionally, when in connexion with
the predisposition to oinomania, a tendency to pursue, at intervals,
a vagabond life. So we find it was with Hartley Coleridge, who
(we are informed) had " a habit of wandering and concealment, which
returned upon him at uncertain intervals during the middle portion of
his life, exposing himself to many hardships, if not dangers, and his
friends to sore anxiety." This state of mind is, by no means (as we
have seen), an unusual symptom or phenomenon of oinomania itself.
Hartley Coleridge's character illustrated another peculiarity of the
class of men we are considering, namely, their tendency to painful and
distressing feelings, in alternation with an opposite state; and here,
again, he shall describe his own mental condition in this respect.

" Sometimes, as if with mocking guile,
The pain departs a little while;
Then I can dance, and sing, and smile
With merry glee.
But soon, too soon, it comes again,
The sulky, stifling, leaden pain,
As a black cloud is big with rain,
Is big with woe.
All I ask is but to know
The depth and nature of the woe ;
I hope not for a wind to blow
The cloud away.
I hear an inarticulate sound,
"Wherein no fixed sense is found,
But sorrow, sorrow without bound
Of when or where."

Hartley Coleridge's brother remarks that this kind of temperament
constitutes the "humourist," and "is very marked in Shakspeare, in
Swift, in Sterne, in Cowper. It is traceable in Shenstone, in Johnson,
in Southey, and still more in Charles Lamb." A list of names
curiously interesting to the psychologist, for, with a solitary exception,
each of these men constitutes an illustration of the mental constitution
we have analysed; varying, it is true, as to the minor qualities and
individual position, but identical as regards the fundamental character-
istics. Need we mention details as to Charles Lamb, or Southey, or
Cowper, or Sterne, or Swift ?

These examples are drawn from too high a type of mind to be at
all common; the majority of mankind have no such gifts of intellect
and imagination as they. Nevertheless, the law of transmission and
development holds good. A merchant under our professional notice
affected with hopeless imbecility and general paralysis, the sequel of
chronic mania, for years before his mental disorder manifested symp-
toms of cerebral disease. One of these was, that after smoking a
cigar he could not lift his eyelids so as to open his eyes, nor, on some
occasions, could he articulate the words he would utter. He took
alcoholic drinks, in quantity far beyond the powers of resistance of his
cerebrum, and fell a victim to their morbific action. Now, this indi-
vidual has a son and daughter approaching adult life. The former
has been subject from childhood, at varying intervals, to paroxysms
of extreme terror and distress, arising from no obvious or known
cause; very similar to those which attack the oinomaniac, but as yet
(being but sixteen years of age) without the impulsive desire for
stimulants. Previously to the attack there is great irritability and
restlessness, with a tendency to sleep, then the outbreak of inexplic-
able terror commences (usually in the night), continuing for two or
three days. When it subsides, he is left weak, ill, and exhausted.
The daughter, on the contrary, is passionately fond of every kind of
pleasure, as dancing, society, &c.; excels in artistic accomplishments,
and is singularly vivacious and animated. Both these children have
manifestly derived from their father a cerebral constitution, which
will endanger their well-being and happiness as years advance by
predisposing to the development of those insane impulses which we
have discussed, or to various forms of melancholia.

The deduction from the varied and numerous facts we have placed
before the reader is obvious, namely, that both paroxysmal and con-
tinuous drunkenness present all the essential characteristics of true
mania, but especially the absolute subjection of the will to an impulse
or appetite; the subjection of the will and the development of the
impulse or appetite being alike dependent upon, or connected ivitJi,
morbid conditions of the cerebrum. What those conditions are, is
not so obvious, but whether we look at the nature of the symp-
toms, the hereditary transmission of the affection, the periodicity of
the attacks and the general etiology, we may clearly conclude that
the cerebral changes differ little from those occurring in other
analogous forms of insanity. These deductions naturally indicate
the plan of treatment.

The treatment of oinomania will differ much, accordingly as it is
paroxysmal or continuous. The great object of treatment will be to
restore to the patient the power of self-control, by beneficially modi-
fying those conditions of the cerebrum upon which the development
of the appetites or impulses and the subjection of the will depend.
The principal means to this end is, undoubtedly, the withdrawal of
the individual from the habitual use of the nervine stimuli, the action
of which upon the brain is to develop the identical morbid conditions
that constitute the disease, or to substitute others for them. But it
is precisely in this withdrawal that the great difficulty of treatment,
at least of the continuous oinomaniac, consists ; for all experience has
shown that, if he have freedom of action, no motives whatever are
sufficient to restrain him from their use. Curative treatment in esta-
blishments devoted to the reception of confirmed drunkards is an idea
that has been mooted from time to time. It was discussed in 1834 by
the Parliamentary Committee, and, of late years, has had numerous
advocates. In our last number we called attention to an attempt now
being made at New York to establish such an institution there, to be de-
signated " The United States' Inebriate Asylum." The fundamental
principle of management of such institutions must necessarily be the
exercise of the same kind of authority over the personal movements of
the drunkard as is exercised over the insane in asylums. Sufferers
from the disease have also advocated this method of treatment in their
own case. In S. T. Coleridge, " the passion for opium had so com-
pletely subdued his will, that he seemed carried away, without resist-
ance, by an overwhelming flood. The impression was fixed on his
mind that he should inevitably die unless he were placed under con-
straint, and that constraint, he thought, could be alone effected in an
asylum ! Dr Fox, who presided over an establishment of this descrip-
tion in the neighbourhood of Bristol, appeared to Mr. C. the indivi-
dual to whose subjection he would most like to submit."*

Coleridge was not sent to this asylum, but was placed under medical
treatment, and had an attendant whose duty it was to prevent him
obtaining that by stealth from which he was openly debarred. Cole-
ridge, however, contrived to evade every precaution, and by various
cunning schemes always obtained the desired drug. It is not an usual
circumstance for confirmed drunkards thus to know at least what is for
their good, and to be ready to submit themselves to restraint. Those
suffering from the paroxysmal form, Dr Hutcheson remarks, are " so
convinced of the necessity of being controlled, that when the first
symptoms of their paroxysm are felt, they voluntarily enter an asylum,
and remain till the attack has passed off. These, however, are men of
stronger minds, though, with all their strength, incapable of resisting
the disease." It is quite certain generally, that in proportion as there
is a necessity for curative restraint, in the same proportion will the
sufferer's will and intellect be degraded, and no motives will be suffi-
cient to induce a voluntary subjection to control. Who with the
slightest practical knowledge of insanity and of the insane can deny
that there are many hundreds of persons now under restraint in
asylums, both public and private, wbo are less dangerous to themselves
and to society, more amenable to motives, possessed of more self-
control,—more rational, in short, in every respect than the thousands
of oinomaniacs who now infest society uncontrolled ? wasting then* own
property and the property of others, ruining their families, displaying
without hinderance the " inhumanitas" "ferocity," and " morose-
ness" of the insane drunkard, and transmitting to their wretched off-
spring their own morbid cerebral organization, as a Pandora's box from
which a host of miserable disorders will inevitably arise. If maniacal
irresponsibility be the necessary and proper ground for restraint, then
that ground is amply shown and undeniably demonstrated in the
natural history and mental pathology of the oinomaniac. As to the
general propriety and advantage, therefore, of restraint in these cases,
no practical man can doubt.

The decision as to the propriety of subjecting any individual drunkard
to restraint might be left in the hands of two medical practitioners
expressly appointed to that duty, rather than to a jury, provided fixed
principles for the guidance of their judgment were laid down. They
would have to determine in the first instance the facts of the case by
personal investigation and inquiry, and from these facts deduce the
general conclusion that the sufferer has lost all power of self-control,
and is destroying his health to a dangerous extent, utterly neglecting
his domestic or social duties, and ruining his patrimony, whether it be
in real estate, in personalty, or in the less tangible form of business-
connexions. In multitudes of instances, the facts and conclusions
would be found to be equally obvious and inevitable.

It is a much more difficult question to determine the extent to which
seclusion and restraint of the oinomaniac should be carried, for the very
obvious reasons that while a very short period of total abstinence from
intoxicating drinks often suffices for the restoration of the patient to a
rational condition, even when insanity of a decided character has been
the result of intemperance, a relapse into drunken habits is almost
certain if an early dismissal takes place, which, in fact, it is difficult
to avoid ; for why should you restrain a person from the exercise of his
freedom, it is argued, who is perfectly rational, truly sober, and quite
determined never again to yield to temptation ? Nor should it be
forgotten that popular opinion runs strongly against any detention of
the kind whatever, on the ground that it is an invasion of the liberty
of the subject, and that a man has a right to get drunk if
he likes. In the Eeport of the Commissioners for 1844, the libera-
tion of patients rendered insane by intemperance is discussed, and
the following instance, as one involving great perplexity, is men-
tioned. At a licensed house in Yorkshire the visiting justices liberated
a dangerous lunatic, who had been placed therein at the instance of his
wife. The man had been in a state of continued drunkenness for many
weeks; he had threatened the life of his wife and child; and two of
his brothers had died insane. The compulsory abstinence of the esta-
blishment had its proper effect, and when the visiting magistrates saw
him, they entered their opinion in the Visitors' book to the effect,
that " he appears to be perfectly sane at present, and unless sufficient
cause for his further detention be shown to the magistrates assembled
in petty sessions, he was to be dischargedand discharged he was
accordingly. The result was, that he again threatened the life of his
wife, drove her from his home, and was again placed in the custody of
the constables. As precisely the same difficulty would arise in dismissing
the ordinary oinomaniac as the drunken madman, we subjoin the results
of the experience of the Commissioners in reference to the latter:—
" The difficulty which we have experienced has been to determine
for how long a period the patient ought to be detained in confinement
after his malady has apparently ceased. We have thought it desirable
that he should not be exposed too soon to the temptation of again in-
dulging in strong liquors ; it having been almost invariably found that
patients of this class, if liberated without having undergone a sufficient
probation, are very liable to resort to their former practices, and to
relapse. At the same time, we have considered that a lunatic asylum
is not a place for the permanent detention of persons who have reco-
vered the use of their reason, and are not obnoxious to the charge of
unsoundness of mind, otherwise than on account of their liability after-
wards to run into their former excesses when restored to liberty. It
has been our practice, in cases of this sort, to liberate the patient after
a short confinement, if it be the first attack of insanity from this
cause, and if he appear to be aware of his misconduct, and to have a
desire to reform his habits. In the event, however, of his being con-
fined a second time owing to the same cause, we have felt that his
probation ought to continue for a much longer period; and indeed we
have felt great responsibility has rested upon us in such a case, and
have at all times very reluctantly, and only after vainly endeavouring
to induce the patient's friends to take charge of him, resorted to our
power of liberation."—(p. 175.)

The great tendency to relapse is in fact the main difficulty, for it is
known that the insane drunkard is specially liable to this. Sir W.
Ellis mentioned to the Parliamentary Committee the case of a man
dismissed cured from Hanwell. He remained well for twelve months,
then began drinking spirits again, and stabbed a policeman, for which
he was committed to Newgate. He again recovered, again relapsed,
and was re-committed to the same prison for similar misconduct.
Mr. William Collins, vice-president of a Scottish Temperance So-
ciety, stated to the same Committee, as the result of his experience of
drunkards, and as " a well-established physical fact," that the drunken
appetite, when once formed, never becomes completely extinct, but
adheres to a man through life.

" If he abstains entirely from spirits, the appetite will not annoy
him; its insatiable cravings and the uneasy sensations of the nervous
system will cease ; but if after ten years' abstinence he take a glass of
spirits, his appetite, like tinder, will ignite with the first touch, and
flame out again. Hence the danger to which drunkards are exposed,
* * * * as we find that at one time or another, when they have
been drunkards before, they all fall by the slightest temptation or
inducement to taste."

Dr Hutcheson's experience is very similar to this. He remarks of
the chronic form
" I have seen only one case completely cured, and that after a seclu-
sion of two years' duration. In general it is not cured ; and no sooner
is the patient liberated than he manifests all the symptoms of the dis-
ease. Paradoxical though the statement may appear to be, such indi-
viduals are sane only when confined in an asylum."
This practical question is of so great importance that it ought to be
placed on a scientific basis by instituting a more careful inquiry into
the etiology, pathology, and treatment of oinomania, with a view to what
may be termed its prognosis ; or, in other words, from an examination
of the nature, causes, and progress of the disease in each particular case,
to deduce safe conclusions as to the amount of self-control that can
be ultimately exercised. Although nothing very definite is to be found
in books, certain general principles may be deduced from the vast
mass of facts recorded. Primarily, and most important of all, arises
the question of causation in reference to the condition of the cerebrum.

If the brain be permanently defective, then the prognosis is bad,
for the organ itself of the will and of the understanding is inherently
feeble. Now permanently defective conditions of the cerebrum may
be induced by numerous causes. Long continued stimulation by
nervine stimuli is one; hence it is that the confirmed drunkard is
usually irreclaimable. Injuries to the structure of the brain, whether
from mechanical causes, from coup-cle-soleil, from fever, or from diseases
of the encephalon, which induce a constantly recurring morbid condi-
tion of the vascular system, as epilepsy, may be placed in the same
category. The occurrence of actual insanity, or a known hereditary
predisposition thereto, renders the prognosis very doubtful. A natural
or inherent condition of the nervous system, such that the appetite for
pleasurable feelings is intense, the sufferings from painful sensations
great, the foresight defective, and the will feeble, strongly predisposes
to relapse. We may here remark incidentally, that persons of this
class who have irregularly formed heads and heavy lips, the upper one
enlarged, the lower somewhat tumefied and everted, are amongst the
most incurable. Oinomania in the parents—one or both—or even what
is termed a " moderate" use of spirituous liquors long continued, is of
unfavourable omen, for the morbid condition of the cerebrum most
assuredly caused by the latter is readily transferred to the children.
Where the daughters of a drunkard are nervous and hysterical (as they
very often are), and the sons weak, wayward, eccentric, and extrava-
gant, relapses from continuous oinomania are likely to be severe and
persistent in any of the family attacked.
To be, continued.
%C TVXVT& .
