Origin of Insanity
===================

Aet. III.—.*
The work of M. Benaudin must not be regarded as a complete
systematic treatise upon Mental Alienation. It is true that we pos-
sess several works whicli embrace more or less fully all the subjects
usually considered in general descriptions of insanity, and which do
not equal in bulk the book now before us. M. Benaudin has devoted
this work to the elucidation of some particular questions only, of the
* Etudes Mddico-Psychologies sur 1'Alienation Mentale. Par L. F. E.
Eenaudin. Paris: 1854.
highest importance indeed, and indissolubly connected with the very
foundation of psychological medicine. Were we to attempt to give
the general character of this work, we should describe it as a laborious
philosophical disquisition upon the etiology of mental diseases. No
part of the great subject of insanity can be more important than this,
none more urgently needs elucidation, and none more demands the
highest powers of the psychologist and the practised skill of the phy-
sician. In the execution of our task of presenting our readers with an
account of M. Renaudin's labours, we shall certainly fail in conveying
an adequate conception of the great acumen, accurate reasoning, and
extensive research displayed by the author. But we may hope to suc-
ceed in compressing within the narrow limits of a review his leading
ideas, and to exhibit some of their most important bearings. We also
believe that those who shall derive an imperfect apprehension of the
interest of M. Renaudin's essays from our analysis and observations,
will seek in the original for fuller satisfaction. In this event, our
failing will be as serviceable as our success.

The fundamental principle of M. Renaudin consists in the proposi-
tion that it is impossible in the study of mental alienation to disregard
either the psychical or the somatic element of man, and that it is
equally irrational to attempt to exaggerate the importance of either
element at the expense of the other. It is impossible, he observes, to
isolate the moral being from the psychical being ; man is a psychico-
somatic duality which must be considered in its entirety under the
penalty of falling into the most serious errors. Every other manner
of seeing only ends in the creation of a phantasy which bends more or
less to such and such a system, but which never represents the entity,
from which it always differs in some salient point. When man is
insane, it is not by a single part that he goes wrong; all his existence
is more or less interested. He is diseased in the physical as well as in
the moral element, in different proportions in different cases, but never
to the exclusion of either of the two elements which make up one
existence. It is on this fundamental idea that depends the differential
diagnosis of insanity; and it is by taking this for our point of de-
parture that we shall succeed in disengaging from the midst of the odd
existences of which society presents such numerous examples, the
pathological element of ordinary eccentricities or of criminal perverse-
ness. It is on this principle of psychico-somatic duality that rests the
appreciation of the many phenomena that present themselves to us in a
lunatic asylum. In all the phenomena of normal psychical life we
observe two features so inherent to the human nature that every lan-
guage possesses special terms for the irdesignation. We mean sensation,
and the transformation of sensation into conception; re-action and its
transformation into action. It is in the mode of evolution and of suc-
cession of these facts that we discover certain pathognomonic signs, by
the aid of which diagnosis may acquire a degree of precision especially
indispensable in medico-legal inquiries. In the state of reason there is
a perfect correlation between the four terms of this proportion, which
is the general formula of our existence. The error that may arise
under the influence of one of them is corrected by another, when the
physiological state is normal. From this basis is deduced the defini-
tion of mental alienation, which M. Eenaudin takes to consist in a
lesion of the sensibility or in its abnormal exercise, over-ruling more or
less the patient's will, and destroying wholly or in part the moral
freedom, the basis of reason and of all moral responsibility.
The author thus expresses the differential diagnosis between mental
soundness and unsoundness :—

" An opinion is stated; reason demonstrates that it is the expres-
sion of truth ; it finds, however, persons who will contradict it. Tax
them with ignorance, bad faith, you may; but it cannot be said that
they are madmen. Their arguments are absurd, paradoxical; they
enjoy their moral liberty. If they re-act but imperfectly upon their
impressions, they still re-act; if they give themselves up to their errors,
it is in the full exercise of their will. When, in consequence of a par-
ticular state of the digestive organs, the organ of taste does not
perceive flavours in the ordinary manner, but that in announcing
this abnormal sensation the patient recognises its dependence upon
the organ, and not upon a change in the nature of the object, there
is only partial lesion of the sensibility; there is not even error, and
still less mental alienation. But if the patient displaces the error, if
the psychical element does not correct it, and he admits that this
flavour belongs to the object itself; if, believing in poisoning, he so
far loses his moral liberty as to wish to be revenged upon the sup-
posed authors of this imaginary crime ; if, under the influence of his
ideas, his affective sentiments are disturbed, the lesion of the sensibility
is then complete, and insanity is easily recognised. It is true, then,
from this example, that a man is rather insane through defect of re-
action against error than through the error itself, for the patient no
longer reflects the impression, he bears it without control, and
abandons himself to it without reservation."

Such is an instance in which the origin of the error lies in the
somatic element. Take an example in which the psychical element is
the point of departure:—

" A man is odd, eccentric, pusillanimous, or proud, without judgment
enough to give the right signification to the facts passing around him,
nor enough discretion to regulate his instincts and inclinations. Under
the influence of this idiosyncrasy there arises a passion which esta-
blishes for a moment a state of equilibrium ; it is upon this passion that
depends the direction given to the sentiments and to the affections,
which, are as variable as the stimulant. His entire existence is organ-
ized upon this incongruous assemblage, without our being able to say-
that there is insanity in tbe nosological meaning. Such a man is pro-
perly held responsible for his acts, so long as no pathological lesion com-
plicates his situation. But if these irregularities of conduct go to the
extent of modifying his constitution, if hallucinations become the point
of departure of his determinations, his originality becomes exaggerated
and pathological, because his sensibility is involved in its double
psychico-somatic relation. These facts show that insanity may spring
from the irritation of each of the two elements, and that one or the
other may dominate in turn, according as it is either cause or condition
of causality. But mental alienation is confirmed only when lesion of
the general sensibility is present."

Proceeding from this basis, the author goes on to trace with great
minuteness the development of psychical life, the conditions of causa-
lity, the transition from reason to insanity, ideas and their relations
with the general sensibility, instincts, wants, the development and
formation of ideas, and the types of mental alienation. These subjects
of course involve the elemental questions of psychology, and we may
spare a detailed exposition of the author's views upon these by
observing that they agree closely with those of Beid. He admits
fundamental ideas,—that is, ideas which stand upon the foundation of
common sense, and secondary ideas deduced from the first by judgment
and discernment.

Concerning the types of mental alienation, he observes :—
" If the insane present general characters by which the perturbation
which governs them is recognised, observation teaches us that the in-
tellectual disorder is not the only pathognomonic symptom, and that
insanity constitutes a group of fundamental types having special cha-
racters and course. However varied the phenomena that accompany
or constitute the delirium of the madman, certain primordial aberra-
tions are detected, around which turn the secondary symptoms peculiar
to the individual. It is in the reciprocal relations of the sensibility
and the reaction, that we find the elements of the nosological table of
mental alienation."

Following Esquirol and other authors of the French school, he re-
cognises four fundamental types : monomania, lypemania, mania, and
dementia. Monomania is chiefly marked by a surexcitation of the
sensibility, producing an energetic re-action, which exaggerates spon-
taneity, the feeling of personality, and modifies the psychico-somatic
relations of the subject with the outer world. It is under the influ-
ence of this state that certain expansive passions, reaching a patho-
logical development, assume the direction of delirium, involving errors
of personality which, binding the moral freedom, become the exclusive
motors of the will. This delirium is more or less organized according
to the intellectual aptitude, and in some subjects it puts on all the
characters of a mortifying logic. If in this form of mental alienation
we almost always observe the same organic lesions, we must neverthe-
less admit that the psychical element predominates, and that in a
somatic point of view the delirium may be considered as more exclu-
sively cerebral.

In lypemania there is also surexcitation of the sensibility, but this
is painful, and often proceeds to stupidity, a sort of chronic spasm
which suspends for a greater or less length of time the most important
functions of the psychico-somatic existence; re-action is incomplete,
insufficient, or wanting.

If we examine the general phenomena of insanity, we are at first
tempted to admit but two principal forms, which seem to include all:
mania and dementia. But more careful analysis reveals that mania
bears a peculiar stamp which constitutes it a distinct type. The most
frequent form of mental alienation, mania, is especially characterized by
disorder of the sensibility, to which corresponds an analogous disorder
of the re-action, in which the mobility is principally noticed. It is the
anarchy of the passions and sensorial functions.

In dementia the spectacle is very different. The sensibility is either
blunted or restricted, the re-action is almost null. Physical lesions
predominate, and animality has assumed the upper hand. Intel-
lectual life has disappeared under the influence of a vegetative ex-
istence.

M. Renaudin having thus laid the basis of his psychological system,
both physiological and pathological, proceeds to investigate minutely
the etiology of insanity. And upon this point we may take the oppor-
tunity of observing, that it is in the profound study of the remote, as
contradistinguished from the immediate, causes of insanity, that we
must look for the most accurate and scientific extension of our know-
ledge of mental pathology. It must be obvious to all those who have
devoted then' minds to this subject, that the path hitherto pursued in
the accumulation of what are presumed to be etiological data is one
pregnant with error. In the etiological tables systematically kept in
most of the continental and British asylums, the proximate exciting
cause is chiefly kept in view. Poverty, reverses, mental concussions,
physical lesions, and other circumstances apparently connected closely
in point of time with the outbreak of open insanity, are set down as
the causative agencies. An imposing statistical battery is then formed
by the enlistment of the figures contributed by a number of different
asylums into one aggregate. Any doubts that might be entertained
as to the value of similar data in the elaborating of etiological laws,
when drawn from a single asylum, and confined to a limited number of cases, become surprisingly dissipated when we are confronted with
the formidable array of figures drawn from many asylums and some
thousands of cases, all made to swell the different heads. There is
nothing so hard to contend against as so-called statistical evidence.

He who resolutely resists the conclusions put forth by many ardent
advocates of the numerical method—conclusions which it is triumph-
antly announced rest upon facts multiplied to the extent of eliminating
the possibility of error—is apt to be decried as one impenetrable to
the plainest of all demonstration. We will not for a moment call in
question the immense value of the numerical method in the determi-
nation of all questions to which that method can be rigorously applied,
under all the necessary logical conditions. The first and most abso-
lutely required of these conditions is, the accuracy of the individual
facts registered. What if there be any fallacy here at the starting
point ? Can any accumulation of individual errors make up an aggre-
gate of truth ? And to secure precision in the primary facts is a dif-
ficulty hard to overcome. We have no concern in this place with the
application of the numerical method to problems in general pathology.
We believe it possible in many questions in general medicine, such as
the mortality from particular diseases, and possibly the value of certain
modes of treatment, to register and collect a sufficient number of
homogeneous facts to warrant definite conclusions. But we very
greatly question whether it be, at the present epoch of our knowledge,
possible to apply such a system to the investigation of psychological
questions without imminent danger of arriving at false conclusions,
and by so doing, of erecting a series of arbitrary conventional dogmas,
which, so far from facilitating the attainment of truth, would have the
opposite effect of concealing it from our sight, by filling the mind with
a specious but false idolatry. Let us take a familiar illustration. In
etiological tables we sometimes find intestinal worms assigned as the
causes of certain cases of insanity. It may be conjectured that in
some of the cases so classified, insanity would not have declared itself
had not the intestinal worms been present; so far, intestinal worms
may with propriety be said to have been the cause of insanity. But
if we analyse a little further, and reflect that many persons have intes-
tinal worms for a very lengthened period without exhibiting any dis-
position to insanity, we are driven to the conclusion that there must
be some antecedent condition in the subject, some peculiar modifica-
tion—to resort for the occasion to M. Iienaudin's phraseology—of the
psychico-somatic constitution, predisposing him to become insane, if
brought within the operation of sufficient determining agencies. We
must believe that in the case of a person having such a proclivity, the
influence of intestinal worms is purely accidental, and that if he be
supposed to escape this particular influence, then he might fall under
the influence of some other conventional cause—as grief, for example—
and then, under the actual arbitrary etiological tables, the same radical
psycopathy would have to be transposed into another column. And
thus clecipimur specie recti. It is in a similar manner asserted that
intestinal worms cause epilepsy. But how many persons are there
who, being afflicted with worms, yet never become epileptic ? There
is here also an antecedent idiosyncrasy, an epileptic actuality, without
which neither worms nor any other circumstance will give rise to
epileptic fits.

It may, indeed, be urged that, although the registration of circum-
stances associated in time with the outbreak of insanity may not lead
to any accurate understanding of the essential conditions of insanity,
it may have its use in indicating those obvious disturbing agencies
which favour the development of insanity. Such being well deter-
mined from tables of this kind, the physician has acquired valuable
indications in practice. "VVe doubt whether, even with this limitation,
it is not giving undue prominence to the class of accidental agencies,
or causes, to make them the heads of etiological columns. The phy-
sician knows well enough, without the aid of statistical tables, that
intestinal worms may lead to the development of various pathological
conditions. Whenever such a case comes before him, whether he
apprehend epilepsy, insanity, or any other disease, he will expel the
worms. The study of secondary causes by means of statistical tables,
therefore, does not lead much nearer to the real object the psycholo-
gical physician must ever have in view, namely, the discovery of the
latent pathological substratum, the insane actuality existing, perhaps,
from birth, and often transmitted from generation to generation. The
influence of heredity has not, indeed, been overlooked; but we doubt
whether it has been rightly appreciated, and we do not doubt that much,
very much, still remains to be done in detecting the genesis of mental
aberration in persons who may be supposed to be free from hereditary
stamp. The primary influences which create the insane actuality
are often lost, obscured by lapse of time, unobserved, not remembered,
and the mind of the physician, hankering as the human mind will for
the definite, fixes upon a later period in the development of alienation,
and seldom fails to associate some marked mental aberration and tan-
gible exciting circumstance ; and to behold in them a relation of cause
and effect. But how much of insanity might there not be, and how
many mind-impairing circumstances in operation, prior to the date at
which lie took up the psychological history ?

It is in the minute and philosophical analysis of the insane constitu-
tion, and of all the elemental causes which assist in the genesis of
insanity, that lies the great merit of M. Renaudin's work. He begins
by discussing the subject of hereditary predisposition; he considers the
influence of temperament, character, the intellectual aptitude; the in-
fluence of age ; the predispositions proper to each sex ; and the influ-
ence of education on the physical and moral development. We will
cite a passage on education which is especially interesting.

" Man is not a tabula rasa upon which we can inscribe any charac-
ters we please. Anteriorly to all education, there exists psychico-
somatic predispositions which must be taken into account; and many
friends have had to pay dearly for the adoption of an a priori exclu-
sive system settled before the birth of the child. From the com-
mencement education is exclusively physical, and is summed up in
two primordial indications, which must never be lost sight of, even
throughout the whole course of existence; the normal and harmo-
nious development of all the parts of the organism, and the direc-
tion of this development into habits fitted to ensure its regular play.
We must at first avoid opposing to the aimless mobility which cha-
racterizes the infant a coercion antipathic to its nature, and more
calculated to increase its native irritability at the expense of the loco-
motive system, the development of which ought to be encouraged in
order to counterbalance the predominance of the nervous system,
which is too easily impressionable at this epoch of life. It is to the
defect of equilibrium between those two essential elements that we
must attribute those numerous nervous and convulsive affections
of early infancy which, as much as heredity, are a predisposition
remote, but almost certain, to the ulterior development of mental
alienation."

The influence of education is admirably discussed. If we were, how-
ever, to hazard an opinion upon the author's doctrines upon this sub-
ject, we should be disposed to object that he has exaggerated the
effect of education in the production of insanity. That a badly-directed
education may tend to develop unduly either the mental or physical
element at the expense of the other cannot be doubted, but that
mental alienation should frequently take its origin from this point of
primitive departure is not easy of demonstration. Even in cases
supposed to be of this nature, were a rigorous analysis possible, it is
highly probable that we should, for the most part, discover an antece-
dent insane actuality, rendering the individual peculiarly susceptible
to the operation of disturbing causes. To maintain that education
has an absolute potential influence in the production of insanity is
to maintain that all mankind are hanging in the balance between
sanity and insanity. It is certain that no amount of error and vice
in education will evoke positive insanity in some organizations.
In his exposition of the intellectual and affective elements of the
human mind, M, Renaudin wisely abandons the attempt to adhere to a
refined classification and isolation of the different passions and modes of
thought. "Man," he says, "is one indivisible whole, and whatever
care we may bring to the analysis of his sentiments and reactions,
we only succeed in isolating them for a moment, in order the better
to recognise the intimate union and reciprocal dependence of the two
elements of which lie is made up." He, therefore, confines himself to
the study of the succession of phenomena rather than to their classifi-
cation. An able chapter is devoted to the faculty of reason, free-will,
and the question of responsibility. He thus explains the reasoning
power so often observed in the insane.

" It is an incontestible fact that the monomaniac or the lypemaniac
reasons and follows, in the thread of his delirious ideas, the path of
ordinary reasoning. Far from undergoing, in this pathological con-
dition, any impairment, the intellectual aptitude seems, on the con-
trary, to concentrate itself with so much energy that, during the
period of incubation, the patient makes of his existence two distinct
parts. The one has all the appearances of reason; its relations with
the external world are preserved with extreme care. In the other, on
the contrary, which remains impenetrable to all, the delirium becomes
completely organized, in order to declare itself at a moment when it is
no longer time to arrest its course."

How many illustrations do we not see of this condition! There
are, even beyond the walls of lunatic asylums, not a few men who
exhibit to the world one phase only of their mental existence, and who
cherish for themselves alone an ideal life full of extravagance, of
absurdity, of actual insanity.

In another chapter the author examines the influence upon man of
his relations with the surrounding world. Under this head he surveys
the bearings of civilization, celibacy or marriage, political institutions,
arts, trades, the hygiene of various professions, changes of fortune, and
religion. The limitation he assigns to these agencies is one which we
could have wished him to have assigned to education. He says, with-
out regarding the surrounding medium as a direct pathogenic agentj
it must be considered to be a predisposing condition to some virtuali-
ties. "Whilst admitting this influence, however, he says, it is subor-
dinate to the reaction of the subject, and however bad the conditions
of the medium may be, it is rare not to find in him a compensative
prophylaxis against his dangers.

In the sixth chapter the author traces the psychical signification of
the different functions as well as of their principal modifications.

After some general reflections upon the different functions, he examines
the influence upon the mind of alternate activity and rest; the rela-
tions of the nervous functions of the circulation; the psychical signifi-
cation of the organs of sense; that of the digestive functions ; of the
abuse of alcoholic drinks; of the generative functions. It is so true
that the genesis of insanity must be sought for in physiology itself,
and its development traced, step by step, through the apparently most
trivial deviations from health, that we may frequently discover in the
normal varieties of functions the starting-point of hallucinations and
of delirious conceptions. This subject, so important to the full under-
standing of the etiology of insanity, and essential to a right interpre-
tation of its phenomena, is treated by the author with singular accuracy
of description and great acumen in tracing the bearings of functional
irregularities upon mental health and disease. "With the same power
and success he advances nearer to the consideration of the immediate
sources of insanity in his appreciation of the psychical signification of
the pathological modifications of the different functions. Indeed, it is
in the reaction of various morbid states of the different functions upon
the mind that we frequently witness the transition into insanity. In
discussing this subject the author is naturally led to estimate the
spiritual and somatic doctrines of insanity. The exposition we have
already given of his leading principles furnishes the clue to his views
upon this question. He is neither exclusively spiritualist or material.
The two elements are affected together, and the one cannot be isolated
from the other. He refers to the principles of moral treatment of
Leuret, which, he says, have had the effect of postponing the investi-
gations of a wholesome nosology. The natural reaction against this
conclusive doctrine led to the opposite extreme, so that many phy-
sicians, adopting a materialism no less exclusive, believed that they
should find in pathological anatomy the secret of the disorder pre-
sented by the delirium. This was to fall into error, for it was run-
ning the risk of confounding effect with cause, and of connecting the
intellectual disorders with certain lesions which had only become de-
veloped under the influence of insanity. Where a moral impression
is experienced, it has, in the first place, a physiological reaction upon
some part of the economy, then a pathological reaction, and upon this
depends the invasion of insanity. On the other hand, all pain, every
pathological modification of the functions, has a psychical correlation
which is only fatal when the moral force yields. It is, therefore, in
this pathological condition, in some sort mixed, that lies the knot of
the question. According to the definition of mental alienation given
by the author, we have seen that the primordial phenomenon consists
in a modification of the general sensibility. He therefore applies him-
self to the task of studying how disease in general can modify sensi-
bility, and what is, according to the nature of certain special diseases,
the mode of perturbation, direct or sympathetic, which may result.
We must refer the reader to the work itself for the distinction between
tlie delirium of fever and the delirium of the madman. The halluci-
nations which appear in the delirium of fever have a peculiar character,
which does not permit them to be confounded with those of the really
insane. This character is more especially somatic.

The subject of hallucination is investigated at great length. He
points out that illusions and hallucinations have often been confounded,
and thus sets forth the diagnosis. Illusions and hallucinations have
this in common, that they constitute erroneous perceptions ; the sen-
sation is real, the perception is inaccurate ; and when there is aliena-
tion the perception is still more inaccurate. There is illusion when
the individual assigns to external objects characters and forms which
they do not possess. It is an error of objective perception. In hallu-
cination, properly so called, the object or external agent does not
exist, and the sensation is perceived just as if they were in relation
with the economy. It is an error of subjective perception, often con-
founded with instinctive predominance. In order that illusion may
exist, it is necessary that there be external to us a real object that
strikes the senses, and that in consequence of an objective sensation,
more or less complete, there be erroneous perception. This error of
perception has its origin in our senses, in the object itself, or in the
medium which separates it from us. Examples of illusions depending
upon the last cause are of constant experience. Hallucination, on
the other hand, a perception exclusively subjective, has its origin in
the reciprocal reaction of the sentient extremities and of the centre of
perception. It recognises for cause or condition of causality the phy-
sical influence, as well as that of the psychical element. The subject
of hallucination feels, but the cause of his sensation is in himself,
instead of being beyond himself; no object strikes his senses, and he
is persuaded that everything he experiences results from the impres-
sion produced by external agents. Two fundamental facts must be
carefully distinguished in this case: there is either a modification of
the sensibility by excess or defect, or else there is error as to the
cause of the sensation. One takes a rheumatic pain for the result
of violence of which he is the victim. Reduced to these terms hal-
lucination might be confounded with illusion; but these misunder-
stood victims see the individuals who torment them, hear their voices,
and even in secret are present at the conspiracies laid against them-
selves. Are you deceived as to the nature of a sound heard, that
is an illusion ; do you hear a sound that does not exist, that is an hal-
lucination. If a person speeds along the streets, thinking he is pur-
sued by all those who are walking behind him, if he supposes their
pace more hurried than is really the case, he is the victim of an illu-
sion : but if, under the influence of a delirious preoccupation, he
imagines himself to be insulted by persons who are silent, and hears
distinctly expressions that no one utters, there is hallucination. In
the first case there is only an erroneous interpretation; in the second,
there exists, beyond the individual, nothing to interpret, everything
passes within himself.

But " hallucination, or rather the hallucinatory condition, does not
constitute mental alienation, nor can it form a distinct species in this
nosological family. Preceding or following the invasion of the insane,
delirium it is not a constant essential symptom; and if Ave observe it
in the outset, or in the course of the affection, we may ascertain that
it is far from possessing that character of persistence which is the
mark of every typical affection. Limited, in many instances, to a
simple diseased virtuality, it often presents nothing by which it can
be distinguished from what is observed apart from all delirium. It
is, therefore, when it exists an element of delirium without being
the delirium itself, and if it be sometimes an essential condition of
causality of this, that depends either on the surrounding medium, or
on special circumstances connected with the idiosyncracy of the sub-
ject. It is, if I may so express myself, central or peripheral; and we
find its primordial evolution either in the psychical or in the somatic
element. Whichever be the point of departure, it only becomes a fact
in mental pathology when there is simultaneous or successive action of
both."

In this country, and especially in our courts of law, whenever the
question of insanity is raised, there is nothing so much insisted upon
as the existence of something which is referred to as " delusion."
Many lawyers take the presence or absence of delusion as their decisive
test of mental unsoundness or soundness. But no definition they have
furnished of the term is capable of practical application. They call
for evidence of that which they cannot define. In most civil cases
they would not hesitate in pronouncing that person insane who
should exhibit marked morbid sensorial hallucinations ; in criminal cases,
the same conclusion would be less readily admitted. Of all the various
mental phenomena which are confounded amongst us under the common
name of delusion, none is considered more undoubted proof of " delu-
sion" than hallucination. But medical psychologists, who carry the
analysis of mental operations further than lawyers, have well ascer-
tained that something more than delusion, as the term is commonly
understood, is necessary to constitute insanity. There is something
beyond; it is that something which it requires the skill of the medical
psychologist to discover and to decide upon. Leuret has well ex-
pressed the difficulty in the following words:—

" I have not been able, whatever pains I have taken, to distinguish
by its nature alone a^ sane idea from a reasonable one. I have sought
at Charenton, at Bicetre, at the Salpetriere, for the idea which seemed
to me the most mad; then I have compared it with many of those
which are current in the world, and I have been astonished and almost
ashamed at not perceiving any difference,"

The same difficulty is also admirably set forth by our author. If it
were possible to regard mental alienation solely from a metaphysical
point of view, it would then be possible for lawyers, as well as physi-
cians, to enter upon the task of diagnosing unsoundness of mind, with
an equal prospect of success. But that is not possible ; and since in
every case of insanity,, the physical as well as the psychical element is
compromised, and that the psychical phenomena are always directly
modified by the changes in the physical structure, one cannot avoid a
feeling of astonishment at seeing men necessarily ignorant of the struc-
ture of the human frame and of its relations to the mind, pronouncing
authoritatively the most absolute dogmas upon the most difficult
points of general mental pathology, and delivering the most unhesitat-
ing decisions upon the sanity or insanity of individuals whom perhaps
they have scarcely seen.

Proceeding with his subject, M. Renaudin traces the mode of mani-
festation of insanity. He denies at the very outset the very common
opinion that all insanity consists in frantic raving and tumultuous
agitation. Fury, he contends, is only an accident, a complication, and
by no means the essential character even of mania. He quotes, with
approbation, a passage from Esquirol, which, as it conveys a great
truth, is reproduced:—

" It is through having mistaken fury for insanity itself, through
having attributed to this symptom a great therapeutical importance,
that so many grave errors have been committed in the treatment of
the insane. The furious were bled to excess, with the intention of
reducing their strength, and it was not perceived that the loss of blood
increased the evil, that it only calmed the patients by depriving them
of the power of reaction necessary for the resolution of the disease. * * *
Since these unfortunates have been treated with benevolence, the
number of the furious has diminished to that extent, in asylums pro-
perly conducted, that out of several hundred lunatics sometimes not
one is seen in a state of fury."

M. Renaudin adds, that fury had vanished from the asylum of
Mareville, which he governs, since they have ceased to take it into
account hi the internal organization of the establishment.
He observes that the course of mental alienation offers difficulties
which it is important to signalize after having disengaged them from
the complications which to some extent masked the fundamental phe-
nomena. In the most regular succession of its symptoms, insanity
presents itself at first in an acute condition, and the observer detects a
reunion of phenomena, having a relation to the type it has definitively
assumed. Then follows a transition-period, which terminates either in
recovery, in dementia, or in a chronic condition. This chronic condi-
tion, which is, so to speak, a quite peculiar mode of existence, may
indeed sometimes resolve itself by a crisis, but it usually persists so long
as no morbid modification has been wrought in the constitution. If
in its essence mental alienation is a continuous affection, we still re-
mark in the manifestation of its symptoms a kind of periodicity, which
is often a precious indication in therapeutics. Remission, he says, is
a frequent phenomenon; but he strenuously and at some length argues
against the existence of lucid intervals. He observes, that in every
disease, acute or chronic, as well as in the physiological condition, per-
manency of the manifestations is a very rare exception, and we are not
to be astonished if for lucid intervals we are called upon to substitute
remissions.

The author then passes on to the symptomatology of insanity. He
discusses the usually received fundamental forms of insanity which are
made to serve as the basis of systems of classification. Upon the
subject of monomania he puts forth views not yet generally admitted,
but which are every day receiving the support of new adherents. He
contends that there is no such thing as a monomaniacal entity of which
any particular act is the only pathognomonic sign. He refers to an
essay published by him in the "Annales Medico-Psychologiques" in
1844, in which he demonstrated that homicide belonged to all the
types of mental alienation, and that the homicidal monomania was an
illusory entity, without foundation and without identity of character,
when the act is considered as the only and fundamental symptom.
Still, accepting the term monomania, with some modifications, he ex-
presses his adherence to the classification of Esquirol.
Speaking of the terminations of insanity, he dwells with some
minuteness upon the doctrine of crises. A crisis, he says, is either
moral or physical, and often is of a mixed character. Again he follows
Esquirol in contending that recovery is possible only by means of a
crisis, not only pathological, but equally psycho-pliysiological; and
that it is marked by a more or less gradual return of the normal phy-
sical and moral functions. We have not space to follow our author
throughout his able exposition of the different critical phenomena. It
is, however, one of the most interesting features of his work, inasmuch
as it is from a close and correct observation of the physical and psychi-
cal critical phenomena that he seeks to derive his most valuable thera-
peutical indications.

The concluding chapter, one of great length, is devoted to the
analysis of the four different types of mental alienation. These four
types, the same that are recognised by Esquirol, constitute truly
distinct pathological entities. The elements of a differential diagnosis
abound. The author here unfolds his reasons for limiting the applica-
tion of the term monomania. The monomania of theft, of homicide, of
suicide, of arson, erected into distinct entities, without precise patho-
logical characters, and rejected by legal tribunals, have raised
against true monomania, a reaction against which it is the author's
study to contend. He refers to the writings of Foville and Falret,
who appear almost to discard monomania altogether. " I. Frank,
again, rejects monomania, and admits only two types, mania and
dementia. He is thus driven to the subdivision of mania, and is obliged
to admit that in chimerical mania the patients are so carried away by
their chimera, that they regulate all their actions according to the
part it enacts. In every other respect their reason is scarcely impaired;
even more, in all that does not relate to their fixed idea, all the
faculties of the soul are often healthy, and sometimes even excellent
in part." M. Morel, attaching a very restricted meaning to the word
monomania, and resting on the incomplete definition often given of
this type, lays down as a principle the physiological impossibility of
an alienation bearing upon a determinate idea with an intact conservation
of the reason of the individual on all other points. He therefore, like
I. Frank, rejects monomania as a type, and confounds it with mania,
with which it becomes a variety under the name of systematised
mania. But, although not sharing the ideas of M. Morel as to
typical classification, he admits that the solidarity of the psychological
functions is for him a fundamental principle, but contends that it is
compatible with the admission of monomania as a type. M. Dela-
siauve maintains that the terms monomania and lypemania no longer
satisfy the necessities of science, and convey no precise meaning. He
comprises under the name of partial delirium a great order, having its
varieties,amongst which, occupying the first place,is a true monomaniacal
delirium, consisting in the alteration of a sentiment or the predomi-
nance of a false conviction, compatible in every other point with the
free exercise of the faculties. M. Renaudin objects to this view, that
besides the predominance of a particular sentiment, we must take into
account the reaction of the sensibility, and not forget that activity or
depression impart to this sentiment very different directions. It is
for this reason that he is inclined to maintain the opinion which dis-
tinguishes monomania as much from mania as from lypemania. The
author expresses himself of the same opinion as M. Baillarger. He
praises the precision with which the physician of the Salpetriere sets
forth his opinion of the essentiality of monomania, which consists not
only in the isolation of a delirious conception, but in the concentration
of a series of dominant ideas, and in not changing its form, whatever
the accessory phenomena and the number and variety of the secon-
dary false ideas. Its evolution comprises delirious conceptions, hallu-
cinations, unwonted or uncontrollable impulses, either isolated or com-
bined. Monomaniacs live in their delirium under the mask of the
healthy mind; and monomania must so much the rather be admitted,
because it is the fundamental type of insanity, and is connected less
than the other forms with so-called organic lesions. To this M.
Henaudin adds, that if the psychical element seems to predominate in
monomania, it still only exists through the complementary influence
of the somatic element; and if primitive organic alterations are rare,
the functional dynamism is a powerful condition of causality upon
which the varieties of evolution are based, from the instinctive impulse
of material want, up to the ecstasy which is completely freed from all
contest with this want.

The author then enters upon the discussion of the general and
differential characters of monomania, chiefly resting upon the analogies
existing between the state of reason and the pathological state. He
cites several interesting eases to show that the first origin of mono-
mania is sometimes detected in the somatic element, which may lead
to the organization of a monomaniacal delirium prepared apart from
the sentiment, but fully confirmed from the moment that this shares
in the disorder. As to the ideas, he admits with Leuret that they are
far from possessing in themselves a pathognomic character. Neither
the idea nor the act, which are its sensible signs, constitute the disease
which is in the domain of the sentiment. It is only upon this con-
dition that we can diagnosticate monomania, not in its final result, but
in its pathogenic mode. As to the diagnosis from lypemania, it is
impossible to confound the sometimes ingenious comparisons of the
lypemaniac, with the active reason, almost rising to inspiration, of
' the monomaniac. The lypemaniac shuns, eludes, avoids; the mono-
maniac goes forwards and becomes a creator. From whatever side,
then, we regard the question of diagnosis, we find that it is resumed
in the study of the evolution of the sentiment, and we discover the
evident proof of the essentiality of a type which we have proposed to
call hyperphreny, and for which we may without inconvenience pre-
serve the name of monomania.

In studying the etiology of monomania, M. Eenaudin observes that
the evolution of monomania depends more upon groups of causes than
upon special causes; and that in this type, as well as in the others, we
must for the most part attach more importance to the conditions of
causality than to the accidental circumstances which have coincided
with the invasion or manifestation of the disease. If the hereditary
transmission of mental alienation be a well-determined fact, the trans-
mission of the special form is far from being well established; and the
author has known many families, the members of which presented
every variety of the nosological scale. The indirect hereditary predis-
position ought to be taken into more serious consideration. We often
meet in the world with individuals who make themselves remarkable
by their originality, their oddity, doing everything in opposition to
other men, and having a peculiar manner of feeling and of expressing
their sensations. The predominance of the personality regulates in
them all the sentiments, and everything leads us to conclude that
should insanity declare itself, it will take the form of monomania. It
is in this that indirect hereditary predisposition consists, and is prin-
cipally revealed by peculiarities of constitution, of character, of incli-
nations, the transmission of which cannot at the present time be
doubted. But these elementary conditions of causality would often
be without influence, if different circumstances did not arise to give
them strength.

The nosology of monomania is then considered. It is not sufficient
to diagnosticate a monomania to be satisfied that we have said all.
Side by side with the general features, we have the individual features,
and if each one is monomaniac after liis own manner, we, nevertheless,
observe different tendencies common to some, wanting in others,
although all present the general impression of monomania. Hence
the necessity of establishing certain important distinctions, not only
in a nosological point of view, but also as regards legal medicine and
therapeutics. The author then proceeds to relate a number of in-
teresting cases, as illustrations of the different varieties of monomania.
The first form described is ambitious monomania. He observes that
the abuse of alcoholic liquors and good living is perhaps the most
dangerous cause; in addition to the permanent surexcitation of the
brain, this abuse entails a variety of affections in the different organs,
and those of the heart are not the least frequent. It is especially this
disorder of the circulation which has appeared to some physicians an
indication for bleeding, a fatal practice, to which many cases of general
paralysis must be attributed. Amongst the patients the author has
seen, several have reached through this course to the belief that they
were the Supreme Being. All had become incurable, because, in
giving a too exclusive attention to the disorders of the circulation,
alcoholic intoxication had not been sufficiently considered. Ambitious
monomania has also sometime? broken out under the impression of
direct physical causes, when it. has not been possible to connect
this form with any anterior disposition depending on the character or
education.

Ambitious monomania, according to M. Kenaudin, is daily becoming
more and moi'e rare, although the number of the insane is far from
having fallen off.

Religious monomania is the next in order. It is the prevailing
sentiment which determines the character of the monomania, since it
becomes the regulator and the motive power of this new existence.
This existence moves henceforth in a circle of errors by the same
processes which formerly placed it in relation with truth; and it is
in order well to appreciate the different phases of this pathological
condition, that we must distinguish in it three moments, which have a
real importance, both in a medico-legal and a therapeutical relation.
The sentiment becomes isolated in abstraction; it enslaves all the
other sentiments, or confounds itself with them by yielding especially
to the sentiment of personality; and lastly, in the third moment, the
access of the prevailing sentiment is revealed by a negation of the
others, that is, besides the transformations of the personality, we find
also perversion of the affective element, or of some other. This truth,
partially seen in studying ambitious monomania, is still more evident
when we enter the sphere of religion. Here, as in the preceding form,
it is less by the fundamental idea than by its applications, its evolution,
and its sentimentality, that the delirious virtuality can be appreciated ;
for what is the idea enunciated by the religious monomaniac, of which
the element cannot be discovered in the sacred writings ? M. Renaudin
relates in this chapter several remarkable examples of this form of
mental alienation, in some of which, as in the case of Swedenborg, the
hallucinations and delirious conceptions of the patient were received as
sacred truths by persons not insane.

Affective monomania is then considered at some length, and its
diagnosis determined according to the general principles laid down by
the author.

The concluding part of this excellent work is occupied with an
examination of some of the important medico-legal questions at issue
between the professions of law and medicine. The author refutes with
admirable force the doctrine of M. Molinier, the professor of law at
Toulouse, who dwells upon the necessity of condemning the mono-
maniac, on the ground that society possesses no preventive measures
with respect to him, and that it would be utterly without defence if it
did not oppose to him repressive measures and the fear of punishment.
According to M. Molinier, this fear is so efficacious and so salutary,
that he attributes to it the triumph which some patients have
obtained over their impulses, a triumph, which, M. Renaudin observes,
can only be explained by the integrity of the will. The argument of
M. Molinier is fundamentally the same as that often enunciated in our
own courts of law; and is equally based upon an imperfect knowledge
of the varieties and essential characters of mental alienation. M.
Renaudin's arguments in favour of medical versus legal interpretations
and judgments in matters pertaining to mental diseases, may be summed
up as follows :—

1. Mental alienation cannot be considered as being ever partial. It
either is or is not: its type may vary as happens in ordinary diseases;
and the more or less extensive sympathetic complications resulting
from it depend upon the initial pathological conditions upon the ap-
preciation of which rests the diagnosis of the affection.

2. Monomania is a delirium having characters peculiar to itself. It
is built up from a pathological condition which, if it borrow much from
anterior predispositions, constitutes from the time when it is organized
a morbid idiosyncrasy subject to special laws, at the same time as to
the ordinary physiological laws.

3. The idea does not constitute the delirium,—it is the expression
of it,—and represents the delirious conceptions, which must be judged
not only in their relations with the primitive virtualities, but
especially with the pathological element with which they are asso-
ciated.

4. It is in this only that resides the criterium of their influence upon
the determinations which reveal themselves, either by restriction or
extension. The delirious conceptions may by a certain sentimental
elaboration aggravate the initial pathological state, but it is com-
monly in the exacerbations of the latter that they produce their extreme
consequences, and during its remissions sometimes only the obscure
virtuality remains. It is, therefore, not by the characters of the period
of remission that monomaniacs can be judged.

5. Monomania being not a passion, but a well-established patholo-
gical condition, the acts committed under its influence cannot consti-
tute a punishable infraction, whatever appearances of discernment may
exist. The loss of the will may perfectly well be conciliated with the
consciousness of this loss; and it must not be lost sight of that the
bases upon which the apparent discernment of the monomaniac is exer-
cised, differ from those upon which common reason reposes.

6. The tribunals must therefore seek in the reports of physicians not
only for information as to physiological and pathological facts, but also
for the legal appreciation of the psychical value; and from the moment
that mental alienation is established, whether it assume the mono-
maniacal type or any other, moral irresponsibility is the necessary con-
sequence.

We have now glanced at most of the leading topics of M. Renau-
din's first series of ^Etudes, preserving very closely the order in which
they have been taken up and developed by the author. Many inte-
resting facts and arguments, having a more or less immediate bearing
upon the subject actually under consideration, are dispersed throughout
the book. Most of these we have necessarily passed over. We are
tempted, however, to bring together some observations upon the effect
of isolation on the mind, and on the influence of the cellular system in
the treatment of insanity, on account of the great practical importance
of the question in the construction and regulation of asylums and
prisons.

Every individual who isolates himself is very near the confines of in-
sanity, either by going beyond the ideas of the times, when he loses
himself in the uncertain, or by exaggerating his individualism, when he
opposes his isolated strength in open conflict with the collective force.
Beneath the weight of these influences many succumb. The moral sense
must be wonderfully developed that can elude this catastrophe; and we
well know that it is the exception. It is in the isolation of this force
that lies the first step to mental alienation Many insane patients
are incoherent only when left to themselves. Many individuals keep
in the straight path so long as they are supported in it. This is also
the history of collective unities, and even of nations which, abandoned
without a guide, present the spectacle of the most complete incoherence,
or raise themselves to the sublime when a powerful and enlightened
authority directs them. M. Renaudin relates the case of a patient who
evinced a constant regret for the period when his confinement in a cell
was attended by a more rigorous coercion. It was at this period, he
says, that his power was greatest, most unlimited. We should all have
been saved if I had remained there, he says. In proportion as his
dwelling has been improved, his power has declined, and he is become
the more docile by being allowed a larger measure of liberty. This
remark cannot be lost sight of when the question of cells in asylums
is considered. When cells were abandoned, all our patients, like the
one referred to, lost the power which stimulated their excitation, and
we are thus supplied with the solution of the most important problem
in the organization of an asylum.

With these passages we must conclude our analysis of M. Renaudin's
present series of essays. We cannot better show the high opinion we
have formed of their merit, and of the instruction they convey upon
some of the most initial, and therefore most difficult and important
questions in medico-psychology, than by expressing an earnest hope
that the author will not long defer the fulfilment of his promise to
publish a continuation of his researches.
