On the Uses and Influence of Mental Philosophy
===============================================

Original (ZDommum'cnttong.
:Author: M. J. KAE, M.D.
Physician to the Carlisle Dispensary.

J. HERE are few, if any, branches of study of such vital importance,
that are so often wholly neglected, and so frequently little appreciated,
as Mental Philosophy. Whilst our knowledge of the laws of nature
has been continually progressing, and every year has been bringing
fresh and valuable accessions to our previous acquaintance with the
physical sciences,—mental science has, on the other hand, made com-
paratively little advancement. When we consider the marvellous
progress which has been attained in the arts and kindred sciences, and
that man has carried his researches so far into the arcana of nature,
that she has been made to reveal herself in some of her most lovely
forms and wonderful combinations; we are surprised that the science
of mind—the science which treats of that curious instrument by
which all these glorious results have been obtained should have made
little progress. The slow progression of mental science has been
chiefly owing to that desire in the human mind, which is more parti-
cularly directed to the study of those branches that affect the physical
wants—the comforts and convenience of mankind—rather than to
those of a merely intellectual character. The prejudice against psy-
chological investigations, and the mistaken notion of their utility,
which exist in the minds of the majority of mankind, together with
the generally acknowledged greater difficulties that are encountered in
the study of mind than what are experienced in the study of matter,
also partly account for the comparatively slow progress of mental
science. Yet mental science has not been barren of cultivators.
I1 rom the time of Thales, the Grecian sage, down to the present time,
some of the greatest minds, and most profound thinkers that have
ever lived, have been engaged in its elucidation. However, from many
of these philosophers having started on wrong principles, and having
attempted explanations of things beyond the province of the human
intellect, their works have been productive of little or no benefit to
mental science. Though many works on mental science will merely
awaken wonder at their production and object in the minds of those
who peruse them, and not a few will be buried in oblivion ; yet many
writings on this science, both of ancient and modern times, distin-
guished for their great utility, and bearing upon them the stamp of
true genius, will remain, through all time, the noblest productions of
human reason, and imperishable monuments of departed greatness, of
intellectual worth, of true nobility.

However much mental science may have been obscured, and its
progress retarded by the subtilties, false theories, idle speculations, and
mysticisms of authors, and by other causes just alluded to, it must
nevertheless be admitted that the study of the human mind is one of
the noblest and most important which can engage the attention of
mankind. That on which Socrates discoursed, on which Plato reasoned,
on which some of the ablest and best of men, in all ages, have exer-
cised their thoughts, on which so much genius and philosophy, so
much research, labour, and piety have been expended, cannot be in-
different to mankind in general. It surely concerns man to know the
powers and susceptibilities of that Divine essence, that mysterious
principle within him, which thinks, and wills, and reasons; which
elevates him above the irrational creation, and gives him the mastery
over the material world; which enables him to survey the past, and
anticipate the future, and to rise from the contemplation of the finite
to the infinite, from the visible to the invisible; which raises him to
the semblance of an angel, or sinks him to the level of a fiend, and
which is destined to endless woe, or to everlasting bliss. Shall man,
then, carry his researches into every department of the arts, and
attempt with unabated ardour to sink the " plummet of his intel-
ligence" still deeper into the abyss of infinity, and watch the opera-
tions of nature in her varied and most secret haunts; and shall he not
turn his thoughts, and observe the curious phenomena, the wondrous
world of thought and action, that is constantly going on within him-
self,—phenomena, more curious, more wonderful by far than any which
physical science or art can reveal, or that the busy artist, nature,
throughout her wide and inexhaustible domain, can exhibit. It is no
doubt necessary and useful for man to know the laws which govern
the material universe, as well as to attend to the various arts which
support and embellish life; yet " the proper study of mankind is
man."

It is surely of the utmost importance to every man to be acquainted
with the phenomena of mind, to be familiar with the laws which guide
the operations of that instrument by which he acquires, retains, and
applies knowledge. The laws of mind can be ascertained, as well as
the laws of matter, not of course by the same kind of experiments,
but what is just as deserving of that title, viz., by originating mental
processes, either in our minds or in those of others; or they can be
ascertained, as some writers say, by observation. A knowledge of the
laws which govern matter or the material word is said to be power}
but some distinguished writers have denied that knowledge is power
in regard to an acquaintance with the laws ot mind. But this is a
narrow and altogether mistaken view of the matter. That knowledge
°f mind is power, history, biography, and the every-day occurrences of
life alike determine. How many individuals that have made the past
illustrious, whose names are " familiar in our mouths as household
"Words," were mental philosophers ? Almost every one of them. How
many poor unknown sons of toil, by the elastic bound of genius,
guided by a knowledge of mind, have raised themselves to fame
and fortune, have swayed the empire of science, or directed the
destinies of men ? Let the history of the past witness ! What is
it that has given the Jesuits such unbounded iniluence over the
fortunes of nations and the councils of kings i Is it their wealth,
^eir numbers, or their force of arms ? No, it is their knowledge of
the human heart and mind. It is a mental and not a physical \\ eapon
which they wield—hence their power. Were they not trained to an
intimate knowledge of the laws of mind, taught how to attack and
storm the citadel of truth, how to direct the thoughts and mould the
passions of men to their purposes, and were they not made masters of
themselves, strong in purpose and resolve, by a training agreeable to
the laws of mind, their mission to the world would be in vain, their
influence over kings and states would crumble into nought; their in-
stitutions, their power, their very name would disappear from the
earth!

What has enabled the present Napoleon to rise through the various
vicissitudes of his life, through exile and the prison, through poverty,
revolution, and the senate, to the imperial throne of France ? AYliat
but his consummate tact, his intimate knowledge of the human mind,
0r at least with the French portion of it. What enabled the cele-
brated Abyssinian traveller, liruce, to achieve the glorious discovery
°f the Nile's mystic source—a discovery, which had baffled the efforts
°f kings and conquerors, at the head of vast armies, to effect, and
which the enterprise of men for three thousand years could not
accomplish; but which he, a stranger, and alone, effected. Was it
not the mighty and secret power which he wielded over the minds of
the barbarians, making their ignorance, their passions, their prejudices,
and their wills subservient to his purpose. His success will remain
an almost unrivalled instance of the power of genius and personal intre-
pidity, guided by a knowledge of mind. It will remain a lasting
triumph of the immeasurable superiority of moral over physical power
—of mind over matter.

Instead, therefore, of knowledge of mind not being power, as some
writers have asserted, it may safely be affirmed, that, if the phrase
" knowledge is power" be applicable to any species of human know-
ledge, it is pre-eminently so to that which relates to an acquaintance
with the laws of mind.

The extent and accuracy of an individual's information concerning
external objects, his ability for acquiring a knowledge of his profession,
and his capacity for properly directing the powers and faculties of his
mind in any intellectual pursuit, will depend, in a great measure, on
his knowledge of mind. Dr Brown justly observes, that all science
is in the mind. Science is just the comparison of phenomena, and the
discovery of the order of their succession. It is the mind which
compares, classifies, judges, reasons ; and these comparisons, classifica-
tions, and reasonings, which are purely mental phenomena, constitute
science. Without mind, science could not exist. The objects of science
might exist without mind ; the llowers might bloom, and the stars
sparkle in the heavens, though there were no science of botany or
astronomy to record their wonders.

It is impossible to make any satisfactory progress in the study of
nature without some knowledge of mental philosophy. Although
men may become well acquainted with the physical sciences, without
paying much attention to the science of mind, yet they must always
conduct their investigations according to the laws of mind, otherwise
they will fail in arriving at satisfactory conclusions. The history ot
physical science proves this. Why was this branch of knowledge so
barren of progress and improvement previous to the time of the
illustrious Bacon p Because its cultivators—and they were both nume-
rous, gifted, and energetic—did not pursue a method agreeable to the
laws of mind. Bacon discovered a true mode of physical investiga-
tion. Hence the success which has marked the progress of the phy-
sical sciences since the discovery and application of the inductive
method of philosophizing. A cultivated and well-ordered mind is
of paramount importance to every man, but how shall he obtain such
a desideratum without a knowledge of its laws ? If a knowledge of
the laws of nature be absolutely necessary before they can be safely
and beneficially applied to practical purposes, it is surely as neces-
sary that an individual should be acquainted with the laws which
preside over his mental powers and moral emotions, before lie can
either rightly direct or properly cultivate them, so as to bring every
faculty into the situation best calculated to favour its free and full
expansion, and to guard against every circumstance that has a tendency
to retard or prevent the complete and uniform development of the
whole mind.

He who has paid little or no attention to the study of mind,
and who has made no successful endeavours to analyse his intel-
lectual powers and moral feelings, and is almost entirely ignorant of
their springs and modes of action, is not very likely to have them in
such a well-ordered condition as to favour his possessing a well-stored,
a well-cultivated, and a well-regulated mind. Mental science ought to
form an important part of the education of every man, that he may
be better qualified to undertake the proper training of his intellectual
faculties, and be more able to regulate and control the feelings, emo-
tions, and desires of his mind ; so that there may be a greater likeli-
hood of his possessing the all-important advantage just alluded to,
and of his attaining to the highest intellectual and moral elevation of
which he is capable.

A knowledge of mind is necessary to the successful discharge of the
duties and responsibilities of life. How shall parents, teachers, and
guardians properly cultivate and discipline the minds and hearts of the
children committed to their care, without a knowledge of mind?
Without this, they may be crushing the opening mind, dwarfing the
intellects of the youths, sowing the seeds of those vulture passions, or
laying the foundations of intellectual and moral habits, which may ruin
their happiness, and blast their prospects and usefulness in the world,
and all the time be wholly unconscious of the dire mischief they are
doing ; nay, perhaps, be flattering themselves that they are discharging
their important trust in the most praiseworthy and effective manner.
Sad mistake! They who have best cultivated their own mental and
moral powers, who have most closely analysed their own thoughts,
emotions, and desires, and who have carefully studied the human mind,
are the best qualified to undertake the charge and tuition of youth, to
cultivate their intellectual and moral powers, to " pour the fresh instruc-
tion o'er the mind, and plant the generous purpose in the glowing
breast." They are also best fitted to discharge other and higher
duties of life.

Again, without a knowledge of mind, an individual is cut off from the
enjoyment of many intellectual and refined pleasures. The higher
order of poetry is placed beyond his reach. He merely knows, or attends
to, the more common or every-day succession of his thoughts, and, con-
sequently, can only appreciate the poetry which relates to these. He
may therefore admire the simple song or the heart-stirring strains
of the lyric, but he cannot appreciate or understand the sublime and
lofty conceptions of Shakespeare. He may even consider the towering
sublimity of Lear and the metaphysical subtilties of Hamlet overdrawn,
unnatural, or meaningless. But they are as true to nature as the sen-
timent of the finest ballad. These characters have been drawn by the
master-hand of genius, a genius which could fathom the depths and
unravel the mysteries of the human heart and mind. The individual
ignorant of the laws and constitution of the mind, is in the same pre-
dicament with regard to his ability to appreciate the truthfulness and
power of these and other splendid creations of the great dramatist, as
he would be of a painting, faithfully portraying a magnificent scene of
classic Italy, had he never heard nor read of its sky, " so deeply, darkly,
beautifully blue," nor of the splendour of its scenery, and knowing
nature only as she appears in the cold and less genial north. Were a
landscape, representing one of the finest Italian scenes by the glowing
pencil of a Claude placed before him, he might probably admire its
beautiful tints, its admirable light and shade, but he would conclude
that it was overdrawn, not true to nature, the mere creation of the
artist's exuberant fancy. It would be a correct representation of nature
for all that; but depicting a part of nature which the individual did
know, he could not therefore appreciate its beauty and correctness. So
it is with the higher creations of Shakespeare and other great poets.
The characters which they have drawn are true to nature, but they
relate to regions and states of mind of which the individual is either
ignorant, or unable to reach,—hence his inability to appreciate their
beauty and truthfulness. To understand and value Shakespeare and
kindred spirits, it is absolutely necessary to be thoroughly acquainted
with the laws of mind, with the workings of the human heart, with the
play of the passions, and with all the internal and complicated machinery
of human thought and action.

The same holds good with regard to the higher order of painting-
Without a knowledge of mind, an individual might admire and
appreciate paintings, representing the ordinary thoughts and common
occurrences of life, but the divine creations of the great masters
would be to him little better than pieces of merely coloured canvas.
The paintings of a great master, like the works of a great poet, may,
however, affect a man without his understanding them, or knowing th0
cause of their power over him ; it is because they are natural. He
affected by their sight, disturbed by " the joy of elevated thought," by
the stirring of his deeper nature excited by the secret influence of the
spirit of true genius. But were these masterpieces of the great artists
not founded on nature, were they not constructed agreeably to the l»,vS
of mind as well as to the principles of art, tlie charm which they possess
over the hearts of men would be dissolved ; they would no longer be
the shrines at which the poetic spirit of man delights to worship, nor
possess the key to unlock the spirit of genius, nor kindle enthusiasm in
the minds of our youthful artists, be to them incentives, guides, and
finger-posts to fame and immortality. Knowledge of mind is not only
necessary to understand the works of the great masters, but also to
Make any satisfactory progress in the higher walks of painting. The
same remark applies, with all its force, to sculpture, oratory, and other
arts.

Mental science greatly aids the cause of religion, by enabling the
Christian to form clearer and more rational views of such difficult doc-
trines as free will, election, and other questions which divide theCliristian
world. Were mental science more cultivated, there would not be so
many divisions among Christians with respect to these doctrines. Igno-
rance is the chief cause of the diversity of opinions held by men on
many of the more difficult doctrines of religion. Many religious doc-
trines cannot be properly, if at all, understood by persons unaccustomed
to psychological investigations. They may receive them as articles of
a ci'eed, but they cannot apprehend them by their understandings.
Mental science further aids the cause ot religion, by enabling the
believer to form a more rational and sublime conception of the person-
ality and universality of the Deity. These are the highest and most
overpowering subjects that can engage the attention of the human
mind, and the most difficult to understand. Mental science, guided by
the spirit of true piety, will enable the inquirer to approach them with
a more rational hope of succeeding in forming an exalted idea of their
nature and co-existence—an idea alike removed from pantheism on the
one hand and a degraded personality on the other.

it has been asserted by some writers that mental science does not
■fid the religious spirit; but this is surely a mistaken idea. 11 piety,
reverence, and love to God are deepened and exalted, as most assuredly
they are by the study of His works, where, in all the wonders of creation
is to be found such evidence of His wisdom and skill as is exhibited in
the mind of man—the subject of the science? Were a spectator
placed on some commanding elevation in the heavens," far beyond the
universe of stars," and able to survey the vast magnificence of the
worlds and systems that circle in the infinity of space, amid all that
glorious assemblage of material beauty and magnificence, and the innu-
merable host of. worlds which would be revealed to his astonished gaze,
he would find no object so wonderful and glorious as the human mind!
When the contemplation of the stars, of the green fields, ol the flowers,
ol the quiet lake and the ever-rolling ocean, deepens the religious
feelings of man.—when the study of Nature raises man to the study of
Nature's God, surely the study of the human mind, that which is superior
to all nature, which is the masterpiece of creation, and an emanation
from the Divine mind itself, is calculated to exalt the religious feelings,
to give a deeper tinge to the piety, and a warmer glow to the love of
the believer, and to raise him to a more sincere and humble adoration
of the mighty majesty on high ! Knowledge of mind, then, is the
foundation of all improvement, the very basis of our intellectual and
moral advancement; is an essential towards the possession of a well-
cultivated and a well-regulated mind; is a chief cause of the great
diversity of mental attainments observed among men of similar
original intellectual endowments ; and.is the source of that tact, that
practical knowledge of mankind, which is so indispensably necessary to
success in the world. Knowledge of mind is also the means by which
a man is raised still higher in the scale of intellect and morality, by
which he is advanced to a larger participation in the higher -and more
exalted pleasures of life, and by which he is better fitted to discharge
the duties and responsibilities of his station here, and prepared for a
nobler and higher state of existence hereafter.

The preceding remarks chiefly refer to the advantages likely to arise
to an individual through his knowledge of mind or mental science.
We shall, however, conclude this part of the paper by taking a cursory
view of the general influence of mental science—using this term in its
widest sense—that is, comprehending both intellectual and moral philo-
sophy ; in short, all that relates to mind. First, look at the influence
of mental science in every age ! In ancient times, the philosopher was
also the legislator, as Solon, Lycurgus, Thales, Socrates ; and from the
earliest periods to the present time, mental science or philosophy has
influenced alike science, literature, legislation, and religion ; nay, they
have been grounded, so to speak, upon philosophy. The progress of
each of them has been retarded or quickened, made beneficial or the
reverse, according to the varying nature of the philosophy of the age.
That this is 110 idle speculation will be seen by referring shortly to the
history of the past. First, with regard to physical science. Allusion
has been made already to the slow progress of this science during the
many centuries that preceded the appearance of Lord Bacon. The
peripatetic or Aristotelian philosophy, which held the sway in the schools
during these ages, so cramped the energies and mind of man, that the
efforts made by him to investigate nature failed, or produced worthless
results. Bacon introduced the inductive method—a method more
rational and better adapted to extend the sphere of human knowledge
in regard to external nature. The deductive method has also bed1
applied with great success to the investigation of natural phenomena*
Both these methods are the results of philosophy ; they are founded
on laws agreeable to the human mind. But philosophy not only
influences the method of physical investigation, hut also determines the
object of research into the field of nature. The natural philosopher
whose mind is imbued with a sensational philosophy, that is, a philo-
sophy which declares that all mental states are the result of sensation,
cultivates physical science with quite a different object in view from
the philosopher who is influenced by an idealistic philosophy—that is,
a philosophy based on a notion of self, with its native and exliaustless
energies. To the former, nature is merely what it appears to the eye;
he generalizes natural objects in their external relations only. The
latter, also, accumulates facts relative to external objects, but he looks
into nature to discover her hidden secrets—the forces which are every-
where in continual operation. " Nature," as it has been beautifully
observed by Morrell, in his ' History of Modern Philosophy,' " is to the
idealistic philosopher a glorious mystery, necessarily prompting us to
the conception of spiritual agencies, which agencies are, in fact, only
the ' indications of the Creator,' the varied forms in which a divine and
spiritual power is diffusing itself throughout its own immense creation.
The influence of philosophy over physical science is still visible in
the works of modern authors, and it will continue to exercise an in-
fluence over scientific research to the end of time. To those not
familiar with the paramount importance of philosophy or mental
science, we would recommend the perusal of Morrell s History of
Modern Philosophythe writings of Carlyle, Whewell, Humboldt,
Herschel, &c. Look again at the influence of mental philosophy 011
literature. It is enough to allude merely to the historical writings of
Hume, Gibbon, Maeaulay, and Alison, to see the power which the
philosophic tendencies of historical authors has over their respective
productions. The poetry of Byron and Wordsworth affords a striking
example of the effect of philosophy in moulding the thoughts and
sentiments of poets, and leading them to an elevated or debased con-
ception of man and nature. Byron has given some splendid descrip-
tions of natural scenery— descriptions which, for power, beauty, and
distinctness, have never been surpassed, if equalled, by any other poet,
either ancient or modern. But graphic and minute as those poetical
paintings are, they depict merely the outward and visible forms of
nature. Wordsworth has also portrayed the outward forms of natural
objects with great beauty and effect, but he has likewise endeavoured
to discover in them the "good, the beautiful, and the true." To the
former, nature appeared only a vast panorama of outward forms and
beauty : to the latter, a world pregnant with living power and moral
Bignifica.icy. To the one, nature is only a magnificent assemblage of
visible but isolated objects: to the other, a vast collection of varied
forms, which link the spirit of man to the Spirit of the universe.
Byron observed nature only as a poet: Wordsworth as a poet and
a true philosopher. The latter has said, in his beautiful lines on
Tintern Abbey,—

"For I have learned to look on nature, not as in the
Hour of thoughtless youtli—but hearing oftentimes
The still, sad music of humanity,
Nor harsh, nor grating, though of ample power
To chasten and subdue. And I have felt a presence
That disturbs me with the joy of elevated thought,
A sense sublime of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
And the round ocean, and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man,
A motion and a spirit that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thoughts,
And rolls through all things."

This is a key to his whole writings. Byron's popularity is already on the
wane; and after ages will regret that a false and gross sensational philo-
sophy and other causes, so perverted his mind and corrupted his heart as
to prevent him leaving to posterity one piece really worthy of the great-
ness of his powers and the splendour of his genius. The poetiy of
Wordsworth is addressed to the deeper and purer feelings of man ; and
it will be read and admired so long as the human mind is affected by
the beauties of nature, by purity of thought, and elevated sentiment.
Wordsworth's mind, unlike Byron's, was imbued with an idealistic
philosophy—hence the difference of their respective writings.

Let us here consider shortly the influence of mental philosophy on
legislation and the condition of nations. To go no further back than
the latter part of last century. We would ask, what chiefly gave rise
to the horrible first French devolution ? It was most assuredly the
promulgation of pernicious philosophical principles, until they spread
through all ranks and classes of men, and corrupted the public mind of
France. It was this, chiefly, which overthrew religion, uprooted virtue,
and roused the fiendish passions that trampled on the throne, degraded
liberty, outraged all order and decency, and made France red with the
blood of her citizens. This tragic historical drama alone shows the
influence of philosophy, and the absolute necessity that exists, at all
times, for the cultivation and dissemination of a sound, healthy, and
enlightened philosophy of mind among the people of every nation.
Whatever kind of philosophy exists in the minds of our Lockes^
Adam Smiths, and Benthams, colours or determines their principles of
social or political economy. The principles, political or philosophic^'
which are held by these philosophers, affect the public mind through
books, the press, lectures, speeches. They affect the minds of the lead*
ON THE USES AND INFLUENCE OF MENTAL PHILOSOPHY. 389
ing statesmen, who work tbem into a practical shape, and discuss and
agitate them, until the public mind of a nation is affected by their
truth or necessity, and legislative enactments are the result.
Philosophy also exerts a powerful sway over religion, not only over
the religion of an individual, as in the case of Swedenborg, Priestley,
and others, but over that of the Church. It has affected the religion of
every Church in every age, modifying its opinions, its spirit, and its
practices. The history of philosophy, as well as ecclesiastical and civil
historv, proves this. To take one example. It is the influence of a
peculiar and somewhat mystical philosophy which is held by a few
minds of tbe present day, that has produced the movement that is now
going on in the Church of England. Whatever kind of philosophy is
taught in the Universities, and imbibed by the theological and other
students in attendance there, it will modify or give a colour to their
religious opinions. Hence the necessity for a sound system of philo-
sophy being taught in all Universities — without which, creeds and
articles of religious belief will be of little avail in promoting sound and
scriptural views of religion among those who are destined to become
the teachers of others.

Seeing, then, the influence of philosophy over the opinions and actions
°f man, over science, legislation, literature, and religion, and seeiitg
that in one form or another it has always held sway in the world, and
that it will continue to do so till the end of time, exercising a useful or
a baneiul sway according to its nature, we must conclude that mental
philosophy ought to form not only an important part of the education
°f man, but should, also, claim his attentive consideration during every
period of his active existence. It ought to be his constant aim to
attain to the knowledge of a sound, pure, and elevated philosophy of
mind. Further, an individual may have some excuse lor his being
ignorant of many sciences, but can have none for his ignorance of mind.
He may not be able to purchase a telescope to sweep the heavens, and
aid his study of astronomy ; and he may remain almost ignorant of the
unseen world of life around him, from not being in possession of the
microscope to reveal its wonders; and of chemistry, from his want of
proper instruction and suitable apparatus. But he has the means
Within himself to become even a master in mental science. Unaided
and alone, he may study mental phenomena as they are manifested
within himself, or as they are exhibited in those around him. In
addition to the careful study of the standard works on mental philo-
sophy, the student should study mind practically as well as theoretically,
and not confine his attention to books bearing expressly upon the
subject. He ought to study the human mind as it is reflected on the
page of history,—here, as in the world, he may obtain a practical
knowledge of mankind, as well as become acquainted with the march
of the human mind upwards through successive ages and civilizations to
the present time, and also learn the various circumstances which influ-
enced or retarded its progress and development. And he should study
the mind as it is depicted by the powerful genius of Shakespeare, who
has withdrawn the veil from the human heart, laid bare, with a
master's hand, its hidden mysteries; explained the "subtilties of thought
and the laws of passion"; who has presented us with a complete
analysis of mind, with a perfect anatomy of the passions, emotions, and
desires of man. And whether delineating the subtilties of love, the
turbulence of passion, the rage of madness, or the clusterings of imbe-
cility, or depicting any other phase of mind or character, he is equally
natural, faithful, and profound. He is a metaphysician worthy of the
closest study. The mind should be studied also as it is exhibited under
the mild and genial sway of Christianity, and as it struggles for utter-
ance through the gloomy atmosphere of infidelity, and as it is de-
veloped under the sway of the different religions and the different
forms of political govprnment. It should be studied among the rich and
poor, the learned and unlearned, in its development, maturity, and
decay; in health and in disease, at the festive board and at the hour
of death. But, above all, the psychological student should study
his own mind. It is here that his progress in mental science will be
most satisfactory. For by attending closely to his own thoughts,
emotions, and desires, and observing their springs and modes of action,
by observing, in short, all the phenomena of mind as exhibited in him-
self, he may not only obtain a clear and comprehensive knowledge of
the powers and susceptibilities of the mind, and of the laws which
regulate their action, he may not only gain a knowledge of mental
science, but, what is of more consequence, gain a knowledge of himself
—a knowledge of his powers and capacities, his motives and desires,
his virtues and defects,—a knowledge which will enable him to im-
prove his intellectual powers, cultivate the affections of the heart, and
give him the mastery of his will, make him firm in purpose and resolve,
and fit him for the proper discharge of the duties and responsibilities
of life.
