On Pledges Exacted from the Insane
====================================

In several of his reports, Dr Samuel B. Woodward, whilst superintendent of
the Massachusetts State Lunatic Hospital, has spoken somewhat at large in
relation to that particular of moral management, which he has entitled
"Pledges." The older writers have also alluded to the subject: Cox does so
directly; and in many cases reported by Pinel, Esquirol, and others, the prin-
ciple is involved. We find various writers, too, alluding to the fact, that the
insane will rarely break their word, as for example, Mr. Hill, in his work
" On Lunatic Asylums." Dr Woodward has even extended this principle of
treatment to the management of the suicidal. Dr Bell, of the McLean
Asylum, however, is opposed to going so far, observing that, "Pledges, not to
abuse privileges, to go out and return punctually, and the like, may be ex-
tended to a great degree. But where the pledge would cover so all-important
and irreprievable a hazard as that of life, we have never trusted it; the
suicide's last act often is accomplished with false representations; his whole
intent is not imfrequently accompanied with great sagacity, in throwing the
inexperienced and unskilled off their guard. I should not, with my experience,
pay the slightest regard to any promise which they might make respecting this
act." Dr W. S. E. Browne also remarks, in his work on " Insanity and Asylums
for the Insane," that Esquirol "trusted a military man, who was determined
on suicide, with the means of destruction, on his pledging his honour that he
would make no attempt to use them." He then goes 011 to say, " He passed
the ordeal in safety, but not without a struggle. This was venturing far,
perhaps, too far." Moreover, in a letter addressed to the trustees of the New
York State Lunatic Asylum, of which, by a gentleman of Baltimore, describing
St. Yincent's Hospital, an institution under the management of the Sisters of
Charity, we find the following remarks :—" In the pledges so much spoken of
in the Worcester Report, the sister places little confidence; she states, that
a lunatic derides the idea of a binding promise; especially if it be of the
violent type. She thinks these unhappy sufferers are generally conscious of
their lamentable condition; and will ask you, when reminded of a broken
pledge, 'if you were fool enough to believe a crazy person?'" So far as
respects suicidal cases, I agree to the extent mentioned by Dr Bell, of not
trusting them on a pledge alone; I may also remark that, however much I
might be inclined to favour the abolition of restraint, yet as to this class I
would oppose the theory, at least, of its complete disuse. But still, I think
that both of these principles might advantageously modify the treatment
pursued in regard to the suicidal; for example, at least in the day-time,
though not so apparently, being really watched, we might, with uenefit
release them from restraint, whilst they were placed carefully and pointedly
on the pledge not to make any attempt at self-destruction.

_ Throwing out of consideration suicidal patients, and also the extremely
violent, comprehending in asylums where there are no adjunctive poor-houses
or other analogous receptacles, but a moderate class, there are left amongst
male patients a very large proportionate number, whose liberties I am satis-
fied might be greatly increased. The experience of the Eastern Lunatic
Asylum of Virginia, with which I am familiar, abundantly testifies to such a
conclusion. But on investigation, facts of a striking nature in this relation
are to be derived from the records of various other institutions.

The idea presents itself, in the first place, in the history of a large number
of patients, who, unfortunately for themselves, it is true, arc retained at home
* Read at a meeting of the American Association of Medical Officers of Hospitals
for the Insane, by Dr J. M. Gait, physician to the Eastern Lunatic Asylum,
Virginia.

a considerable period before sending them to an asylum, or who reside per-
manently with, their friends. Now, although there may be in the annals of
every asylum numerous cases where, previously to his reception in the ulti-
mate refuge from the world's wretchedness, the poor patient was chained
down in loathsome dens for years and years; and although, perhaps, circum-
stances of this, as much as those of any other character, have led to the
establishment of hospitals for the insane—circumstances, too, which have
induced the public to continue for them a generous support; yet still there is
a considerable body of sufferers brought to our institutions whose previous
history exhibits them to have gone about for years, unrestrained, in the
neighbourhood of their homes.* Hence the deduction is plain, could not the
same liberty be allowed them at an asylum, particularly with the systematic-
action pursued there, not only as to those but as to all other patients ?
But, again, take the example of the village of Gheel. Here we find a
theatre on which the experiment proposed has been tried for centuries. Here
we have patients traversing the streets, partaking in the social amusements of
the inhabitants, going about wholly unregarded, and indeed upon precisely the
same footing as ordinary citizens; and that, too, not in small numbers, but
with few exceptions all have these privileges. This is, indeed, advancing the
system far beyond the point which we advocate, and properly considered, it
must, in fact, completely close the discussion. Now, opposing arguments,
however, may be alleged in this connexion. First, it may be said that the
peasants treat their patients kindly at Gheel, that the children of the com-
mune do not annoy them, and that the whole neighbourhood adapts itself to
this state of firings. Granted. But any difficulty of this kind might be
met by invoking the patient's self-control and self-respect, and bv invariably
casting the blame of any difficulty whatsoever, not on the public, but 011 him.
I speak from experience when I say, that this plan will prevent any disturbance
between the insane and the population external to an asylum. Secondly, it
may be urged, that there exists some intention in Belgium to change the
system at Gheel to the ordinary one usual in hospitals. But this does not
materially influence the question in debate. From the accounts of travellers, \
in the plan adopted at Gheel there are doubtless many deficiencies; foi
example, the want of some central power, having entire authority over the
whole arrangement. Nor would I be in favour of this exact general outline ;
I merely bring forward the treatment here pursued, as illustrating the truth,
fixed and immutable, in my opinion, at least, as illustrating it most con-
clusively, that the patients in our asylums have not a degree of liberty
allowed them which they could enjoy without the least disadvantage either to j
themselves or the public. And if this be so, there are none who can possibly
wish to deprive them of any liberty which would lead to 110 injurious conse-
quences, 110 matter whether they approve or disapprove of the details of the
plan in operation in Belgium.

Another circumstance, leading to the conclusion to which we have arrived,
is found in a work published by M. Scipion Pinel in 1841, entitled, " Traite
de Pathologie Ccrebrale." He therein mentions an extraordinary experiment
that was tried at the Salpctriere, which, it is almost needless to remark,
contains a large number of patients labouring under mental alienation of long
standing; seventy-two of these old cases, looked upon as incurable for years,
were sent back again into the world, and only three ever returned. He
supposes that there are many chronic cases in establishments for the insane,
who, lrom indolence, from the fear of giving up a life of tranquil ease for one
01 labour, shrink from recovery; who, from finding themselves amongst
,, Pr*!,a"l>' *ndeecb many persons retain recollection of having, in tlieir boyisli
loughtlessness, worried and played tricks on these helpless creatures.
the insane, continue to consider themselves as such; and thus remain as
inmates merely from these circumstances, and being, as it were, not really
deranged. With his explanation, however, or the point—how far they are of
unsound mind—we have nothing to do. We would simply mention the-
success of this experiment with the chronic insane, patients in whom, at any
rate, aught like excitement or combativeness has long ago disappeared;
and from the result at the Salpetriere, we would immediately deduce the
inference, that to many of the inmates of our asylums might be very suitably
granted the minor liberty of going about at will in the neighbourhood of the
institution in which they resided.

Another argument which may be urged, is the fact that, in various asylums,
we find mention of such liberty as we propose being entrusted to a few of the
inmates ; for the same liberty might be easily extended to a greater number.
Here, as elsewhere, we should never forget the principle contained in any
measure; the moment we detect a principle to be involved, and admit its
existence, we then establish a rule, that applies not only to a few, but to
many. To give an example, Dr Webster, in his valuable " Notes on Pro-
vincial Asylums for the Insane in France,"* remarks, concerning the asylum
at Armentiere:—"Although no farm is attached to this institution, the
gardens adjoining afford means for employing some of the inmates in out-door
work. In addition to such occupations, small gangs of patients, under the
charge of attendants, are permitted to labour in the fields belonging to the
townspeople, from whence they always return to dine in the asylum, but again
resume work in the afternoon. Tor this employment, each patient receives a
gratuity of twenty-five centimes per day, which is appropriated to form a fund
for after benefits, or occasionally to augment their present comforts. Various
inmates are likewise allowed to leave the asylum, under similar regulations, to
work for persons in town ; some as masons, and others to dig the foundations
of new houses now in course of construction. This privilege is appreciated
by the poor lunatics, and seems to be beneficial." Again, Dr Cumming, in
his " INotcs on Lunatic Asylums," &c., observes, concerning the asylum at
Gronnestein, in Germany, that many of the able-bodied patients of the
institution work with an attendant on the lands of neighbouring farmers.
And, speaking of the asylum for the East Hiding of Yorkshire, he states that
" Mr. Hill, the able superintendent, even sends parties, of both sexes, to
market with vegetables raised on the grounds of the asylum; and the city
of York is thus partially supplied by lunatio labour." So Dr Wilson
observes, in the " Report of the Ploomingdale Asylum for 1842" :—" Most of
the patients take frequent and extensive walks under the supervision of an
attendant, although many to whom such supervision would be irksome are
allowed, when their situation will admit of it, to ramble at their pleasure,
upon giving assurance of their return; and but seldom have such promises
been broken." Whilst Dr Awl writes, in 1841, concerning the patients in
the Ohio State Asylum : "Pledges arc often successful, without the necessity
of personal restraint. We arc seldom disappointed in the word of a patient,
seriously given, and c upon honour.' A number of the peaceable and orderly
have the entire freedom of the farm upon these terms, and are sometimes sent
down to the city."

In the "Ileport of the Eastern Lunatic Asylum, of Virginia, for the year 1844,"
it is observed:—" During a period, longer than twelve months, there has been
no enclosure around the southern yard of the institution; and thus nearly all
the male patients have, in point of fact, had no barrier whatsoever to going
wheresoever they pleased during most of the year just passed." The period here
referred to may be considered an intermediate point, in which an uncommon
* Psychological Journal.
degree of liberty, gradually increasing for a year or two before, now reached a
maximum, and continued at this maximum for some years succeeding that period.
A large number of the inmates, under this absence of restriction, were permitted
to ramble into the adjacent country, wheresoever they pleased, unattended,
except into town, where it was otherwise forbidden them to go. They would thus
take excursions in the woods and fields after nuts and fruit; they would fish
in a pond a mile or two off; and bathe in a creek situated at an analogous
distance. Going in and out of the wards thus freely, the asylum lost its
prison-like appearance. When religious services were held in town, they
would also attend them; and, strange to say, when they were of the most
exciting character, 110 harm ensued. Daring the last Methodist revival that
occurred at "Williamsburg (in the summer of 1S1-9), three patients attended
the meetings very regularly every day, and all of them recovered at that time.
The theory of their being permitted to hear preaching, although in town,
was that, as an unusual thing, some sane person connected with the asylum
would almost always be there. But, in truth, the rule forbidding their
entrance into the village was never preserved by them entirely.

This system of extensive liberty was one that was rather the result of
time than any sudden action, which was rather the result of gradual experience
than any a priori theory; and that, moreover, was rather dependent on a
varied condition of mind than upon the capacity of each patient enjoying such
freedom to give a pledge, and his doing so—although we have headed our
article with this title, for the sake of convenience, and remarks into which we
would be almost necessarily led, and that, moreover, concerned a subject of
importance in the management of the insane. The circumstances leading to
one general effect. Avere so various, that it would be difficult to point out the
exact operation of each; although, as in other matters, results may be here
systematized and reduced to a scientific hypothesis. It will, perhaps, be sufficient
for me to point out the fact conceived of a practical bearing ; and in this mode
of viewing the question, the patients of the asylum may be divided into several
classes. In the first placc, there are a number of the insane who have been in
the institution for many years, and who are in a state of dementia. For a very
long period, these have been taken out daily to work. This was the ease even
before the still existing arrangement was adopted, of having two of the four
wards into which the male department is divided, with the doors unlocked
during the day, the gates of the enclosure around the institution being also
open. These patients would then industriously pursue their daily avocations,
and would never care about going outside the premises. No pledge was re-
quired of them, and they were incapable of attending to it if it had been.
A few, with more active minds than the remainder, would occasionally venture
on a fishing excursion, or into the surrounding woods. With many the same
vegetative life is pursued in this respect, as in others where they arc not
allowed to pass freely into the yard outside the building and courts. They
would thus, therefore, proceed regularly to the wood-yard and the garden, and
never think of advancing their footsteps into town or beyond the immediate
neighbourhood. Monoinaniacal patients, on the other hand, constitute a class
where the pledge was necessary. So with those having, as a peculiar propen-
sity, the idea of returning home. Thus, likewise, with the convalescent.
Now, the advantages of this system were very patent. The patient, in
the first place, was rendered much happier. His health was also improved by
being so much in the open air, and the general health of the establishment was
promoted by keeping the atmosphere of the wards pure, through the mass of
the patients being far away from them during most of the day. The faculties
01 many w hich, through disuse, would have sunk into a complete state of
imbecility, were preserved from such declinc by contact with the world. _ Sc)
again all the evils from the assimilation of an asylum to a prison were dissi-
yated. Moreover, the public, from having constant intercourse with these
inmates, had proper ideas conveyed to them as to the management of the
asylum, and false reports were warded off; for an immediate reply to any one
of these would be, "Why, we should have heard the patients of our acquaintance
speak of it." And even when the patient conveyed the opposite impression,
the general plan of unrestrained intercourse with the public neutralized every
evil influence of such a nature. On the whole we may state that the circum-
stances attending this system were decidedly of a character embodying the
greatest degree of freedom found under recent management of the insane; and
the advantages were similar to those following increased freedom everywhere.

In looking over the experience of the period, comprising some years, in
which the patients were so unrestricted, we cannot perceive any inherent evils
which would counterbalance the attendant benefit. So far, for example, as
elopement is concerned, to which a system of the kind might, a priori, seem
liable, the Eastern Asylum will compare favourably with other institutions.
And the unpleasant occurrences consequent were few, of little importance, and
need not be detailed—such, for example, as a patient obtaining ardent spirits.
Occasionally there was some dissension with boys who molested the patients,
but on no occasion was there any serious result. Our inmates were always
perfectly aware that any dispute with boys or others, exterior to the asylum,
would tend to a curtailment of their privileges, whether in any particular
difficulty they were to blame or the reverse.

The system under discussion was terminated by the interference of the grand
jury of James City County. Nothing was alleged in this instance against it,
except, perhaps, a trifling depredation on vegetables or something of the kind,
at one of the adjacent farms. But the jud^e in his charge alluded to the cir-
cumstance, that there existed danger from the simple fact of patients going at
large; and he remarked that the mere sight of the insane might have a perni-
cious effect on ladies. The whole affair 1 think could be clearly traced, not to
the true merits of the question involved, but to an unfortunate disposition ex-
isting between the townspeople and the inhabitants of the contiguous counties,
alike as to the citizens of the place and its institutions; together with a con-
siderable admixture of political antagonism, feelings of intense excitement in
connexion with recent alterations in the government of the asylum, and violent
dissensions thereupon in the community. Since this edict ot the august body
by whom it was enacted, the directors have entrusted the exercise of the male
patients to three officers, as their exclusive duty.

The result of the experience elsewhere, in the forms which I have pointed
out, and the modification of liberty allowed to the patients in the Eastern Lunatic
Asylum, I consider such as should lead to a similar extension of privileges in
other institutions. In the first place, I would advise in this regard, that the
central authority should be particularly careful that the welfare of the lunatics
of a whole state be not sacrificed to the prejudices of a petty locality. And to
the same intent, I think that before an asylum is established, it ought to be
distinctly understood that the patients of the institution would be allowed a
large degree of liberty, and that the people of the vicinity would not be per-
mitted to interfere with this question. If evils were to be removed, let the
central authority inquire into them, and take the necessary steps. It should
be understood that the true view of this question was such, as I may be allowed
to express myself, in the phraseology of a patient in the Eastern Lunatic
Asylum, to the effect—"That the people of Wilhamsburg thought the asylum was
very near them, but that it was the city of Williamsburg that was very near the
asylum." Secondly, one disadvantage under which the Eastern Lunatic Asylum
laboured, from its situation, should be, and with care in general might be, avoided,
that is, there should be only one entrance to the demesnes of the establishment.
Then the officer of the gate-house has entire control of the inmates generally.

Thirdly, I think the plan of confinement in asylums ought always to be modified
by placing some of the patients under charge of its officers, to board in the
neighbourhood, and particularly insane artisans. The last-mentioned class I
would place with persons of their trade in the vicinity, leaving, of course, their
supervision to the superintendent of the institution. On the topic just alluded
to, I have 110 time here to enter at large, but I am satisfied that, by an arrange-
ment of the kind, we could frequently act beneficially upon certain inmates, on
whom the resources of an asylum had previously been lavished in vain; whilst,
by retaining the supervision of a competent medical man, a new set of arrange-
ments would thus be within our power, without the prominent deficiency so
peculiarly felt in the cases of patients under private treatment. By such a
procedure, we would also create in the vicinity of an institution, for those
afflicted with mental alienation, an order of persons familiar with the manage-
ment of lunacy.
