Any organism may be limited by some essential nutrient in short
supply---nitrogen for a plant on poor soil, for instance, or iron for
phytoplankton in the open ocean. For the long-lived tubeworm
Lamellibrachia luymesi, what it needs most and has least is sulfide. L.
luymesi lives clustered around hydrocarbon-releasing ocean floor seeps
in the Gulf of Mexico, and it---or rather, its menagerie of internal
bacterial symbionts---uses the high-energy sulfide the way plants use
sunlight, extracting energy and releasing the waste products, in this
case sulfate.

With a lifespan of up to 250 years, L. luymesi is among the
longest-lived of all animals, but how it obtains sufficient sulfide to
keep going for this long has been a mystery. In this issue, Erik Cordes
and colleagues propose a model in which, by releasing its waste sulfate
not up into the ocean but down into the sediments, L. luymesi stimulates
the growth of sulfide-producing microbes, and ensures its own long-term
survival.

An aggregation of Lamellibrachia luymesi in the Gulf of Mexico (Photo:
Ian MacDonald)

The sulfide L. luymesi needs is created by a consortium of bacteria and
archaea that live in the sediments surrounding the vent. These
chemoautotrophs use energy from hydrocarbons to reduce sulfate to
sulfide, which L. luymesi absorbs through its unique "roots," extensions
of its body that it tunnels into the sediments. Measurements of sulfide
and sulfate fluxes in the water near the vents are inconsistent with the
observed tubeworm colony size and individual longevity, leading Cordes
et al. to propose that L. luymesi also uses its roots to release sulfate
back to the microbial consortia from which it draws its sulfide.

Without this return of sulfate, the model predicts an average lifespan
of only 39 years in a colony of 1,000 individuals; with it, survival
increases to over 250 years, matching the longevity of actual living
tubeworms. The model, which was based largely on empirical data, is
relatively unperturbed by changes in hydrocarbon seep rate, or in the
growth and recruitment rates for the colony. The authors note that the
proposed return of sulfate into deep sediments would, in theory,
increase the local rate of carbonate rock formation, creating a barrier
to fluid circulation into the sediments. Their model predicts this to
occur after about 50 years, in line with observed reductions in tubeworm
recruitment in colonies of this age. They propose that carbonate
precipitation may be inhibited if roots can also release hydrogen ions,
a possibility open to further testing. Their model also explains several
biogeochemical anomalies observed near tubeworm colonies, including
elevated levels of highly degraded hydrocarbons and higher than
predicted rates of sulfur cycling.

To date, the proposed return of sulfate to the sediments through the
roots is only a hypothesis---albeit one with much to support it---that
still awaits direct confirmation. By providing a model in which this
hypothetical interaction provides real benefits and explains real
observations, the authors hope to stimulate further research into the
biology of L. luymesi. For more on tubeworms, see
"Microfauna--Macrofauna Interaction in the Seafloor: Lessons from the
Tubeworm" (DOI:
[10.1371/journal.pbio.0030102](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0030102)),
also in this issue.
