# Introduction

Primate lentiviruses persist in the host by active replication and can
reemerge from latent reservoirs that are established in cells of the
immune system (Finzi and Siliciano 1998; Douek et al. 2003). The
infectious cycle is intimately linked to interactions between
circulating T cells and antigen-presenting cells (Stevenson et al. 1990;
Bukrinsky et al. 1991; Embretson et al. 1993; Swingler et al. 1999;
Geijtenbeek et al. 2000). These interactions involve T cell migration,
adhesion, and antigen-initiated signaling, processes that are dependent
on cytoskeletal dynamics regulated by the Rho subfamily of small GTPases
(Hall 1998; Schmitz et al. 2000).

The lentiviral accessory protein Nef is a multifunctional regulator that
is important for rapid progression to AIDS (Kestler et al. 1991; Piguet
et al. 1999; Renkema and Saksela 2000). One key function of Nef is its
ability to facilitate activation of infected cells and thus provide an
environment that is conducive for viral replication (Skowronski et al.
1993; Baur et al. 1994; Du et al. 1996; Schrager and Marsh 1999; Simmons
et al. 2001). Another important function of Nef is its ability to
promote evasion of the antiviral immune response. This is accomplished
by downregulation of class I MHC complexes from the surface of infected
cells, which protects against detection by cytoxic T cells specific for
viral antigens (Schwartz et al. 1996; Collins et al. 1998).

The ability of Nef to facilitate T cell activation is well documented.
Thymic and peripheral CD4^+^ T cells from transgenic mice are
hypersensitive to stimulation via the T cell antigen receptor (TCR)
(Skowronski et al. 1993; Hanna et al. 1998), as are resting primary
human CD4^+^ T cells (Schrager and Marsh 1999; Wang et al. 2000) and
cell lines transduced to express HIV-1 Nef (Alexander et al. 1994; Baur
et al. 1994). Nef was reported to associate with molecules that play
important roles in antigen-initiated signaling in T cells, including
elements of signaling pathways involving small GTPases. Specifically,
Nef was reported to associate with Vav (Fackler et al. 1999) and
activate p21-activated serine--threonine kinases (PAKs), possibly though
the activation of Rac or CDC42 (Lu et al. 1996). Recent observations
that Nef can activate Rac in a glial cell line have strengthened the
connection between Nef and these pathways (Vilhardt et al. 2002). The
notion that effects of Nef on signaling machineries in T cells are
mediated by small GTPases, their effectors, or both represents an
attractive possibility, yet the exact mechanism resulting in activation
of these pathways has remained elusive. Since Nef likely functions as an
adaptor protein, we exploited a proteomic approach to directly identify
the key molecules Nef uses to subvert the signaling machinery in T
cells. Here we show that Nef targets a key activator of Rac GTPases that
functions downstream of the TCR and chemokine receptors.

# Results

## Nef Binds DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac in T Cells

To identify downstream effectors of Nef in T lymphocytes, we generated
CD4^+^ Jurkat T cells that stably express the extensively studied
patient-derived HIV-1 Nef protein NA7 (Mariani and Skowronski 1993)
tagged at its C-terminus with HA and FLAG epitopes (NA7-hf) ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020006-g001)A). Nef and its associated proteins were purified
by successive immunoprecipitations with anti-HA- and then anti-FLAG
epitope antibodies, followed each time by elution with the respective
peptide epitope and resolved by SDS-PAGE. Several polypeptides with
apparent molecular weights ranging from approximately 20 kDa to 220 kDa
copurified with HIV-1 Nef, but were absent in preparations from control
cells that do not express Nef ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020006-g001)B). Gel
slices containing these polypeptides were digested with trypsin, and the
resulting peptides were sequenced by liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectroscopy (LC/MS/MS) and subjected to database searches (Hu et al.
2002). Two abundant Nef-associated proteins, DOCK2 and ELMO1, were thus
identified. DOCK2 is a lymphocyte-specific CED5/DOCK180/Myoblast City
(CDM) family protein that regulates the activity of Rac1 and Rac2
GTPases downstream of chemokine receptors and the TCR and is essential
for lymphocyte migration and normal antigen-specific responses of T
cells (Fukui et al. 2001; Reif and Cyster 2002; Sanui et al. 2003a). Rac
GTPases are members of the Rho subfamily of small GTP-binding proteins
that control several processes, including cytoskeletal rearrangements
during cell motility and T cell activation (Hall 1998). Recent studies
showed that ELMO1 functionally cooperates with CDM family proteins to
activate Rac (Brugnera et al. 2002; Sanui et al. 2003b). Significantly,
our mass spectroscopic analyses of Nef-associated proteins also
identified Rac2. Furthermore, in addition to Rac2-specific peptides, we
also detected peptides shared by Rac1 and Rac2, raising the possibility
that Rac1 also associates with HIV-1 Nef in T cells. The ubiquitously
expressed Rac1 and hematopoietic cell-specific Rac2 are 95% identical,
and both isoforms regulate cytoskeletal dynamics and gene expression in
T lymphocytes (Yu et al. 2001; Croker et al. 2002).

DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac Are Abundant Nef-Associated Proteins in T Cells\
(A) Schematic representation of epitope-tagged HIV-1 Nef (NA7-hf). The
structured regions of Nef are boxed and the disordered regions, as
determined by X-ray crystallography and NMR studies, are shown by a thin
line. The locations of the N-terminal myristoyl moiety, prolines P72 and
P75 in the PP-II helix, arginine R106, leucines L164 and L165 (LL164),
and the C-terminal HA-FLAG epitopes are indicated.\
(B) DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac2 specifically copurify with HIV-1 Nef from
Jurkat T cells. Jurkat T cells (1.8 ×10^10^) stably expressing NA7-hf
(lane 3) or control Jurkat cells (lane 2) were subjected to the two-step
immunopurification procedure described in the text (see [Materials and
Methods](#s4)). Polypeptides present in purified immune complexes were
resolved by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by LC/MS/MS. We identified 58
DOCK2-specific peptides covering 869 out of 1830 total amino acid
residues (47.5% coverage, expectation value 6.0 × 10^--130^), 10
ELMO1-specific peptides covering 122 out of 727 total amino acid
residues (16.8% coverage, expectation value 1.0 × 10^−10^), and three
Rac-specific (two of which were Rac2-specific) peptides covering 26 out
of 192 total amino acid residues (13.5% coverage, expectation value 4.6
× 10^−4^). Bands corresponding to DOCK2, ELMO1, Rac2 and their predicted
molecular weights, NA7-hf Nef, and the FLAG peptide used for elution are
indicated.

## Nef Binds the DOCK2--ELMO1--Rac Complex

By analogy to previously described interactions among Rac, ELMO1, and
CDM family proteins (Brugnera et al. 2002; Sanui et al. 2003b), our
finding that DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac2 copurified with HIV-1 Nef suggested
that DOCK2 forms a ternary complex with ELMO1 and Rac2 and that Nef
binds this complex. To investigate these possibilities, we attempted to
reconstitute these interactions in human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK 293)
cells. Although HEK 293 cells express endogeneous ELMO1, our initial
studies revealed that the association of Nef with DOCK2 and Rac2 was
significantly enhanced by ectopic expression of ELMO1 (data not shown).
Thus, to determine whether ELMO1 and Rac2 copurify with DOCK2,
DOCK2-containing complexes were purified from HEK 293 cells transiently
expressing His-tagged DOCK2, Myc-tagged ELMO1, and Myc-tagged Rac2 via
DOCK2 using Ni--NTA resin and eluted with imidazole. Immunoblotting
revealed that ELMO1 and Rac2 copurified with DOCK2 ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020006-g002)A, lane 3), indicating that DOCK2 complexes with
ELMO1 (DOCK2--ELMO1) and Rac2.

Lentiviral Nef Binds the DOCK2--ELMO1--Rac Complex\
(A) HIV-1 Nef binds the DOCK2--ELMO1--Rac2 complex. His-DOCK2,
Myc-ELMO1, and Myc-Rac2 alone (lanes 1, 3, and 5) or together with
NA7-hf Nef (lanes 2, 4, and 6) were transiently expressed in HEK 293
cells as indicated. DOCK2 was precipitated from extracts (lanes 1 and 2)
with Ni--NTA resin (lanes 3 and 4). Nef--DOCK2 was then precipitated
with anti-FLAG affinity gel (lanes 5 and 6), and the epitope-tagged
proteins were detected by immunoblotting and visualized by enhanced
chemiluminescence.\
(B) Rac1 associates with HIV-1 Nef. Nef and associated proteins were
isolated from extracts of HEK 293 cells transiently expressing DOCK2,
ELMO1, and Rac1 either alone (lanes 1 and 4), with NA7-hf (lanes 2 and
5), or with a Nef variant containing a disrupted myristoylation signal
(lanes 3 and 6). Nef and associated proteins were detected in anti-FLAG
immunoprecipitates (lanes 1--3) and in extracts (lanes 4--6) by
immunoblotting.\
(C) The interaction with DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac2 is a conserved function
of lentiviral Nef proteins. The ability of selected hf-tagged HIV-1
(lanes 1--3 and 5) and SIV mac239 (lane 4) Nef proteins to bind DOCK2,
ELMO1, and Rac2 was determined as described in the legend to (B) above.
The protein band in (C) indicated by the asterisk is the heavy chain of
anti-FLAG mAb.

Subsequently, we asked whether ELMO1 and Rac2 are subunits of DOCK2--Nef
complexes. DOCK2--Nef-containing complexes were isolated from HEK 293
cells transiently expressing His-tagged DOCK2, Myc-tagged ELMO1,
Myc-tagged Rac2, and HA-FLAG epitope-tagged HIV-1 Nef (NA7-hf) via DOCK2
using Ni--NTA resin and eluted with imidazole ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020006-g002)A, lane 4). DOCK2--Nef complexes were then
reisolated from this eluate via Nef by anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation. It
is evident that ELMO1 and Rac2 also copurified with complexes containing
both Nef and DOCK2 ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020006-g002)A, lane 6), thus
supporting the possibility that HIV-1 Nef binds DOCK2--ELMO1 complexes
that contain Rac2.

## Nef Targets Rac1 and Rac 2 Isoforms

Our mass spectroscopic analyses indicated that HIV-1 Nef associates with
Rac2, but left open the possibility that it also targets Rac1.
Therefore, we tested whether Nef can associate with Rac1 in the context
of DOCK2 and ELMO1 using the same HEK 293 transient expression assay.
Nef and its associated proteins were isolated from cell extracts by
anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation and visualized by immunoblotting ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020006-g002)B). Nef formed readily detectable complexes
incorporating Rac1 ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020006-g002)B, lane 2), while a
mutant Nef protein unable to associate with membranes due to disruption
of its N-terminal myristoylation signal (NA7~(G2∇HA)~), and therefore
functionally defective, did not associate with DOCK2, ELMO1, or Rac1
([Figure 2](#pbio-0020006-g002)B, lane 3). These results indicate that
myristoylated Nef targets the Rac1 and Rac2 isoforms.

Nef proteins from well-characterized primate lentiviruses display
considerable amino acid sequence variation. Therefore, we verified that
Nef proteins from additional well-characterized laboratory HIV-1 strains
(SF2 and NL4--3) bind DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac2. We also tested a Nef
protein from a strain of pathogenic SIV, mac239, that is important for
rapid progression to AIDS in experimentally infected rhesus macaques
(Kestler et al. 1991). Nef and its associated proteins were isolated
from HEK 293 cell extracts by anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation and
visualized by immunoblotting ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020006-g002)C).
Functional Nef proteins from all lentiviral strains tested associated
with DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac2. This indicates that the ability to
associate with Rac and its upstream regulators is a conserved function
of primate lentiviral Nef.

## Nef Activates Rac in Resting T Cells

Since DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac are major Nef-associated proteins in Jurkat
T cells and since DOCK2 mediates Rac activation, we determined the
effect of Nef on Rac activity in these cells. The active GTP-bound form
of Rac (Rac~GTP~) binds the p21-binding domains (PBD) of PAKs directly
(Burbelo et al. 1995). Hence, we used a PBD--GST fusion protein in
pulldown assays to measure the fraction of activated Rac in vivo. Jurkat
T cells were transduced with a lentiviral vector directing the
expression of HIV-1 Nef (FUGWCNA7) or a control empty vector (FUGW).
Extracts prepared from these cells were incubated with PBD--GST and the
fraction of PBD-bound Rac was determined by immunoblotting ([Figure
3](#pbio-0020006-g003)A). Notably, the expression of Nef resulted in a
readily detectable increase in the steady-state level of PBD-bound Rac
([Figure 3](#pbio-0020006-g003)A, lane 3), consistent with the
possibility that the interaction of Nef with DOCK2--ELMO1 increases Rac
activation.

Nef Activates Rac in Resting CD4^+^ T Lymphocytes\
(A) HIV-1 Nef activates Rac in Jurkat T cells. Jurkat T cells (lane 1)
were transduced with a control empty vector (FUGW; lane 2) or the same
vector expressing HIV-1 NA7 Nef (FUGWCNA7; lane 3). Rac~GTP~ was
precipitated from cell extracts with recombinant PAK1 PBD--GST. PBD--GST
bound Rac~GTP~ (top), total Rac present in extracts (middle), and Nef
(bottom) were detected by immunoblotting.\
(B) Flow cytometric analysis of Gag and CD4 expression in resting CD4^+^
T lymphocytes transduced with HIV-1 derived vectors in the presence of
IL-7. Percentages of cells productively infected with *nef*-deleted H-Δ
vector (boxed area in middle panel) or with HIV-1 NA7 *nef* containing
H-NA7 vector (right panel) are shown. Results obtained with uninfected
control CD4^+^ T cells cultured in the presence of IL-7 are also shown
(left panel).\
(C) HIV-1 Nef specifically activates Rac in resting primary CD4^+^ T
lymphocytes. Rac~GTP~ and CDC42~GTP~ were precipitated with PAK1
PBD--GST from extracts prepared from CD4^+^ T lymphocytes transduced
with HIV-1 derived vectors, shown in (B), and analyzed as described in
(A).

In nontransformed T lymphocytes, Rac activation through DOCK2 is tied to
chemotactic and antigenic stimuli. To assess whether Nef can uncouple
these processes, we determined the effect of Nef on Rac activation in
primary CD4^+^ T lymphocytes in the absence of stimulation with antigen
and chemokines. While resting T cells are normally refractory to
productive infection by lentiviruses and lentivirus-derived vectors, a
sizable fraction becomes permissive for infection when cultured in the
presence of cytokines such as IL-7 (Unutmaz et al. 1999). We used this
procedure to infect primary resting CD4^+^ T lymphocytes with an
HIV-1-derived vector expressing HIV-1 NA7 Nef (H-NA7) or a control
*nef*-deleted vector (H-Δ). Since HIV-1 Env protein may activate
DOCK2-controlled signaling pathways through binding to chemokine
receptors such as CXCR4, *env*-defective, VSV-G-pseudotyped viruses were
used in these experiments. We cultured 98% pure populations of CD4^+^ T
cells isolated from the peripheral blood leukocytes of healthy donors
for 5 d in the presence of IL-7 and then transduced them with
Nef-expressing H-NA7 or control H-Δ virus. The purity of the infected
populations and the efficiency of transduction were assessed 4 d later
by flow cytometric analysis of CD4 expression on the cell surface and
intracellular p24 Gag expression, respectively. As shown in [Figure
3](#pbio-0020006-g003)B, between 13% and 15% of CD4^+^ T cells were
productively infected. Notably, the unusually low level of CD4 on the
surface of cells infected with H-NA7 virus was due to robust
downregulation of cell surface CD4 by NA7 Nef (Mariani and Skowronski
1993). Cell extracts were prepared from the infected populations, and
PBD--GST pulldown assays were performed to determine the fraction of
activated Rac. Strikingly, infection with H-NA7 resulted in a readily
detectable increase in the steady state level of activated Rac ([Figure
3](#pbio-0020006-g003)C). Based on direct quantitations of
chemiluminescent signals of total and PBD--GST bound Rac, we estimated
that approximately 1.2% of the total Rac in extracts from cells
transduced with H-NA7 was bound to PBD--GST as compared to 0.2% in
extracts from cells transduced with H-Δ. The activation of Rac was
specifically due to the expression of Nef and not other viral gene
products, as infection with the otherwise isogenic H-Δ virus did not
increase PBD--GST-reactive Rac. To address the specificity of Nef effect
towards Rac, we then asked whether Nef affects activity of CDC42 GTPase,
which also uses PAK as a downstream effector (Burbelo et al. 1995).
Direct quantitations of chemiluminescent signals for total and
PBD--GST-bound CDC42 revealed that less than 0.2% of the total CDC42 in
extracts from H-NA7 and H-Δ transduced cells was PBD--GST bound.
Therefore, we concluded that Nef primarily activates Rac and not CDC42
in CD4^+^ T lymphocytes in the absence of antigenic stimuli.

## Nef Activates Rac through DOCK2--ELMO1

Next we asked whether Nef activates Rac through DOCK2--ELMO1. To
determine whether ELMO1 is required for the effect of Nef, we measured
Rac activation by Nef in NS1 lymphoma cells, which do not express the
endogenous ELMO1 (Sanui et al. 2003b) and in NS1 cells in which ELMO1
expression was restored by retrovirus-mediated transfer of *ELMO1* cDNA
(NS1~ELMO1~). NS1 and NS1~ELMO1~ cells were infected with a lentiviral
vector expressing HIV-1 NA7 Nef (FUGWCNA7) or with a control empty
vector (FUGW). Cell extracts were prepared from the infected
populations, and PBD--GST pulldown assays were performed to determine
the fraction of activated Rac. In agreement with a previous report
(Sanui at al. 2003b), NS1 cells contain a small but readily detectable
pool of activated Rac in spite of the lack of detectable ELMO1
expression, which is most likely generated by ELMO1-independent
mechanism(s) ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020006-g004)A, lane 1). Notably,
expression of Nef in the absence of ELMO1 and expression of ELMO1 in the
absence of Nef did not increase the fraction of activated Rac (compare
lane 2 to lane 1 and lane 3 to lane 1, respectively, in [Figure
4](#pbio-0020006-g004)A). In contrast, expression of Nef in the presence
of ELMO1 induced a readily detectably increase in the pool of activated
Rac in the NS1~ELMO1~ cells ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020006-g004)A, lane 4).
These observations indicate that Nef activates Rac through an
ELMO1-dependent mechanism.

ELMO1 and DOCK2 Mediate Rac Activation by HIV-1 Nef\
(A) ELMO1 is required for Rac activation by Nef in NS1 cells. Rac~GTP~
and total Rac in the extracts prepared from ELMO1-deficient NS1 cells
(lanes 1 and 2) and ELMO1-expressing NS1 cells (lanes 3 and 4) following
transduction with a lentiviral vector expressing HIV-1 Nef (lanes 2 and
4) or a control empty vector (lanes 1 and 3) were visualized as
described in the legend to [Figure 3](#pbio-0020006-g003).\
(B) Nef activates Rac through DOCK2 and ELMO1 in HEK 293 cells. Rac~GTP~
and total Rac in the extracts prepared from HEK 293 cells coexpressing
the indicated proteins were visualized as described above.

Next, we studied Rac activation by Nef in HEK 293 cells, which do not
express endogeneous DOCK2. Combinations of Nef, DOCK2, ELMO1, and either
Rac1 or Rac2 were expressed in HEK 293 cells by transient transfection.
The expression of Nef in the absence of DOCK2 had little effect on the
activation of either Rac isoform ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020006-g004)B, lanes
2 and 7). Ectopic expression of DOCK2 and ELMO1 increased the fraction
of activated Rac1 and Rac2 by approximately 3- to 4-fold ([Figure
4](#pbio-0020006-g004)B, lanes 3 and 8), which is in agreement with a
previous report (Sanui et al. 2003b). Significantly, coexpression of
myristoylated, but not unmyristoylated, Nef ([Figure
4](#pbio-0020006-g004)B, lanes 4 and 9 versus lanes 5 and 10) with DOCK2
and ELMO1 further enhanced the fraction of activated Rac isoforms by
approximately 2-fold, and this effect of Nef was more pronounced for
Rac2 (compare lane 9 with lane 4 in [Figure 4](#pbio-0020006-g004)B).
Together, these data indicate that myristoylated Nef stimulates Rac
activation through the DOCK2--ELMO1 complex.

## Nef Activates Rac through Association with DOCK2 and ELMO1

We identified mutations in Nef that disrupt Rac activation. Nef was
reported to associate with an active form of PAK, and this interaction
was suggested to be important for Nef effects on the cytoskeleton and T
cell activation (Fackler et al. 1999; Arora et al. 2000; Wang et al.
2000). Since PAK is an immediate downstream effector of Rac, we asked
whether the abilities of Nef to activate Rac through DOCK2--ELMO1 and to
associate with activated PAK are correlated. Two different Nef mutations
that were previously reported to disrupt its association with activated
PAK (P72A,P75A and R106A) (Sawai et al. 1995; Renkema and Saksela 2000),
yet unlike the myristoylation signal mutation (G2~∇~HA) did not
significantly affect Nef functions in other assays, were tested for
their effects on Rac activation in Jurkat T cells ([Figure
5](#pbio-0020006-g005)A) and in HEK 293 cells transiently expressing
DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac2 ([Figure 5](#pbio-0020006-g005)B). Both mutations
abolished the ability of Nef to stimulate Rac activation ([Figures
5](#pbio-0020006-g005)A and [5](#pbio-0020006-g005)B, lanes 4 and 5). As
expected, the same was true for mutation of the myristoylation signal in
Nef ([Figures 5](#pbio-0020006-g005)A and [5](#pbio-0020006-g005)B, lane
3). In contrast, a mutation that specifically abrogates the interaction
of Nef with clathrin adaptor proteins (LL164AA; Greenberg et al. 1998)
had little disruptive effect on Rac activation ([Figures
5](#pbio-0020006-g005)A and [5](#pbio-0020006-g005)B, lane 6).

Nef Potentiates Rac Activation through Association with DOCK2--ELMO1\
(A and B) Myristoylation signal, P72,P75, and R106 in Nef are required
for Rac activation. Rac~GTP~ and total Rac in the extracts prepared from
Jurkat T cells transduced with lentiviral vectors expressing no Nef (−)
or the indicated Nef proteins (A) and HEK 293 cells transiently
coexpressing the indicated Nef mutants together with DOCK2, ELMO1, and
Rac2 (B) were visualized as described in the legend to [Figure
3](#pbio-0020006-g003) and quantified by direct imaging of
chemiluminescent signals. The fraction of total Rac present in the
extracts that was PBD--GST bound is shown in the histograms. Data in the
histogram shown in (B) are averages of three independent experiments and
error bars represent two standard deviations.\
(C) Myristoylation signal, P72,P75, and R106 in Nef are required for
association with DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac2. The ability of selected Nef
mutants to associate with DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac2 was determined as
described in [Figure 2](#pbio-0020006-g002).

Next we asked whether mutations in Nef that disrupted Rac2 activation
affected the association with DOCK2, ELMO1, and Rac2 ([Figure
5](#pbio-0020006-g005)C). The LL164AA mutation, which did not
significantly compromise the stimulation of Rac activation, did not
affect the association of Nef with these proteins ([Figure
5](#pbio-0020006-g005)C, lane 6). In contrast, mutations that reduced
Rac2 activation by Nef also diminished its association with DOCK2,
ELMO1, and Rac2 ([Figure 5](#pbio-0020006-g005)C, lanes 3--5). Notably,
the P72A,P75A and R106A mutations completely disrupted detectable
association with ELMO1 and Rac2, but only weakened that with DOCK2,
suggesting that Nef associates with both DOCK2 alone and DOCK2 complexed
with ELMO1 and/or Rac2 and that the P72A,P75A and R106A mutations
preferentially disrupt binding to the latter complex. Thus, robust
stimulation of Rac2 activation by Nef requires its association with both
DOCK2 and ELMO1.

## Functional Consequences of Nef Interactions with DOCK2--ELMO1 and Rac

The CD4^+^ T lymphocyte is a major target of infection by primate
lentiviruses. Nef was reported to lower the threshold signal required
for antigen-induced responses of T cells (Schrager and Marsh 1999; Wang
et al. 2000), and this effect was proposed to be an important component
to stimulation of viral replication by Nef in vivo (Alexander et al.
1994; Simmons et al. 2001). Since DOCK2 mediates Rac activation
downstream of the TCR to modulate T cell responsiveness and downstream
of chemokine receptors to mediate chemotactic responses (Fukui et al.
2001; Sanui et al. 2003a), we studied effects of Nef on these processes
in T lymphocytes.

Purified populations of primary resting CD4^+^ T cells were transduced
with VSV-G-pseudotyped H-NA7 or *nef*-deleted H-Δ in the presence of
IL-7. Cells were stimulated 4--6 d following transduction with
plate-bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies, mixed at various ratios,
for various amounts of time. Intracellular IL-2 and p24 Gag were
visualized and quantified by flow cytometry to provide a measure of
cellular activation of the infected cells in response to the
stimulation. In the absence of anti-CD3/anti-CD28 stimulation, neither
uninfected (Gag-negative) nor the productively infected (Gag-positive)
cells, produced detectable amounts of IL-2 ([Figure
6](#pbio-0020006-g006)). In contrast, stimulation through CD3 and CD28
induced readily detectable accumulation of IL-2 in both H-Δ- and
H-NA7-transduced populations. Notably, a larger fraction of productively
infected CD4^+^ T lymphocytes typically proceeded to express IL-2 than
uninfected cells. This phenomenon suggests that the permissive state for
HIV-1 infection induced by IL-7 is associated with an increased
responsiveness to activation via CD3 and CD28. However, no significant
difference in the levels of IL-2 expression in cells infected with H-Δ
compared to those infected with H-NA7 was detected across a wide range
of stimulation conditions. These observations contrast with results from
previous studies using T cell lymphoma and nontransformed CD4^+^ T
lymphocytes expressing Nef alone (Schrager and Marsh 2000; Wang et al.
2001). This difference could, for example, reflect the modifying effect
of other HIV-1 gene products that were not tested in the previous
experiments. On the other hand, we cannot exclude the possibility that
IL-7 treatment masks the effect of Nef. Since Nef deregulates DOCK2
function and DOCK2 is essential for proper signaling through the
immunological synapse, further studies under a variety of conditions
that modulate the formation and function of the immunological synapse
may be required to reveal this effect of Nef in the context of HIV-1
infection.

Effect of Nef on IL-2 Expression in HIV-1-Infected CD4^+^ T Lymphocytes
Stimulated through CD3 and CD28\
CD4^+^ T lymphocytes transduced with H-Δ and H-NA7 HIV-1-derived vectors
were not stimulated (unstimulated) or stimulated with immobilized
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 mAbs (anti-CD3, anti-CD28) in the presence of
Golgi-Stop for 5 h and stained for intracellular IL-2 and p24 Gag.
Percentages of IL-2-positive and IL-2-negative cells in the Gag-negative
and Gag-positive populations are shown.

DOCK2 regulates the activation of Rac proteins during lymphocyte
migration in response to chemokine gradients (Fukui et al. 2001).
Therefore, we also asked whether Nef affects lymphocyte chemotaxis.
Jurkat T cells, which constitutively express CXCR4, a major coreceptor
for T-cell tropic HIV and a receptor for stromal-derived factor 1
(SDF-1) (Deng et al. 1996; Feng et al. 1996), were transiently
transfected with a control plasmid expressing enhanced green fluorescent
protein (GFP) alone or with a plasmid that coexpresses Nef and a GFP
marker protein from the same bicistronic transcription unit. We then
measured the chemotaxis of transfected populations to SDF-1 using a
transwell migration assay. The relative frequency of control and
Nef-expressing cells in the migrated populations was determined by flow
cytometric measurement of GFP expression. Approximately 30% of control
cells migrated regardless of the level of GFP expression, indicating
that the chemotaxis in this assay was robust ([Figure
7](#pbio-0020006-g007)A). In contrast, the chemotaxis of cells
coexpressing Nef and GFP was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner.

Nef Disrupts T Cell Migration to SDF-1\
(A) Migration of cell populations shown in (B) expressing GFP (open
circle), ectopic CXCR4, and GFP (filled circle), HIV-1 NA7 Nef and GFP
(open box), HIV-1 NA7 Nef, ectopic CXCR4 and GFP (filled box) to SDF-1
was measured in transwell assays.\
(B) Transient expression of ectopic CXCR4 restores CXCR4 levels on the
surface of Nef-expressing cells. Flow cytometric analysis of Jurkat T
cells transiently expressing GFP (panel 1) or HIV-1 NA7 Nef and GFP
(panel 2) and together with ectopic CXCR4 (panels 3 and 4,
respectively).

Control experiments revealed that Nef caused a modest decrease in cell
surface expression of CXCR4 (compare panels 1 and 2 in [Figure
7](#pbio-0020006-g007)B). This observation raised the possibility that
Nef-expressing cells were unresponsive to SDF-1 due to abnormally low
levels of CXCR4 at the cell surface rather than due to deregulation of
the DOCK2--ELMO1 complex. To address this possibility, we restored CXCR4
on the surface of Nef-expressing cells to levels equal to and even
higher than those seen in control cells by transiently expressing
ectopic CXCR4 receptor and then performed migration assays using these
cell populations ([Figure 7](#pbio-0020006-g007)B, panels 3 and 4).
Significantly, the migration of cells with restored CXCR4 levels was
still inhibited by Nef expression ([Figure 7](#pbio-0020006-g007)A). We
concluded that HIV-1 Nef blocks lymphocyte migration to SDF-1
principally by interfering with CXCR4-controlled signaling cascades
rather than by downregulating CXCR4 from the cell surface.

We then asked whether inhibition of Jurkat T cell migration by Nef
correlated with its ability to potentiate Rac activation by DOCK2 and
ELMO1. As expected, we found that disruption of the myristoylation
signal in Nef (NA7~(G2~^∇^~HA)~) abolished the inhibition of migration
([Figure 8](#pbio-0020006-g008)A and [8](#pbio-0020006-g008)B).
Furthermore, the P72A,P75A, and R106A mutations diminished the ability
of Nef to block migration, albeit to different extents. In contrast, the
LL164AA mutation, which had little disruptive effect on enhancement of
Rac activation, was fully functional in this assay. These observations
suggested that deregulated activation of Rac GTPases is instrumental for
the defective migration of Nef-expressing cells. To explore this
possibility further, we ectopically expressed constitutively active Rac1
and Rac2 (Rac1~G12V~, Rac2~G12V~) and, as controls, wild-type Rac1 and
Rac2 in Jurkat T cells and measured their migration to SDF-1 ([Figure
8](#pbio-0020006-g008)C). Expression of wild-type Rac GTPases stimulated
chemotaxis approximately 2- to 3-fold. In contrast, expression of the
constitutively active forms of each Rac GTPase severely suppressed
lymphocyte migration to SDF-1. Thus, deregulated Rac activation inhibits
directional cell movement, most likely by disrupting spatially organized
rearrangements of the cytoskeleton that are induced by chemokine
gradients. These results further support a model in which Nef disrupts
migration to SDF-1 by activating Rac through the DOCK2--ELMO1 module and
thus uncoupling Rac activation from chemokine receptor signaling.

Nef Disrupts Chemotaxis by Activating Rac through DOCK2--ELMO1\
(A and B) Jurkat T cells expressing wild-type or mutant HIV-1 Nef
proteins and GFP reporter were used in transwell chemotaxis assays with
SDF-1. Percentage of migrated cells expressing GFP alone (open circle),
or together with HIV-1 NA7 (open square), NA7~(G2~^∇^~HA)~ (open
diamond), NA7~(P72A,P75A)~ (open triangle), NA7~(R106A)~ (filled
circle), and NA7~(LL164AA)~ (filled triangle) is shown as a function of
GFP fluorescence intensity in (A) and in (B) for the single GFP
fluorescence intensity interval indicated by the shaded rectangle in
(A).\
(C) Constitutively active Rac GTPases disrupt lymphocyte migration to
SDF-1. Migration of Jurkat T cells transiently expressing wild-type
(Rac1, Rac2), constitutively active (Rac1~G12V~, Rac2~G12V~), or as a
control HIV-1 Nef were also measured. Data shown are averages of three
independent experiments and error bars represent two standard
deviations.

The above observations predicted that Nef likely causes a general
migration defect. Therefore, we also studied the effect of Nef on Jurkat
T cell migration to the MIP-1β chemokine. Since the MIP-1β receptor
(CCR5) is not constitutively expressed in Jurkat T cells, we transiently
expressed CCR5 and GFP marker from a bicistronic vector either alone or
together with HIV-1 NA7 Nef. Using this vector, CCR5 expression levels
were positively correlated with GFP marker protein expression ([Figure
9](#pbio-0020006-g009)A, panels 2 and 3). Notably, flow cytometric
analysis revealed that CCR5 cell-surface expression was not
downregulated by Nef (compare panels 5 and 6 in [Figure
9](#pbio-0020006-g009)A). We then measured the ability of these cells to
migrate to MIP-1β. Migration of cells coexpressing CCR5 and HIV-1 Nef
was impaired compared to control cells expressing CCR5 at comparable
levels ([Figure 9](#pbio-0020006-g009)B). These data confirm that Nef
induces a general defect in lymphocyte migration by targeting
DOCK2--ELMO1 and Rac.

HIV-1 Nef Disrupts CCR5-Mediated Migration\
(A) HIV-1 Nef does not downregulate CCR5. Flow cytometric analysis of
CCR5 and GFP in Jurkat T cells transiently expressing GFP alone
(panel 1) or CCR5 and GFP in the absence (panel 2) and presence (panel
3) of HIV-1 Nef. Histograms of CCR5 expression for cell populations
within a single GFP fluorescence intensity interval indicated by the
rectangle in panel 1 are shown in panels 4 to 6, respectively.\
(B) Percentage of cells migrated to MIP-1β and expressing GFP alone
(open circle), GFP and CCR5 (open triangle), or GFP, CCR5 and HIV-1 Nef
(filled triangle) is shown as a function of GFP fluorescence intensity.

# Discussion

Nef is a multifunctional adaptor protein that modulates signal
transduction and protein-sorting machineries. We purified to near
homogeneity an abundant Nef-associated protein complex from T cells and
identified by mass spectroscopy its major subunits as DOCK2 and ELMO1, a
bipartite Rac activator (Sanui et al. 2003b). Notably, the extensive
large-scale biochemical purification and sensitive proteomic analyses
described in this report did not detect several cellular proteins
previously reported to associate with HIV-1 Nef and mediate the effects
of Nef in the cell (data not shown). This includes cellular proteins
such as Vav (Fackler et al. 1999), PAKs (Sawai et al. 1995), inositol
triphosphate receptor (Manninen and Saksela 2002), Lck protein-tyrosine
kinase (Baur et al. 1997), clathrin adaptors (Greenberg et al. 1997; Le
Gall et al. 1998; Piguet et al. 1998), and others.

Why were proteins previously reported to associate with Nef not detected
in our studies? One possible explanation is that previously reported
associations are unstable under the biochemical purification conditions
used in our studies. This likely explains the apparent absence of
clathrin adaptors in Nef preparations purified in our studies, since we
know that Nef binds AP-2/AP-1 clathrin adaptors only weakly in the salt
and pH conditions used here (data not shown). It is also possible that
in some cases, epitope tags may be buried and therefore inaccessible to
the monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) used for immunoaffinity purification.
Moreover, some of the previously reported associations, especially those
with protein kinases, such as PAKs, were best detected by an
ultrasensitive in vitro kinase assay (Sawai et al. 1995) and, as our
data show, are likely of exceedingly low stoichiometry. (Of note, we did
detect the presence of p62 phosphoprotein \[PAK\] by in vitro kinase
assays of anti-Nef purifications \[data not shown\]). Finally, some of
the described associations, such as that with thioesterase, are known to
occur only with selected Nef variants (Cohen et al. 2000), while those
we report here occur with all Nef variants tested. Nonetheless, the
specific isolation of the Nef--DOCK2--ELMO1--Rac complex reported here
provides strong biochemical evidence to reinforce predictions from
previous genetic studies that Nef functions through multiple independent
interactions with different sets of downstream effector proteins.

Our observations strongly argue that DOCK2--ELMO1 is the major upstream
regulator used by Nef to activate Rac in T cells and that through this
interaction Nef can activate Rac in CD4^+^ T lymphocytes even in the
absence of stimulation with antigen or chemokines. These data indicate
that Nef targets a critical switch, DOCK2--ELMO1, that regulates Rac
GTPases downstream of chemokine receptors and the TCR and uses it to
modulate the downstream processes they control. Thus, the interaction of
Nef with DOCK2 and ELMO1 provides an important mechanism by which Nef
may impact pathogenesis by primate lentiviruses.

Our data strongly suggest that DOCK2--ELMO1 is the major activator of
Rac targeted by Nef in T lymphocytes. This model is supported by the
observations that Nef physically associates with a complex that contains
DOCK2--ELMO1 and Rac, that specific mutations in Nef simultaneously
disrupt its ability to bind this complex and to activate Rac, and that
Nef fails to activate Rac in the absence of ELMO1. Although previous
reports implicated Vav, a Rac1 guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF),
as the critical downstream effector that Nef binds directly to activate
PAK (Fackler et al. 1999), our data do not support this possibility.
Notably, we have been unable to detect the presence of Vav in anti-Nef
immune complexes by both proteomic analyses and immunoblotting,
indicating that these interactions are of low abundance relative to
those with DOCK2 and ELMO1 and are therefore unlikely to mediate the
bulk of Nef\'s impact on the Rac pathway. Significantly, ELMO1 is
ubiquitously expressed (Gumienny et al. 2001) and can associate with Nef
in nonlymphoid cells in the absence of DOCK2 (data not shown). Thus, we
postulate a general mechanism in which ELMO1, possibly in complex with
another CDM family protein, mediates Rac activation and PAK recruitment
by Nef that is observed in nonlymphoid cells (Sawai et al. 1995; Fackler
et al. 1999; Arora et al. 2000).

Our observation that the expression of Nef from the integrated HIV-1
provirus in primary CD4^+^ T cells did not alter IL-2 production in
standard activation protocols was unexpected, because previous genetic
evidence linked Nef binding to DOCK2--ELMO1 and the ensuing activation
of Rac GTPases to the the ability of Nef to facilitate T cell
activation. Specifically, the same mutations that we observed to disrupt
Rac activation through the DOCK2--ELMO1 complex were previously reported
to disrupt the stimulatory effect of Nef on aspects of T cell activation
(Sawai et al. 1995; Simmons et al. 2001), and the observed effects were
in some cases dramatic (Wang et al. 2000). Moreover, Rac activation by
DOCK2 facilitates T cell responsiveness to antigen, as disrupted Rac
activation in *DOCK2*(−/−) and *Rac2*(−/−) mice is associated with
defective immunological synapse formation and depressed antigen-specific
responses (Yu et al. 2001; Sanui et al. 2003a). Since Nef deregulates
DOCK2 function and DOCK2 is essential for proper signaling through the
immunological synapse, further studies under a variety of conditions
that modulate the formation and function of the immunological synapse
may be required to reveal the effect of Nef in the context of HIV-1
infection.

Interestingly, the chemokine receptor system plays crucial roles in
infection by primate lentiviruses. Previous studies revealed its
essential role for virus entry into target cells (Deng et al. 1996; Feng
et al. 1996). Primate lentiviruses also exploit this system to recruit
uninfected target cells to sites of viral replication (Weissman et al.
1997; Swingler et al. 1999). Our observations reveal an additional level
of complexity in primate lentivirus--chemokine receptor system
interactions. Inhibiting chemotaxis of the infected T cells likely
disrupts the generation of the immune response. During generation of the
immune response, T cells are initially activated in the paracortex of
lymph nodes and then migrate to the edges of follicles, where they
interact with antigen receptor-activated B cells (Garside et al. 1998).
This physical interaction is required to drive B cells towards antibody
production, isotype switching, and the affinity maturation of the
antibody response. Hence, the development and maturation of the immune
response require the ordered migration of activated T cells to specific
sites within lymphoid tissue (Delon et al. 2002). Notably, recent in
vivo evidence documents Nef-dependent alterations in the distribution of
SIV mac239-infected CD4^+^ T lymphocytes in the lymph nodes of
experimentally infected rhesus macaques (Sugimoto et al. 2003). In lymph
nodes of monkeys infected with *nef-*deleted SIV, most infected T cells
were located in the B cell-rich follicles and in the border region
between the paracortex and the follicles. In contrast, in monkeys
infected with SIV harboring a functional *nef* gene, most productively
infected T cells remained in the T cell-rich paracortex and were only
infrequently present in proximity to B cell follicles. This evidence
shows that Nef disrupts the ordered migration patterns of infected
CD4^+^ T lymphocytes in vivo and reinforces the possibility that this
disruption impairs the generation and maturation of the immune response
to antigens. Since a large fraction of HIV-1-infected CD4^+^ T cells is
specific for HIV-1 antigens (Douek et al. 2002), this effect of Nef
provides another mechanism to suppress the antiviral immune response.
Taken together, the functional interaction of Nef with DOCK2, ELMO1, and
Rac enables Nef to modulate multiple aspects of T cell function.

# Materials and Methods

## 

### Construction of expression plasmids

Sequences encoding variant and mutant Nef proteins tagged at their
C-termini with a peptide (hf) containing the HA and FLAG epitopes
(DTYRYIYANATYPYDVPDYAGDYKDDDDK) were subcloned into pBABE-*puro* and pCG
expression plasmids (Morgenstern and Land 1990; Greenberg et al. 1998).
In NA7~(G2∇HA)~ Nef, the myristoylation signal was disrupted by
insertion of the HA epitope (ANATYPYDVPDYAG) at glycine G2. The
full-length human *ELMO1* cDNA (clone IMAGE:4521393; ResGen, Carlsbad,
California, United States), *DOCK2* cDNA (KIAA0209, clone ha04649;
Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Chiba, Japan), and cDNAs encoding
wild-type and mutant forms of Rac1 and Rac2 (kindly provided by Linda
Van Aelst, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York,
United States) were subcloned into pCG plasmids containing N-terminal
c-Myc (EQKLISEEDL) or polyhistidine (HHHHHHH) epitope tags, using
standard techniques. pBABE *ELMO1* contains an N-terminal c-Myc
epitope-tagged *ELMO1* cDNA subcloned into the pBABE-*neo* vector. H-NA7
was constructed by substituting the HIV-1 NL4--3 *nef* coding sequence
with that of HIV-1 NA7 *nef* (Mariani and Skowronski 1993) in pNL4--3
carrying a frameshift mutation at the KpnI site at position 6463 in
*env*, kindly provided by Klaus Strebel (National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States). H-Δ is based on H-NA7 with a deletion that
removes residues 1--34 of Nef and prevents expression of Nef protein.
For chemotaxis assays, cDNAs encoding HIV-1 NA7 Nef, human CCR5 (kindly
provided by Frank Kirchhoff, Universitätsklinikum, Ulm, Germany), and
Rac proteins were subcloned into the pCGCG bicistronic vector that
directs the expression of GFP from an internal ribosomal entry site
element (Lock et al. 1999).

### Generation of stable cell lines

pBABE plasmids were introduced into the Phoenix amphotropic packaging
cell line, kindly provided by G. P. Nolan (Stanford University Medical
Center, Palo Alto, California, United States), by calcium phosphate
coprecipitation, and viral supernatants were used to infect a Jurkat T
cell subline (Greenberg et al. 1998), provided by Dan R. Littman (New
York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States),
or NS1 cells. Transduced Jurkat cells were selected and subsequently
maintained in the presence of puromycin (0.4 μg/ml) (Sigma, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States). Transduced NS1 cells were selected and
maintained in the presence of G418 (1.0 mg/ml) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
California, United States).

### Immunoaffinity purification of epitope-tagged Nef and associated proteins

Unless stated otherwise, all reactions were performed at 4°C.
Approximately 1.8 × 10^10^ Jurkat T cells stably expressing NA7-hf (or
control cells) were lysed for 1 h in 200 ml of LB buffer (150 mM NaCl,
50 mM Tris--HCl \[pH 7.5\], 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol) (Complete
Protease Inhibitors, Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Extracts were
precleared with protein G--agarose (Roche) for 1 h and incubated with
12CA5 mAb crosslinked to protein G--agarose beads for 4 h. The
immunoprecipitate was washed extensively with LB, and bound proteins
were eluted by competition with HA peptide (0.2 mg/ml) (ANATYPYDVPDYAG;
Invitrogen) in LB for 45 min at 30°C. The eluate was incubated with
anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel beads (Sigma) overnight, and the
immunoprecipitate was washed extensively with LB and then LB modified to
contain 0.1% Triton X-100 (FEB buffer). Proteins were eluted with FEB
containing FLAG peptide (0.2 mg/ml) (Sigma) for 45 min at 30°C. The
eluate was concentrated on Microcon centrifugal filter devices
(Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts, United States) with a cutoff of 8
kDa.

### Protein identification by mass spectrometry

Nef and associated proteins were separated by 8%--17% SDS-PAGE and
visualized using SYPRO stain (Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oregon, United
States). Visible bands were excised and processed for identification by
mass spectrometry. The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described
previously (Hu et al. 2002). Spectra resulting from LC/MS/MS were
analyzed with the SONARS software package (ProteoMetrics LLC, New York,
New York, United States).

### Lentiviral vectors and infections

FUGWCNA7 contains the wild-type HIV-1 NA7 *nef* coding sequence under
control of the CMV promoter, subcloned downstream of the
Woodchuck-responsive element in the FUGW lentiviral vector (Lois et al.
2002). FUGWC vectors containing amino acid substitutions in Nef have a
similar structure. Supernatants containing infectious particles were
produced by calcium phosphate cotransfection of HEK 293 cells, as
described previously (Lois et al. 2002). For biochemical analyses of Rac
activation, approximately 10^7^ Jurkat T cells or NS1 cells were
infected with supernatants containing approximately 10^7^ infectious
units of FUGW or FUGWC vectors encoding wild-type or mutant HIV-1 NA7
Nef proteins, in the absence of polycationic agents. Cell extracts were
prepared 3--4 d following infection and used for PBD--GST pulldown
assays. PBMCs were purified from buffy coats of healthy donors (New York
Blood Bank, Hicksville, New York, United States) by density gradient
separation on Lymphocyte Separation Medium (ICN Biomedicals, Inc.,
Irvine, California, United States), and CD4^+^ T lymphocytes were
isolated using CD4^+^ T Cell Enrichment Columns (R&D Systems,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States). Replication incompetent HIV-1
particles pseudotyped with VSV-G were produced by calcium phosphate
transfection of HEK 293 cells and used to infect \>98% pure populations
of CD4^+^ T lymphocytes that were cultured in the presence of IL-7
(Unutmaz et al. 1999). Cell-surface CD4 in the infected populations was
revealed with FITC-conjugated SK3 mAb (Becton Dickinson, San Jose,
California, United States). Cells stained for CD4 were permeabilized
using Cytofix/Cytoperm Kit (BD PharMingen, San Jose, California, United
States) and p24 Gag expression was revealed with PE-conjugated KC57-RD1
mAb (Beckman Coulter, Inc., San Diego, California, United States) as
described elsewhere (Mascola et al. 2002). CD4 and Gag expression were
quantitated simultaneously using an LSR-II flow cytometer (Becton
Dickinson).

### Cell stimulations and IL-2/Gag assays

Anti-CD3 mAb and anti-CD28 mAb (MAB100 and MAB342; R&D Systems), alone
or in combinations, were immobilized on 12-well microtiter plates
(351143; Becton Dickinson) in PBS overnight at 4°C. Wells were washed
three times with PBS, and 5 × 10^5^ CD4^+^ T lymphocytes were added 4--5
d after they were transduced with H-Δ or H-NA7 vectors in the presence
of IL-7. In some experiments, transduced cells were cultured for
additional 48 h in the absence of IL-7 before stimulations. Stimulations
were performed for 4 h to 16 h in the presence and absence of Golgi-Stop
(Becton Dickinson). Cells were recovered from wells by vigorous
pipetting, fixed, and permeabilized using Cytofix/Cytoperm Kit (BD
Bioscience PharMingen). Intracellular IL-2 and p24 Gag were revealed
simultaneously with PE-conjugated rat anti-human IL-2 mAb, (559334; B&D
Biosciences PharMingen) and FITC-conjugated KC57-RD1 mAb (Beckman
Coulter, Inc.), respectively.

### Transient transfections of HEK 293 cells, immunoprecipitations, and immunoblotting

HEK 293 cells were transfected by calcium phosphate coprecipitation with
20 μg of pCG plasmids expressing epitope-tagged DOCK2, ELMO1, Rac2 or
Rac1, and/or tagged Nef proteins and a control empty vector. Cells were
lysed 48 h posttransfection in LB buffer. To isolate Nef and associated
proteins, extracts were incubated overnight with anti-FLAG M2 Affinity
Gel (Sigma), the immunoprecipitates were washed four times with LB
buffer, once with LB containing 0.5 M LiCl, and proteins were eluted
with FLAG peptide as described above. To isolate DOCK2 and associated
proteins, extracts were incubated with Ni--NTA agarose (Qiagen,
Valencia, California, United States) and proteins were eluted from the
precipitate with 250 mM imidazole. DOCK2--Nef complexes were isolated
from imidazole eluates with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel as described
above. Eluted proteins proteins were separated by 16% SDS-PAGE,
electroblotted onto PVDF membrane (Millipore), and immunoblotted with
the following antibodies: anti-c-Myc mAb (1:100; Oncogene, Tarrytown,
New York, United States), anti-FLAG M2 mAb (1:5000; Sigma), 12CA5 mAb
(1:5000), or rabbit serum raised to a DOCK2-specific peptide
(GDKKTLTRKKVNQFFKTM). Immune complexes were revealed with HRP-conjugated
antibodies specific for the Fc fragment of mouse or rabbit
immunoglobulin G. (1:5,000; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc.,
West Grove, Pennsylvania, United States) and ECL (Amersham, Little
Chalfort, United Kingdom).

### Rac and CDC42 activity assays

Cells were lysed in LB modified to contain 500 mM NaCl, 0.5% sodium
deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, and 10 mM MgCl~2~ (RB buffer). Extracts were
incubated for 2 h with 40 μg of recombinant PAK1 PBD--GST (kindly
provided by Linda Van Aelst) bound to glutathione--agarose beads (8
mg/ml) (Roche), and beads were washed extensively with RB buffer. Bound
proteins and aliquots of extracts were separated by 16% SDS-PAGE. Rac
was immunoblotted with anti-c-Myc epitope mAb (1:100; Oncogene), or with
anti-Rac mAb (1:1000; BD Transduction Laboratories), CDC42 was detected
with sc-87 rabbit antibody (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
California, United States), and Nef was detected with rabbit serum
raised against HIV-1 HxB3 Nef (1:300; Mariani and Skowronski 1993).
Immune complexes were visualized by chemiluminescence using Lumi-Lite
Plus (Roche). Chemiluminescent signals were imaged and quantitated using
the FluorChem Imaging System and software (Alpha Innotech, Cannock,
United Kingdom).

### Chemotaxis assays

Jurkat T cells were transfected by electroporation with plasmids
coexpressing Nef and GFP marker protein from a single bicistronic
transcription unit (pCGCG NA7; Lock et al. 1999), except that in some
experiments were also cotransfected with pCG CXCR4, expressing human
CXCR4 receptor. Transfected populations were used 24--48 h later in
transwell chemotaxis assays in the presence of 10 ng/ml of SDF-1 (R&D
Research). For CCR5-dependent migration, Jurkat T cells were transfected
with pCGCG CCR5, expressing human CCR5 and GFP, alone or in the presence
pCG NA7, and migration to MIP-1β (10 ng/ml) was measured. Cells were
allowed to migrate for 2 h, and the relative frequency of GFP-positive
cells in the initial and migrated populations was determined by flow
cytometry using an LSR-II flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson).

# Supporting Information

## Accession Numbers

The LocusLink (<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/>) accession
numbers of the genetic loci discussed in this paper are *DOCK2*
(LocusLink ID 1794), *ELMO1* (LocusLink ID 9844), *Rac1* (LocusLink ID
5879), and *Rac2* (LocusLink ID 5880).

We thank Linda Van Aelst, Nouria Hernandez, Winship Herr, and Dan
Littman for helpful discussions, sharing reagents, and critical reading
of the manuscript. We also thank Frank Kirchhoff and Klaus Strebel for
sharing reagents; Dan Littman for making his P3 facility available to
us; Dan Bogenhagen, Robert Haltiwanger, and Bruce Stillman for support;
and Takahiro Nagase from the Kazusa DNA Research Institute for providing
the KIAA0209 cDNA clone. This work was supported by Public Health
Service grant AI-42561 (to JS).

CCR5

:   chemokine (CC motif) receptor 5

CDM

:   CED-5/DOCK180/Myoblast City

CXCR4

:   chemokine (CXC motif) receptor 4

DOCK

:   dedicator of cytokinesis

ELMO

:   engulfment and cell motility

GEF

:   guanine nucleotide exchange factor

GFP

:   green fluorescent protein

GST

:   glutathione S-transferase

HEK

:   human embryonic kidney

LC/MS/MS

:   liquid chromatography tandem mass spectroscopy

mAb

:   monoclonal antibody

PAK

:   p21-activated kinase

PBD

:   p21-binding domain

SDF-1

:   stromal-derived factor-1

TCR

:   T cell antigen receptor

[^1]: AJ, TS, BH, and JS conceived and designed the experiments. AJ, TS,
    MPM, and JS performed the experiments. AJ, TS, BH, MPM, and JS
    analyzed the data. AJ, TS, BH, and JS contributed
    reagents/materials/analysis tools. AJ and JS wrote the paper.

[^2]: ¤1 Current address: The Rockefeller University, New York, New
    York, United States of America

[^3]: ¤2 Current address: Pritzker School of Medicine, University of
    Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America

[^4]: The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.
