The presence of a small number of discrete forms---as you find in a
classic Mendelian trait like eye color---suggests that the phenotype is
controlled by a very small number of genes. In contrast, a complex trait
such as body size is influenced by multiple genes as well as
environmental factors, giving rise to a continuous spectrum of
phenotypes. This causal complexity makes discovery of the genetic
determinants of the trait---so-called quantitative trait loci
(QTLs)---very difficult. In this issue, Fiona Oliver, Julian Christians,
and colleagues extend their work on a single QTL with a large effect on
body size variation in mice, and show that the responsible gene is one
already linked to a Mendelian growth disorder in humans.

In previous work, mice were divergently selected for large or small body
size, revealing a QTL on the X chromosome that causes a 20% difference
in growth rate. In this study, the authors further refined the map of
the area to 660 kilobases, and found it contains only four genes:
glypican-3 and glypican-4 (Gpc3 and Gpc4), and two other genes of
unknown function. The glypicans are membrane-bound growth regulators;
loss of function of Gpc3 in humans causes a rare syndrome of overgrowth,
skeletal and other abnormalities, and neonatal death. Since none of the
four genes showed coding-region variations that might explain the
differences between the large and small mice, the authors examined
expression levels. In Gpc3, but not the others, size correlated with a
significant difference in gene expression: larger mice had low levels of
the messenger RNA, and smaller mice had high levels&mdash;the same
pattern seen in the human loss-of-function disorder. The authors
identified several non-coding polymorphisms in Gpc3 that differed
between the two forms, although it remains to be seen whether the
differential effect on growth is due to these or other DNA differences
nearby.

Variation in the expression of a protein involved in a rare human
overgrowth syndrome contributes to size variation in mice (Photo: Lutz
B&uuml;nger, Scottish Agricultural College)

The results from this study point out an important feature of
inheritance, namely, that a gene implicated in a Mendelian trait can
also contribute to quantitative variation. While catastrophic expression
failure, such as a loss of function, can cause disease, smaller changes
in expression of the same gene may simply help fill out the bell curve
of normal variation.
