# Introduction

Two different pathways of spindle assembly are known to operate in the
animal kingdom. The first, observed in somatic as well as in male
germline cells, requires the microtubule organising activity of
centrosomes (Compton 2000; Bornens 2002). The second, restricted to
female germline and some embryonic cells that lack centrosomes, is
thought to depend upon the microtubule stabilisation and organisation
activity of the chromosomes themselves (McKim and Hawley 1995; de Saint
Phalle and Sullivan 1998; reviewed in Karsenti and Vernos 2001).
Centrosome-independent microtubule growth and sorting into a bipolar
spindle have been observed in vitro around chromatin-coated beads in
*Xenopus* egg extracts (Heald et al. 1996). Moreover, some experimental
data suggest that a centrosome-independent pathway for spindle assembly
also exists in somatic cells (Bonaccorsi et al. 1998, 2000; Megraw et
al. 1999, 2001; Vaizel-Ohayon and Schejter 1999; Khodjakov et al. 2000;
Hinchcliffe et al. 2001; reviewed in Raff 2001). It is generally assumed
that the microtubules that build these acentrosomal spindles originate
over the chromatin. However, so far, the actual process of
centrosome-indepen dent microtubule nucleation, polymerisation, and
sorting into a bipolar spindle has not been documented in any of the
centrosome-containing cell lineages of a living animal.

The problem in visualising such microtubules of noncentrosomal origin
when centrosomes are present is a technical one. In *Drosophila*, as in
most animal cells, at the onset of cell division the two segregated
pairs of centrosomes have a strong microtubule organising activity
(Tates 1971; Church and Lin 1982; Cenci et al. 1994). Consequently, as
soon as the nuclear envelope (NE) breaks down, numerous microtubules
invade the nuclear region, making it extremely difficult to single out
any noncentrosomal microtubules that might be present. To circumvent
this limitation, we have taken advantage of two experimental conditions
that inhibit the natural process of centriole migration from the plasma
membrane to the interior of the cell that takes place at the onset of
meiosis in *Drosophila* spermatocytes. Under such conditions, the
centrosomes organise asters, but these are kept at the plasma membrane,
away from the nuclear region. In these cells, microtubules can be seen
to grow from the remnants of the fenestrated NE and to assemble into
anastral bipolar spindles in a centrosome-independent manner. We propose
that these spindle-shaped arrays correspond to a subset of microtubules
that are normally present in the spindles of wild-type cells.

# Results

## Centriole Migration towards the Nucleus in *Drosophila* Spermatocytes Requires Microtubules and the Function of *asp*

Studies based on electron microscopy (Tates 1971) had shown that soon
after the last round of mitotic divisions that precede meiosis in
*Drosophila* spermatocytes, the centrioles migrate towards the periphery
of the cell and position themselves underneath the plasma membrane. The
same studies revealed that shortly before the onset of prometaphase I,
the centrioles are found again close to the nuclear membrane, thus
strongly suggesting that they migrate back near the nucleus in
preparation for meiosis. Using an endogenously expressed centriolar
green fluorescent protein (GFP) marker, we have been able to demonstrate
such migration in living spermatocytes ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020008-g001)A;
[Video S1](#pbio-0020008-s001)). The entire process takes about 2 h.
Initially, the two centriolar pairs move towards the nucleus and start
to migrate apart as they approach the nuclear membrane. They finally
position themselves at opposite sides of the nucleus, about 30 min
before the onset of NE breakdown (NEB).

Centriole Migration in Primary Spermatocytes\
(A) Time-lapse series of confocal images from a wild-type primary
spermatocyte expressing GFP-PACT (centrioles) and His2AvD--GFP
(chromosomes). The centrioles (arrows) can be seen moving away from the
plasma membrane (0) towards the nucleus (N) and then migrating
diametrically apart as the chromatin condenses. The chromosomes are
fully condensed at timepoint 121 min.\
(B--D) The two centriole pairs (green) projected over the phase-contrast
view (grey) can be seen close to the fenestrated NE and away from the
plasma membrane (pm) in control cells (B), while they remain plasma
membrane-bound in *asp* (C) and in colcemid-treated wild-type cells (D).
In *asp* spermatocytes (C), the position of the membrane-bound
centrioles correlates tightly with the pointed end of phase-dark
protrusions (arrows) that are not present in colcemid-treated cells.
These reflect the distribution of phase-contrast membranes known to
overlap microtubules in these cells.\
(E--J) XY projections (E--G) and their corresponding optical sections
(H--J) of control (E and H), *asp* (F and I), colcemid-treated
spermatocytes (G and J) expressing an endogenous GFP--α-tubulin confirm
that the two major MTOCs in control cells are close to the nucleus, but
remain near the plasma membrane in the two experimental conditions. MTOC
activity in colcemid-treated spermatocytes was assayed following a 1-s
pulse of 350 nm light to inactivate the drug, thus allowing microtubule
regrowth. The yellow bar in the XY projections (E--G) marks the position
of the corresponding XZ optical sections (H--J).

We have identified two experimental conditions that inhibit centriole
movement, back from the plasma membrane in *Drosophila* spermatocytes.
The first one is mutation in the gene abnormal spindle, *asp* (Ripoll et
al. 1985; Casal et al. 1990; Gonzalez et al. 1990; Saunders et al. 1997;
do Carmo Avides and Glover 1999; Wakefield et al. 2001; Riparbelli et
al. 2002). In contrast to wild-type control cells ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020008-g001)B), the two pairs of centrioles in
*asp^E3^/asp^L1^* spermatocytes at late prophase are still located at
the plasma membrane ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020008-g001)C), where they remain
throughout meiosis. Centriole migration back towards the NE can also be
inhibited by microtubule depolymerisation. Like in *asp* mutant
spermatocytes, the centrioles of wild-type spermatocytes exposed to the
microtubule-depolymerising drug colcemid remain close to the plasma
membrane throughout meiosis ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020008-g001)D).

Top ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020008-g001)F) and lateral ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020008-g001)I) views of living *asp* mutant spermatocytes
expressing a GFP--α-tubulin fusion reveal that the microtubule
organising centres (MTOCs) are found at the periphery of these cells.
The MTOCs of control cells at this stage can be seen near the nuclear
membrane ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020008-g001)E and [1](#pbio-0020008-g001)H).
These observations strongly suggest that the membrane-bound centrioles
observed in *asp* mutant spermatocytes are associated to active
centrosomes that retain MTOC activity. This conclusion is further
substantiated by the localisation of the pericentriolar material (PCM)
marker γ-Tub23C (Zheng et al. 1991; Sunkel et al. 1995) around the
membrane-bound centrioles, coinciding with the position of the MTOCs
(data not shown). The same applies to cells in which centriole migration
is inhibited by colcemid. Immediately after a short pulse of 350 nm UV
light to inactivate the drug (W. E. Theurkauf, personal communication),
two asters are organised around the membrane-bound centrioles in these
cells ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020008-g001)G and [1](#pbio-0020008-g001)J).

## Anastral Spindles Are Assembled When the Centrosomes Are Kept Membrane Bound

Inhibition of centrosome migration back from the plasma membrane in
*Drosophila* spermatocytes offers an unprecedented opportunity to assay
centrosome-independent microtubule polymerisation during spindle
assembly in the cells of a living animal that contain centrosomes.
Therefore, we decided to follow microtubules by time-lapse confocal
microscopy in *asp* and colcemid-treated cells that expressed a
GFP--α-tubulin fusion, as they went through meiosis. At the onset of
prometaphase, the NE becomes fenestrated, but does not disappear in
*Drosophila* (Tates 1971; Stafstrom and Staehelin 1984; Church and Lin
1985). This partial NEB can be readily identified by the sudden entry of
GFP--α-tubulin into the nuclear region ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020008-g002),
timepoint 0; [Video S2](#pbio-0020008-s002)). In control cells,
microtubule polymerisation and organisation are largely concentrated
around the centrosomes (Church and Lin 1982; Cenci et al. 1994).
Consequently, the abundance of these microtubules makes it extremely
difficult to determine the possible contribution of any
centrosome-independent microtubule polymerisation activity to spindle
assembly ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020008-g002), control, 10 min to 32 min;
[Video S2](#pbio-0020008-s002)). Microtubule organisation is
significantly different in the case of *asp* mutant spermatocytes. At
the time of NEB, the membrane-bound centrosomes can be seen organising
the two asters at a significant distance from the nucleus, which is kept
clear from astral microtubules ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020008-g002); [Video
S3](#pbio-0020008-s003)). Around 10 min after NEB, a distinct focus of
microtubule polymerisation appears within the nuclear region, away from
the asters ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020008-g002), *asp*, 10 min; [Video
S3](#pbio-0020008-s003)). It gives rise to a few bundles ([Figures
2](#pbio-0020008-g002), 15 min) that grow ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020008-g002), 22 min) and get organised into a bipolar
spindle-shaped microtubule array that in 28% (*n* = 43) of the cells is
anastral and establishes no contact with the membrane-bound centrosomes
([Figure 2](#pbio-0020008-g002), 39 min). The remaining 72% was
accounted for by cells in which, despite the distance, microtubules from
one or both asters reach the spindle so that spindle poles and asters
were aligned. Although the acentrosomal origin of the spindle
microtubules in these cells is fairly convincing, only those cells that
assembled truly anastral spindles that remained so throughout meiosis
were considered as cases of noncentrosomal spindle assembly.

Time-Lapse Series of Meiosis Progression in Control, *asp*, and
Colcemid-Treated Spermatocytes\
Timepoint 0 coincides with the time of NEB revealed by the sudden entry
of GFP signal into the nucleus. In control cells ([Video
S2](#pbio-0020008-s002)), microtubules are mainly organised around the
centrosomes (arrows). However, when centrosomes are kept away from the
nuclear region by mutation in *asp* ([Video S3](#pbio-0020008-s003)) or
colcemid treatment ([Video S4](#pbio-0020008-s004)), microtubule
nucleation and growth are clearly revealed over the nuclear region (N),
well away from the centrosomes. Such noncentrosomal microtubules may
form bundles that eventually are sorted into spindlelike bipolar
microtubule arrays. Microtubules were labelled with an endogenous
GFP--α-tubulin fusion.

These observations strongly suggested that microtubules can nucleate in
a centrosome-independent manner and assemble a spindle-like array in
*Drosophila* spermatocytes. The question remained open, however, as to
whether such anastral structures could not simply be a consequence of
mutation in *asp* itself. To rule out such a possibility, we followed
spindle assembly in wild-type spermatocytes in which centrosomes had
been kept membrane-bound by colcemid treatment. The results were
strikingly similar to those observed in *asp* cells. Seconds after
colcemid inactivation, the cortex-bound position of the centrosomes is
revealed by the growing asters that were not visible before ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020008-g002), colcemid inactivation, 0 timepoint; [Video
S4](#pbio-0020008-s004)). Like in *asp* mutant spermatocytes,
microtubules can clearly be seen to nucleate over the nuclear region,
well away from the asters ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020008-g002), 11 min), grow
([Figure 2](#pbio-0020008-g002), 15 min), and get sorted ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020008-g002), 37 min and 43 min) into anastral bipolar arrays.
Of the colcemid-treated cells studied (*n* = 32), 22% behaved like the
cell shown in [Figure 2](#pbio-0020008-g002). The remaining cells
assembled more than one spindle, multipolar spindles, or spindles that
were connected to one of the asters.

## The Nucleation of Noncentrosomal Microtubules in Spermatocytes with Membrane-Bound Centrosomes Has a Late Onset

We then decided to time the onset of anastral microtubule nucleation.
The timing of the main landmarks of meiosis progression in control,
*asp*, and colcemid-treated spermatocytes is summarised in [Figure
3](#pbio-0020008-g003). In control spermatocytes, chromosome
condensation starts within 2 min after NEB, and the first centrosomal
microtubules enter the nuclear region shortly afterwards. Chromosome
condensation is completed between 10 and 12 min after NEB. In agreement
with previous reports, anaphase onset takes place between 32 and 47 min
after NEB (Church and Lin 1985; Rebollo and Gonzalez 2000; Savoian et
al. 2000). Remarkably, the timing of meiosis progression from NEB to
anaphase onset, both in *asp* and in colcemid-treated wild-type
spermatocytes, seems to be largely unaffected, suggesting that the
feeble spindle checkpoint of these cells (Rebollo and Gonzalez 2000;
Savoian et al. 2000) is not triggered by the membrane-bound
centrosomes\' condition. The timing of the onset of noncentrosomal
microtubule growth within the nuclear region in *asp* and
colcemid-treated cells is tightly controlled. It occurs between 9 and 13
min after NEB, at the same time or marginally later than the end of
chromosome condensation. If this process occurs with the same timing in
wild-type cells, the noncentrosomal microtubules will intermingle with
numerous centrosomal microtubules that are already present at this
stage.

The Timing of Noncentrosomal Microtubule Nucleation\
Referred to NEB (timepoint 0), the timing of chromosome condensation and
of onset of chromosome segregation is essentially identical in control,
*asp*, and colcemid-treated spermatocytes. In control spermatocytes,
aster microtubules can be seen entering the nuclear region 3--6 min
after NEB. They do not in *asp* or following colcemid treatment. In
these two cases, however, centrosome-independent microtubule
polymerisation can be seen over the nuclear region. It starts between 9
and 13 min after NEB, coinciding with or very shortly after the end of
chromosome condensation.

## Acentrosomal Microtubules Are Nucleated on the Inner Side of the Remnants of the NE and Not around the Chromosomes

To determine the nucleation site of the microtubules organised over the
nuclear region, we followed the initial stages of microtubule assembly
by time-lapse microscopy, acquiring several Z series of XY confocal and
phase-contrast sections at different timepoints. From these, we
generated a time-lapse series of 3D reconstructions that allowed us to
localise the foci of nucleation of anastral microtubules. We were able
to draw the following three main conclusions that apply to both *asp*
and colcemid-treated spermatocytes. Firstly, the foci from which
microtubules grow may be clustered ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020008-g004)A) or
dispersed ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020008-g004)B). Secondly, no significant
correlation can be established between the site of microtubule
nucleation and the chromosomes ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020008-g004)A and
[4](#pbio-0020008-g004)B). Finally, nucleation takes place in close
proximity to the remnants of the NE (ten out of ten cells reconstructed;
[Figure 4](#pbio-0020008-g004)A and [4](#pbio-0020008-g004)B), which in
*Drosophila* ruptures without disassembling completely (Tates 1971;
Stafstrom and Staehelin 1984).

The Place of Noncentrosomal Microtubule Nucleation\
The initial stages of noncentrosomal microtubule nucleation revealed by
an endogenous GFP--α-tubulin fusion (left) and phase contrast (right).
Following the corresponding videos, it is possible to unmistakably tell
the chromosomes (arrows) apart form the other phase-dark objects that
are present over the nuclear region (asterisks). The cell in (A) is
shown as a single timeframe and the cell in (B) as a time-lapse series.
In both cells, noncentrosomal microtubule nucleation (arrowheads) takes
place close to the remains on the NE and does not overlap with the major
chromosomes. Nucleation sites can be clustered (A) or dispersed (B). In
the time-lapse series (B), only the chromosomes that are in focus are
labelled. Timepoint 0 min in these series corresponds to the first sign
of noncentrosomal microtubule nucleation, around 11 min after NEB. A
white bar marks the growing end of a microtubule bundle that at
timepoint 93 min reaches one of the bivalents.

## The Anastral Spindles Organised in Cells with Membrane-Bound Centrosomes Can Sustain Some Degree of Chromosome Segregation

We then decided to study in more detail the extent to which the anastral
spindles organised in cells with membrane-bound centrosomes can mediate
successful cell division. To this end, we produced transgenic flies
carrying a GFP--α-tubulin fusion together with a His2AvD--YFP (yellow
fluorescent protein) strain so that both chromosomes and microtubules
could be visualised in the same cell ([Figure 5](#pbio-0020008-g005);
[Video S5](#pbio-0020008-s005)). In *asp* cells, during prometaphase,
the bivalents do not move to the extent that they do in control cells
(data not shown). As mentioned before, congression occurs ([Figure
5](#pbio-0020008-g005); [Video S6](#pbio-0020008-s006)), but orientation
is rarely bipolar. Homologue chromosomes separate at the onset of
anaphase, but they barely move, remaining near the center of the
spindle. Moreover, they tend to cosegregate ([Video
S7](#pbio-0020008-s007)) and end up included in the same daughter
nucleus. All together, these abnormalities result in high levels of
aneuploidy in agreement with previous genetic analysis data (Ripoll et
al. 1985). In contrast, in half (52%) of the anastral spindles assembled
following transient colcemid treatment, homologue chromosomes could be
seen to segregate from one another ([Figure 5](#pbio-0020008-g005);
[Video S8](#pbio-0020008-s008)). Anaphase in these cells is not
complete, however, because only the chromosome-to-pole movement
(anaphase A) is observed. The further separation achieved in wild-type
cells by the extension of the spindle (anaphase B) is very limited in
these cells.

Chromosome Segregation in Anastral Spindles in *Drosophila*
Spermatocytes\
(Control \[[Video S5](#pbio-0020008-s005)\]) At metaphase I (0), the
bivalents (revealed by a His2Avd--YFP fusion, shown by double
arrowheads) are aligned in the middle of the spindle (revealed by a
GFP--α-tubulin fusion), at the metaphase plate. At the onset of anaphase
(3 min), the homologue chromosomes start to migrate towards opposite
poles (single arrowheads) and to decondense. During anaphase B (4 min
and 6 min), the spindle poles move apart from each other and the two
sets of decondensed chromosomes become further separated.\
(*asp* \[[Video S6](#pbio-0020008-s006)\]) At timepoint 0, the bivalents
align at the metaphase plate. Homologue chromosomes split apart at the
onset of anaphase I (4 min). However, anaphase A migration is highly
impaired. By the time the chromosomes start to decondense, they have
barely moved towards the spindle poles (8 min and 14 min), and often
homologue chromosomes end up included in the same daughter nucleus.\
(Colcemid \[[Video S8](#pbio-0020008-s008)\]) As in *asp* spermatocytes,
the asters (arrows) remain at the plasma membrane at metaphase I in
colcemid-treated cells, and the bivalents align in a metaphase
plate-like within the acentrosomal spindles (0 min). Homologue
chromosomes split apart at the onset of anaphase (upper cell, 6 min) and
significantly segregate from one another (upper cell, 8 min; lower cell,
3 min). Further separation of the daughter nuclei during anaphase B is
very limited in these cells (8 min), and cytokinesis does not occur.

## The Orientation of the Cytokinesis Furrow Correlates with the Position of the Membrane-Bound Asters, Independently of Spindle Orientation

Following colcemid treatment, we have never observed complete
cytokinesis. However, as reported before (Riparbelli et al. 2002),
cytokinesis does proceed to completion in around half (47%, *n* = 19) of
*asp* cells. These cells, which contain unconnected centrosomal asters
and anastral spindles, provide a valuable experimental system to assess
the contribution of asters and spindle to specifying the place of
cleavage. To this end, we plotted the angles between the line defined by
the two asters, the major spindle axis, and the plane of cleavage in
wild-type and *asp* spermatocytes ([Figure 6](#pbio-0020008-g006)). Two
conclusions can be drawn from these data. Firstly, the anastral spindles
assembled in *asp* cells can be observed at any angle, even up to 90°,
with respect to the position of the two asters. Interestingly, in most
such cases, furrow progression forces the spindle to rotate and align
with the asters so that, at the end, a fairly normal cytokinesis takes
place. Secondly, the orientation of the plane of cleavage keeps a tight
90° ± 10° with respect to the axis defined by the asters and does not
correlate with the orientation of the anastral spindle.

Correlation between the Orientation of the Cytokinesis Furrow, the
Asters, and the Spindle in *asp* Spermatocytes\
Schematic representation (A--C) of the relative position of the asters
(red), the spindle (yellow), and the cytokinesis furrow (blue),
corresponding to a control cell (D) and two examples of *asp* mutant
spermatocytes (E and F), respectively. Asters (arrows) and spindles are
labelled with a GFP--α-tubulin fusion. The position of the cleavage
furrow (double-headed arrow) was determined by time-lapse imaging of
these cells (data not shown). In wild-type cells (*n* = 10), plotting
spindle and furrow orientation relative to the interastral axes shows
that asters and spindle are tightly aligned, and cleavage occurs at an
angle of 90° ± 10° with respect to them (G). In *asp* spermatocytes (*n*
= 10), the plane of cleavage occurs at a 90° ± 10° angle with respect to
the asters and does not correlate with the orientation of the anastral
spindle.

# Discussion

We have found that when the asters are kept near the plasma membrane
during meiosis I in *Drosophila* spermatocytes, noncentrosomal
microtubules appear over the nuclear region and, in a fraction of the
cells, are sorted into anastral bipolar spindles (summarised in [Figure
7](#pbio-0020008-g007)). Identical observations are derived whether
centrosomes are forced to remain membrane-bound by mutation in *asp* or
by transient colcemid treatment of wild-type cells. The very different
nature of these two experimental conditions strongly argues against
these spindles being assembled as a consequence of the experimental
conditions themselves. It rather suggests that the observation of
anastral spindles is due to the impaired ability of the plasma
membrane-bound centrosomes to contribute to spindle assembly. Anastral
spindles are also assembled following the removal of centrosomes by
laser ablation or microdissection in cultured cells (Khodjakov et al.
2000; Hinchcliffe et al. 2001) or by inhibiting the formation of
centrosomes in mutant *Drosophila* embryos (Megraw et al. 1999;
Vaizel-Ohayon and Schejter 1999), thus reinforcing this argument.

Noncentrosomal Microtubules and Spindle Assembly\
(Central column) Spindle assembly in *Drosophila* spermatocytes with
membrane-bound centrosomes. At the time of NEB, the chromatin (pale
blue) starts to condense, and the membrane-bound centrosomes (red)
organise asters (yellow) at a significant distance from the nuclear
region. Around 12 min after NEB, the first noncentrosomal microtubules
(green) start to nucleate near the remnants of the NE (grey), as the
chromosomes achieve full condensation (dark blue). These microtubules
then bundle, associate with the chromosomes, and eventually end up
organised into a bipolar anastral array whose shape is reminiscent of
the female meiotic spindle.\
(Left column) Spindle assembly in wild-type *Drosophila* oocytes
(Theurkauf and Hawley 1992; Matthies et al. 1996). NEB starts at the
beginning of stage 13 of oocyte development. At this stage, the oocyte
does not contain centrosomes and the chromosomes (karyosome) are tightly
condensed (dark blue). Microtubules (green) appear 11--15 min after NEB
within the nuclear region in association with the karyosome. These
microtubules form bundles and are sorted around the chromatin into a
bipolar spindle. Evidence suggests that ER components may be required
for spindle assembly in these cells (Kramer and Hawley 2003). At
metaphase I, recombined bivalents are aligned at the spindle equator,
while those that have not recombined are found closer to the spindle
poles. Meiosis remains arrested at this point (stage 14) until oocyte
activation. Despite the obvious morphological similitude, the
equivalence between these and the anastral spindles organised in
spermatocytes with membrane-bound centrosomes is unclear.\
(Right column) Hypothesis regarding the contribution of centrosomal and
noncentrosomal microtubules to spindle assembly during meiosis I in
wild-type *Drosophila* spermatocytes. Before NEB, the centrosomes are
located at opposite positions near the nucleus. Shortly after NEB,
astral microtubules enter the nuclear region and make the first contact
with the condensing chromatin. No evidence of noncentrosomal microtubule
polymerisation near the nuclear region at this stage has been found yet.
Once chromosomes are fully condensed, microtubule bundles of centrosomal
origin (yellow) connecting centrosomes to chromosomes already exist. At
this stage, noncentrosomal microtubules (green) start to polymerise in
association with the remnants of the NE. These microtubules form bundles
that interact with the chromosomes and intermingle with the microtubules
of centrosomal origin. The fully mature spindle in these cells would
therefore contain a spindle-shaped structure made of microtubules of
noncentrosomal origin (green) embedded in another spindle-shape array
made of two overlapping asters (yellow). We propose that each of these
subsets may perform to a certain extent some of the functions carried
out by normal spindles, but neither of them can on its own mediate
robust cell division.

## The Place of Noncentrosomal Microtubule Nucleation

Noncentrosomal microtubule nucleation during cell division is thought to
take place over the chromatin (Nachury et al. 2001). This assumption is
largely based on the observations carried out in the few acentrosomal
systems in which spindle assembly has been followed by time-lapse
microscopy (reviewed in Karsenti and Vernos 2001). These include
wild-type *Drosophila* female meiocytes (Theurkauf and Hawley 1992;
Matthies et al. 1996), parthenogenetic *Sciara* embryos (de Saint Phalle
and Sullivan 1998), and *Xenopus* egg extracts (Heald et al. 1996). It
is also consistent with the active role of chromosomes in spindle
organisation. For instance, it has been reported that bivalents
micromanipulated away from the spindle in *Drosophila* spermatocytes
induce the assembly of anastral minispindles in the cytoplasm (Church et
al. 1986). Likewise, the removal of chromosomes before NEB has been
shown to inhibit spindle assembly in grasshopper spermatocytes (Zhang
and Nicklas 1995), although the phenotype of *fusolo* mutants, recently
described, seems to argue otherwise (Bucciarelli et al. 2003). Moreover,
the chromosomal localisation of the RanGEF RCC1 is expected to result in
a local enrichment of the GTP-bound form of Ran, known to facilitate
spindle assembly (Nachury et al. 2001; Wilde et al. 2001; Gruss et al.
2002; reviewed in Hetzer et al. 2002), thus providing a mechanistic
interpretation for the suspected role of chromatin in this process.

In contrast, our observations reveal that nucleation of the
noncentrosomal microtubules over the nuclear region occurs over the
remnants of the NE, which in *Drosophila* are present throughout cell
division despite extensive fenestration at the onset of prometaphase
(Tates 1971; Stafstrom and Staehelin 1984; Church and Lin 1985).
However, upon closer examination, our observations may also be
consistent with the literature quoted above. The single bivalents that
organise minispindles when micromanipulated into the cytoplasm in
*Drosophila* spermatocytes have actually been shown to be surrounded by
masses of stacked membranes, whose contribution to microtubule
nucleation/stabilisation, according to the authors themselves, cannot be
ruled out (Church et al. 1986). In *Drosophila* oocytes, too, the
meiotic spindle is ensheathed in a membrane structure derived from the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Although the bulk of microtubules has been
described by time-lapse confocal microscopy to form over the chromatin
(Theurkauf and Hawley 1992; Matthies et al. 1996), the contribution of
these membranes to the initial stages of microtubule nucleation cannot
be discarded either. In this regard, the recent cloning of *Axs*, which
encodes a transmembrane protein associated with the membranes that
surround the spindle and is required for the segregation of achiasmate
chromosomes, is very tantalising (Kramer and Hawley 2003). Asx is
distributed within the ER of the germinal vesicle just before meiotic
spindle assembly. Upon germinal vesicle breakdown (GVBD), Axs associates
with the developing spindle through all stages of assembly. These
observations have been taken as an indication that the ER may be
organised into structures that impinge on spindle assembly during
meiosis in *Drosophila* females (Kramer and Hawley 2003), very much in
line with our observations in *Drosophila* spermatocytes.

Indeed, our results do not discard the contribution of chromatin to
microtubule stabilisation and sorting into a bipolar array, even if
chromatin itself is not the place of initial microtubule nucleation, nor
do they rule out the possibility of microtubules being polymerised over
the chromatin at later stages. They merely show that in these cells, the
remaining bits of the fenestrated NE provide a particularly favourable
environment to sustain the initial stages of noncentrosomal microtubule
nucleation. Moreover, these observations strongly suggest that, unlike
centrosomes, the foci of microtubule nucleation over the nuclear region
do not behave as stable MTOCs. As soon as the microtubule bundles
acquire a certain length, they interact with the condensed chromosomes
and are often sorted into a bipolar spindle, regardless of the initial
number of nucleation sites. We have not been able to detect γ-Tub23C at
these nucleation sites.

We still do not know the actual contribution of Ran to spindle assembly
in *Drosophila* spermatocytes, although, given its known conservation
across distant species (Hetzer et al. 2002), it is likely to play a
major role. Since orthologues of most of the known components of this
pathway are known in *Drosophila*, it is technically possible to address
this question both under normal conditions and in cells in which
centrosomes cannot contribute to spindle assembly as described in this
work. Experiments are underway in our laboratory to address these
points.

## Functional Relevance of the Anastral Spindles

Perhaps the most fundamental question regarding the anastral spindles
organised in cells that normally contain centrosomes is the extent to
which they could provide a back-up, able to mediate successful and
robust cell division when the centrosomes cannot contribute to spindle
assembly. Our observations suggest that this is an unlikely scenario.
Firstly, only a fraction of cells display a single bipolar array, the
rest being accounted for by cases in which either the spindle is
multipolar or there is more that one per cell or there is no spindle at
all. Secondly, chromosome segregation is also significantly less
efficient than in control cells. These two points, however, carry a
caveat since they could reflect the effect of depleted *asp* function or
residual traces of active colcemid, rather than the anastral nature of
the spindle. Finally, cytokinesis is severely disrupted in these cells.
Around half of *asp* spermatocytes containing anastral spindles go
through and complete cytokinesis. However, in these cells, the
orientation of the cleavage furrow correlates tightly with the position
of the two asters and not at all with the orientation of the spindle.
This situation gives rise to cases in which the plane of cleavage is
nearly parallel to the spindle. In colcemid-treated cells that contain
notoriously small asters, cytokinesis does not occur. These observations
strongly argue that asters contribute to specify the place of furrow and
may be required for cleavage. The contribution of centrosomes to ensure
proper cytokinesis has been previously observed in vertebrate cell lines
(Rieder et al. 1997; Savoian et al. 1999; Hinchcliffe et al. 2001;
Khodjakov and Rieder 2001), human cell lines (Gromley et al. 2003),
*Dyctiostelium* (Neujahr et al. 1998), or *Xenopus* (Takayama et al.
2002). This conclusion, however, is not consistent with the observation
that cytokinesis is not inhibited in asterless *Drosophila*
spermatocytes (Bonaccorsi et al. 1998).

Therefore, the anastral spindles organised in spermatocytes with
membrane-bound centrosomes seem able to provide only some of the
functions required for cell division, with relatively low efficiency.
The functionality of the anastral spindles assembled in embryos laid by
*cnn* mutant females, which do not appear to contain centrosomes, is
also compromised. These spindles are not always properly shaped, the
chromosomes are not tightly aligned at the spindle equator, chromosome
movements are nonsynchronous, and their segregation not always faithful
(Megraw et al. 1999; Vaizel-Ohayon and Schejter 1999). Thus, in this
instance, too, when centrosome function is abrogated in a syncytium that
normally contains centrosomes and that does not naturally undergo
parthenogenesis, anastral spindles can be assembled that are able to
perform some of the functions of their wild-type counterparts, but in a
rather inefficient manner.

## Origin of the Anastral Spindles: Neomorphic or Constitutive

Two alternative interpretations can account for the origin of the
anastral spindles that we have observed (Khodjakov et al. 2000). First,
they could be neomorphic structures, assembled through a pathway
normally repressed that is only triggered in response to the impaired
contribution of centrosomal microtubules. Although we cannot at the
moment discard this interpretation, we find it hard to envisage how such
an alternative pathway could have evolved, given the extremely low
frequency of centrosome loss or inactivation in wild-type populations.
Moreover, it is also difficult to imagine what sort of signalling
mechanism could trigger the alternative pathway in these cells since
centrosomes are still present and active as MTOCs.

Alternatively, these anastral microtubule arrays could be a constitutive
component of wild-type spindles, normally masked by the abundance of
centrosome-derived microtubules, but revealed when asters are kept away.
This interpretation is summarised in [Figure 7](#pbio-0020008-g007). In
wild-type spermatocytes under normal conditions, the first astral
microtubules enter the nuclear area shortly after NEB and start to build
a bipolar spindle as chromosome condensation progresses. By the time
chromosome condensation is fully achieved, a distinct bipolar spindle
can be observed in these cells. However, it is not yet fully mature, as
the number of microtubules will still increase until anaphase onset. It
is about this time that nucleation of the acentrosomal microtubules
occurs in cells with plasma membrane-bound centrosomes. Therefore, if
this process occurs at the same time in wild-type cells, the
acentrosomal microtubules could significantly contribute to the
maturation of the cell division spindle. This interpretation is
consistent with the recent proposal put forward by Gruss et al. (2002)
to account for their observations regarding spindle assembly in HeLa
cells. They found that when the function of the human homologue of TPX2
is inhibited by RNA interference, the centrosomal asters do not interact
and do not form a spindle. From these observations, they concluded that,
intermingled with microtubules of centrosomal origin, the mitotic
spindle may contain noncentrosomal microtubules that are stabilised and
organised by the chromatin and are essential for the assembly of
functional spindles. In *Drosophila*, secondary spermatocytes\' mutation
in *fusolo* seem to reveal the centrosome-derived component of the
spindle (Bucciarelli et al. 2003). Forcing the asters away from the
nucleus in *Drosophila* primary spermatocytes reveals the noncentrosomal
component that, indeed, does not require asters to get organised into a
spindle-like structure. We propose that both components are required to
mediate robust cell division. The very recent finding of peripheral,
noncentrosomal microtubules that contribute to spindle assembly in
LLCPK1α cells provides additional evidence to substantiate this
conclusion (Tulu et al. 2003).

Regardless of their neomorphic or constitutive nature, the acentrosomal
spindles that we have found in *asp* and colcemid-treated spermatocytes
are, from a morphological point of view, closely reminiscent of the
anastral female meiotic spindles found in many animal species, including
*Drosophila* (Theurkauf and Hawley 1992). The same holds true for the
anastral spindles assembled when centrosomes are removed from the cell
or cannot be organised due to mutation in essential centrosomal
components (Megraw et al. 1999; Khodjakov et al. 2000; Khodjakov and
Rieder 2001; Hinchcliffe et al. 2001). In the case of the *Drosophila*
female meiotic spindle, the timing of microtubule nucleation is also
very similar: between 9 and 12 min after NEB in spermatocytes and 11 to
15 min in oocytes (Matthies et al. 1996). These similarities have led
some to propose that experimentally induced anastral spindles could
require the same motors and structural components that build the
spindles in female meiocytes (Megraw et al. 1999; Khodjakov et al. 2000)
(summarised in [Figure 6](#pbio-0020008-g006)). In fact, it has been
suggested that the absence of some of these components at the time
syncytial divisions occur could explain the lack of robustness of the
anastral spindles assembled in embryos derived from *cnn* mothers
(Megraw et al. 1999). We still do not know to what extent the anastral
spindles of spermatocytes share components with the oocyte spindle. Some
essential ones cannot be shared, though, since they are only expressed
in the female germline. Given the wealth of probes and mutants available
in *Drosophila*, it should be possible to draw a clear picture of the
situation regarding this fundamental question.

# Materials and Methods

## 

### Fly stocks

Flies from *w^1118^;e^11^ asp^E3^/TM6C* and *w^1118^;red asp^L1^/TM6C*
stocks were crossed to generate *w^1118^;e^11^ asp^E3^/red asp^L1^*
transheterozygous individuals. The viability of *asp^E3^/asp^L1^* males
is high, but they are poorly fertile and produce high levels of
aneuploid gametes.

### Transgenes

The chromosomes were labeled with transgenes expressing either a
His2avD--GFP fusion (Clarkson and Saint 1999) or its derivative,
His2avD--EYFP, constructed by us under the control of the polyubiquitin
promoter (Lee et al. 1988). To visualise centrioles, we used the
transgene expressing GFP-PACT (pericentrin-AKAP450 centrosomal
targeting) (kindly provided by J. Raff) that contains the predicted
Drosophila homologue of the PACT domain described by Gillingham and
Munro (2000). To visualise microtubules, we constructed a transgene that
contained the GFP--α-tub84B fusion as previously described (Grieder et
al. 2000) under the control of the polyubiquitin promoter (Lee et al.
1988).

### Time-lapse recording

Live spermatocytes were recorded as previously described (Rebollo and
Gonzalez 2000, 2003). For most applications, we collected a series of
timepoints at 15--30 s intervals, each containing four to eight XY
sections at different depths along the Z axis and including both the
phase-contrast and fluorescence channels. For more-detailed 3D
reconstruction, stacks containing 20 sections were obtained. Laser
intensity was always kept to a minimum, and only the excitation laser
line 488 was utilised. GFP and YFP signals were distinguished by
overlying the two recorded channels. Image processing was performed with
NIH-Scion Image, Interactive Data Language (IDL), and huygens2. For 3D
reconstructions, we wrote macros in NIH-Scion Image to navigate through
the three dimensions of the cell stack.

### Colcemid treatment

Newly hatched adult males were fed for 8--12 h with a solution
containing 32 μg/ml of colcemid (Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United
States) in 1 M sucrose. Upon dissection, their testes were prepared for
in vivo imaging as described above. Once under the microscope,
microtubules were allowed to repolymerise by a 1-s pulse of 350 nm light
that inactivates the drug. For simplicity, this entire procedure of
exposure to colcemid followed by light inactivation of the drug is
referred to through this manuscript as 'colcemid treatment.'

# Supporting Information

## Accession Numbers

The FlyBase accession numbers discussed in this paper are α-tubulin 84B
(CG1913), *asp* (CG6875), *Axs* (CG9703), *cnn* (CG4832), γ-Tub23C
(CG3157), His2AvD (CG5499). The GeneBank accession numbers discussed in
this paper areGFP (U57609.1), Ran (NM_006325), RCC1 (D00679), TPX2
(BC020207), and YFP (U57609.1).

## 

###### Centriole Migration in Primary Spermatocytes

(849 KB MOV)

###### Spindle Assembly in Control Spermatocytes

(442 KB MOV)

###### Spindle Assembly in *asp* Spermatocytes

(675 KB MOV)

###### Spindle Assembly in Colcemid-Treated Spermatocytes

(844 KB MOV)

###### Chromosome Segregation in Control Spermatocytes

(206 KB MOV)

###### Chromosome Segregation in *asp* Spermatocytes I

(452 KB MOV)

###### Chromosome Segregation in *asp* Spermatocytes II

(377 KB MOV)

###### Chromosome Segregation in Colcemid-Treated Spermatocytes

(465 KB MOV)

We are grateful to W. Theurkauf for advice on the method to inactivate
colcemid; to J. W. Raff for providing the Drosophila GFP-PACT construct;
to T. Zimmerman for his help with image processing; to A. M. Voie for
performing embryo injections; and to I. Vernos and E. Karsenti for very
helpful comments on this manuscript. Our lab is financed by grants from
the European Union and the Ramon Areces Foundation.

ER

:   endoplasmic reticulum

GFP

:   green fluorescent protein

GVBD

:   germinal vesicle breakdown

IDL

:   Interactive Data Language

MTOC

:   microtubule organising centre

NE

:   nuclear envelope

NEB

:   nuclear envelope breakdown

PACT

:   pericentrin-AKAP450 centrosomal targeting

PCM

:   pericentriolar material

YFP

:   yellow fluorescent protein

[^1]: ER and CG conceived and designed the experiments. ER performed the
    experiments. ER and CG analyzed the data. ER, SL, and JR contributed
    reagents/materials/analysis tools. ER and CG wrote the paper.

[^2]: The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.
