Rabies recently hit the national headlines when a Wisconsin teenager
survived after showing full-blown symptoms. Even more remarkable, the
girl---who was bitten by a bat---recovered after receiving a novel
therapy, since doctors felt her case was too advanced for the standard
rabies inoculations to work. Rabies is nearly always fatal if not
treated immediately, and continues to pose a serious public health
threat. Though most rabies fatalities in the United States stem from bat
bites, far more people are treated for raccoon rabies.

A new strain of raccoon rabies started spreading throughout the eastern
United States in the mid-1970s, after raccoons caught in Florida were
released along the West Virginia--Virginia border to replenish hunting
stocks. Some of the imports carried a rabies variant that caused an
outbreak in local populations and has been steadily expanding ever
since. In 1990, raccoons topped the list of most often reported rabid
mammal.

Predicting the spread of raccoon rabies across Ohio

Controlling this re-emerging public health threat depends on predicting
the spatial dynamics of the disease---where new outbreaks might occur
and how the virus might spread. Toward this end, Leslie Real and
colleagues work on probabilistic simulation models that calculate the
effects of various factors, such as local transmission rates between
townships, ecological barriers to transmission, and long-distance
"translocation" rates between townships. (The deliberately released
Florida raccoons were one such translocation, but raccoons have also
been known to hitch rides on garbage trucks.) As reported elsewhere,
these models previously accurately reflected rabies spread in both
Connecticut and New York. In a new study reported in *PLoS Biology*,
Real and colleagues apply their model to the likely spread of rabies in
Ohio---a potential gateway for spread throughout the Midwest---and find
that raccoon rabies could spread throughout the state in just three
years.

One strategy for limiting rabies spread is to establish vaccine
corridors by distributing vaccine baits---vaccine doses hidden in
fishmeal---to wild raccoons. This *cordon sanitaire* strategy limited
rabies in Ohio to sporadic cases from 1997 until 2004, when a rabid
animal was detected---11 kilometers beyond the buffer zone---in
northeastern Ohio. The authors had previously shown that local
transmission was significantly reduced when townships were separated by
geographical barriers---the Connecticut River in Connecticut and the
Adirondack Mountains in New York. In modeling the likely transmission
path in Ohio, the authors incorporated the likely effect of Ohio\'s five
major rivers on transmission from local points along the Pennsylvania or
West Virginia border.

Given Ohio\'s topography (three of its rivers run along the southern and
eastern border) and a single point of emergence in the northeast, the
authors adjusted their simulations to estimate the potential impact of
translocations. Even without the occasional garbage truck ride, because
of the lack of ecological barriers in central Ohio, the simulations
predict that rabies will spread far faster in Ohio than in New York and
Connecticut.

Factoring in those garbage truck rides, the scenario is considerably
bleaker: rabies would take just 33 months to spread across central
Ohio---compared to 48 months to cross the much smaller state of
Connecticut---and cover the state in 41 months. This transmission
rate---100 kilometers/year---significantly surpasses previous estimates,
which range from 30 to 60 kilometers/year. The potential for such rapid
spread, if unchecked, "is quite alarming," the authors warn. But they
also point out that the path of a real epidemic would likely fall
somewhere between these two scenarios, given the unpredictable nature of
translocations. The authors also simulated potential breech points in
the vaccine corridor and found that the Ohio and Muskingum rivers halted
viral advance initially. But a raccoon can certainly cross a bridge when
the opportunity arises, so any delays would likely be temporary.

Given the unpredictable nature of rabies transmission---challenging
efforts to identify potential leaks in vaccine corridors and sites of
dispersal---the authors\' simulations provide a valuable resource for
anticipating alternate outbreak scenarios and preparing multiple game
plans to prevent or contain them. They also indicate the best sites for
establishing a new vaccine barrier. And given how fast raccoon rabies
could spread, Real and colleagues make a strong case that halting its
western march depends on a strategy based on early detection and
high-powered intervention programs---a sensible approach for any
infectious disease.
