# Introduction

Astrocytes are nonneuronal cells of the brain with some known and
hypothesized functions (Kettenmann and Ransom 1995; Fields and
Stevens-Graham 2002). Traditionally, astrocytes have been considered to
mediate supportive and protective functions in the central nervous
system because of their strategic placement relative to the vasculature,
and because they lack fast sodium action potentials. It is only recently
that this family of glial cells has been implicated in controlling the
dynamics of the neuronal networks in the central nervous system
(Nedergaard 1994; Parpura et al. 1994; Kang et al. 1998; Parri et al.
2001). Although the membrane potential of unidentified glial cells shows
correlated changes with neuronal activity in vivo (Amzica and Steriade
2000; Amzica and Massimini 2002), most of our knowledge on neuron--glia
and glia--glia communication comes from studies in vitro.

In cultured and acutely prepared astrocytes, free calcium concentration
(\[Ca^2+^\]~i~) in the cytosol undergoes large changes spontaneously or
in response to various physiological and pharmacological manipulations,
such as mechanical stimulation, membrane potential depolarization, and
activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors (Cornell-Bell et al.
1990a; Pasti et al. 1997). These slow events are mediated by release of
Ca^2+^ from intracellular stores (Charles et al. 1993; Venance et al.
1997). The \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ surges can be evoked by strong neuronal
activity (Dani et al. 1992; Porter and McCarthy 1996), suggesting a
potential homeostatic role of astrocytes in the regulation of
extracellularly accumulating neurotransmitters (Verkhratsky et al.
1998). Conversely, spontaneous \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ changes in astrocytes have
been shown to influence neuronal excitability (Parpura et al. 1994; Kang
et al. 1998; Pasti et al. 2001). The mechanism of activity propagation
among astrocytes is controversial. In tissue cultures, \[Ca^2+^\]~i~
events can propagate among a network of astrocytes via gap junction or
by elevation of adenosine triphosphate level (Cornell-Bell et al. 1990b;
Charles et al. 1991; Nedergaard 1994; Reetz et al. 1997; Newman 2001).
In the in vitro slice preparation, coordination of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~
activity appears independent of gap junctions but may require
transmitter activation of N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) and/or
metabotropic glutamate receptors (Parri et al. 2001; Aguado et al. 2002;
Nett et al.2002; Tashiro et al. 2002). Moreover, the extent and
magnitude of these network effects vary as a function of the preparation
used, and can involve correlated \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ changes in no, or only a
few, neighboring astrocytes, or the whole population (Porter and
McCarthy 1996; Verkhratsky et al. 1998). Whether and how the
observations in the various in vitro situations apply to the intact
brain have yet to be determined.

We have used two-photon laser scanning microscopy (2-PLSM) to monitor
cytosolic Ca^2+^ concentration in astrocytes labeled with Fluo-4
acetoxymethyl (AM) ester in juvenile rats in vivo. We find that
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ dynamics in astrocytes is rather quiescent during baseline
anesthesia. However, increased population bursting, brought about by
attenuating γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA~A~) receptor-mediated
neurotransmission, leads to increased magnitude \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ surges,
and the \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ changes become more strongly coordinated in
neighboring astrocytes.

# Results

## Loading of Calcium-Sensitive Dye

To examine the depth of penetration of the Fluo-4 AM, coronal brain
slices (300 μm thick) were acutely prepared after the residual dye was
washed off from the craniotomy. A large number of cells below the
craniotomy showed fluorescence labeling ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020096-g001)). On the basis of morphological appearance (see
also [Videos S1-S4](#sv001)), most brightly labeled cells were
astrocytes, in accordance with recent observations using a pressure
application of the indicator (Stosiek et al. 2003). The large overlap
between Fluo-4 AM-loaded cells and astrocytes identified by S100B
immunoreactivity provided confidence that most of the loaded cells were
astrocytes ([Video S5](#sv005)). In addition to astrocytes, capillary
endothelial cells and pericytes, outlining microvessels, were also
observed, albeit less regularly. Some processes of astrocytes contacted
local vessels. To quantify the dye penetration, mean bulk fluorescence
intensity was plotted for different depths from the pial surface. Most
intensive labeling occurred between 50--150 μm below the surface (i.e.,
layers I/II), but labeled cells could be visualized at greater than 300
μm as well ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020096-g001)C). The decreased fluorescence
on the surface is likely due to the diluting effect of the washout
procedure in the superficial tissue. Like the histological appearance,
in vivo imaging revealed numerous astrocytes ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020096-g001)E). Although the labeling was dense, the somata
and several associated processes, including vessel-contacting end feet,
of single astrocytes could be clearly revealed ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020096-g002)).

In Vivo Loading and Imaging of Astrocytes Using Fluo-4 AM\
(A) Acute slice prepared 1 h after dye loading. Scale bar, 200 μm.\
(B) Higher magnification reveals cells with typical astrocyte
morphology. Scale bar, 20 μm.\
(C) Average bulk fluorescence as a function of the depth from the pial
surface.\
(D) Schematic drawing of the experimental arrangement. Abbreviations:
EKG, electrocardiogram. PMT, photomultiplier. LFP, glass micropipe for
local field potential and multiple unit recording. The same pipette was
used to deliver bicuculline.\
(E) Image taken 50--150 μm below pial surface in vivo. Flattened xyz
stack.\
(F) Fluo-4 AM loaded cells (left) were stained for S100B
immunoreactivity (right), and the images were merged (center). See
[Video S3](#sv003) for large-scale staining. Scale bar, 20 μm.

Time-Lapse Imaging of Astrocytes In Vivo\
Four astrocytes, from which fluorometric Ca^2+^ imaging (0.5 Hz) was
made, are outlined. A blood vessel, outlined by the astrocyte end feet,
runs diagonally across the viewed area. White arrows show the end foot
connected to the imaged astrocyte.

## Spontaneous Calcium Events in Astrocytes

In our initial experiments, we made a large number of line scans
(sampling rate ∼200 Hz) of dye-loaded cells to examine whether some of
them were neurons. We never observed short-lasting \[Ca^2+^\]~i~
transients (less than 200 ms; Svoboda et al. 1997; Garaschuk et al.
2000), suggesting that the brightly loaded cells were likely to be
non-neuronal (Parri et al. 2001; Stosiek et al. 2003). In subsequent
experiments (*n* = 8 rats), cells with astrocytic appearance (*n* = 185)
were selected for long-term (10--20 min) monitoring. For quantitative
studies, three states of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ activity were distinguished: (a)
quiescent state with very slow (less than 0.025 Hz) oscillations of
baseline fluorescence level, (b) \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ spikes (greater than or
equal to 20% increase in *ΔF/F~0~* between 5--50 s), and (c)
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ plateau potentials (greater than or equal to 20% increase
in *ΔF/F~0~* for greater than 50 s). \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ spikes and
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ plateau potentials were automatically detected. In the
control (baseline) condition, 11% of astrocytes had at least one spike
event, and 52% had at least one plateau event in 10 min. The mean
frequency of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ spikes among the cells that had at least one
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ spike was 0.121 ± 0.098 per minute (mean width at greater
than or equal to 20% *ΔF/F~0~*: 25.1 ± 10.31 s) and the mean frequency
of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ plateau was 0.118 ± 0.058 per minute (mean duration:
160.4 ± 114.9 s).

To investigate whether the baseline values of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ dynamics
were affected by increasing neuronal activity, we induced regularly
occurring population bursts by local application of bicuculline
(Schwartz and Bonhoeffer 2001; *n* = 7 rats). Large amplitude (0.69 ±
0.26 mV) synchronous field events (approximately 100 ms) occurred at
relatively regular frequency (0.15 ± 0.06 Hz), associated with multiple
unit discharges. No significant difference was observed in average
heartbeat frequency between the control sessions and bicuculline
sessions (4.51 ± 0.54 Hz and 4.36 ± 0.74 Hz, respectively; paired
t-test, *p* = 0.13).

We used two methods to evaluate the effect of neuronal activity on
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ in astrocytes (*n* = 214 cells). First, the incidence of
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ spikes and plateau events was counted in the absence and
presence of bicuculline-induced population bursts. Under bicuculline
condition significantly more astrocytes had \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ spikes (11%
versus 24%; *p* \< 0.001; Fisher\'s exact test), whereas the probability
(52% versus 54%) of plateau potentials did not differ significantly. The
mean duration of plateau potentials, however, was significantly longer
(160.4 ± 114.9 s versus 211.12 ± 152.175 s; t-test, *p* \< 0.001) after
bicuculline treatment. Among the cells that exhibited at least one spike
or plateau event, there was not a significant difference in frequency of
the event occurrences (spike: 0.121 ± 0.098/min versus 0.098 ±
0.068/min; t-test, *p* = 0.24; plateau 0.118 ± 0.058/min versus 0.112 ±
0.049/min; t-test, *p* = 0.46). Thus, the major difference between
control and bicuculline conditions was the higher proportion of active
astrocytes under bicuculline.

The second method examined \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ changes in the frequency
domain. The *ΔF/F~0~* trace was considered as a continuous process, and
the power spectrum estimate was calculated with a multi-taper method for
each astrocyte and averaged across cells. There was a general increase
of power at all frequencies in bicuculline-treated animal. The most
consistent significant increase (*p* \< 0.05) of power appeared in the
frequency range of 0.10--0.24Hz, reflecting the increased incidence of
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ spikes. Short-term cross-correlation of neuronal field
bursts and \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ signals (± 10 s) did not show a significant
time-locked relationship ([Figure 3](#pbio-0020096-g003)).

Frequency Domain Analysis of Population Dynamics of Fluorescence in
Astrocytes in Control State and during Bicuculline-Induced Neuronal
Hyperactivity\
Insets show local field potentials in a control animal and regular
spiking in a bicuculline treated mouse (scale bar: 2.0 s, 500 μV).
Asterisks show significant differences (*p* \< 0.05) between groups at
various frequencies.

## Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ Events

In individual experiments, propagation of synchronous activity could be
observed visually ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020096-g004)A; [Video S6](#sv006))
but the spatio-temporal relationship of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ dynamics among
astrocytes varied across experiments. To quantify the magnitude and
spatial extent of this population effect, pair-wise cross-correlograms
of *ΔF/F~0~* intensity were calculated separately for nearby cell pairs
(local: less than or equal to 50 μm) and distant cell pairs (greater
than 50 μm). In control conditions, the temporal correlation of
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ signals in neighboring pairs was somewhat larger than in
distant pairs, but this difference was not significant (*n* = 374
neighbor pairs and *n* = 1,138 distant pairs). Nevertheless,
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ signals in astrocytes were not completely random, since
the cross-correlograms had wide central peaks at the 10--100 s scale
([Figure 4](#pbio-0020096-g004)B). In contrast to the baseline
condition, the temporal correlation of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ changes in local
and distant pairs were significantly different after large population
bursts were brought about by bicuculline ([Figure
4](#pbio-0020096-g004)C). Correlation of distant pairs under bicuculline
(*n* = 433 pairs) was similar to those in the control condition.
However, synchrony between local pairs (*n* = 1,282) increased
several-fold relative to both distant pairs under the same condition
(*t*-test, *p* \< 0.0001) and to local pairs in the baseline condition
(*t*-test, *p* \< 0.0001).

Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of Astrocyte Ca^2+^ Activity\
(A) Definition of nearby (less than 50 μm) and distant (greater than 50
μm) cell pairs.\
(B) Fluorescence changes in two nearby astrocytes.\
(C) Cross-correlogram of fluorescent intensity.\
(D) Mean cross-correlation of *ΔF/F~0~* in all nearby (thick line) and
distant (thin line) cell pairs in control condition (left) and in the
presence of bicuculline (right). Note large increase of *ΔF/F~0~*
correlation in nearby cell pairs in the bicuculline condition (error
bar: standard error of the mean).\
(E) Relationship between distance of the two cells and the magnitude of
correlation at zero timelag. Note lack of a reliable relationship in the
control condition (left). Note also the significant negative correlation
between the distance and correlated *ΔF/F~0~* changes in cell pairs in
the bicuculline-treated cortex (right).

Using a different approach, the magnitude of the zero-timelag
correlation coefficient for each cell pair was plotted against distance
between the cell pairs. Under control condition, no notable relationship
was observed between these variables ([Figure 5](#pbio-0020096-g004);
*n* = 1,512 cell pairs, *r* = 0.019, *p* = 0.46). In contrast, a
significant negative correlation was found between the synchrony of
\[Ca^2+^\]~i~ signals in the bicuculline condition (*n* = 1,715; *r* =
−0.281; *p* \< 0.0001).

# Discussion

Astrocytes in superficial cortical layers were successfully loaded using
Fluo-4 AM by surface application up to 350 μm from the pial surface in
juvenile rats. In agreement with previous literature (Parri et al. 2001;
Dallwig and Deitmer 2002; Simard et al. 2003), the majority of the
Fluo-4-loaded cells exhibited astrocytic morphology with multipolar
branching and bushy microprocesses impinging on local vasculature.
2-PLSM imaging revealed spontaneous \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ events in individual
astrocytes in vivo. Some coordination of these events was indicated by
the broad cross-correlograms in the baseline condition. Increased
neuronal discharge was associated with increased astrocytic activity and
a robust coordination of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ signals in neighboring
astrocytes, providing evidence for neuron--glia communication in the
intact brain.

The magnitude, frequency and pattern of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ events observed
here are qualitatively similar to those described in tissue cultures
(Dani et al. 1992; Charles 1998) and acute hippocampal, neocortical, and
thalamic slice preparations (Parri et al. 2001; Aguado et al. 2002; Nett
et al.2002; Tashiro et al. 2002). It has been reported that the
percentage of active astrocytes in brain slices showed a 2- to 3-fold
decrease from early postnatal days to juvenile age (Parri et al. 2001;
Aguado et al. 2002). In our experiments, a large portion of the imaged
astrocytes were active, showing either \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ or plateau
potentials. It is unlikely that the elevated activity in vivo is due to
anesthesia because urethane is known to suppress transmitter release
from presynaptic vesicles and attenuate both
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA) and NMDA
receptors (Hara and Harris 2002). Since blockade of these receptors
decreases astrocytic \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ activity in vitro (Parri et al. 2001;
Aguado et al. 2002), it is expected that in the drug-free animal the
percentage of active cells will be even higher. A different explanation
for the lower percentage of active astrocytes in the slice, relative to
the in vivo situation and tissue culture preparation, is that the trauma
of brain slicing attenuates spontaneous \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ activity. Reactive
astrocytes in a stab wound area show very limited \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ activity
(Aguado et al. 2002). In addition, the temperature at which the cells
are kept may be playing an important role.

In the absence of provoking conditions, spontaneous \[Ca^2+^\]~i~
activity in individual astrocytes does not spread among astrocytes as an
intercellular Ca^2+^ wave (Nett et al.2002). In baseline condition, the
magnitude of correlated activity in nearby and distant astrocytes was
quite similar. Nevertheless, the presence of zero-timelag correlation
suggests that activity in the astrocytic syncytium in vivo is not
random, but is under some coordinated control. Widespread but limited
coordination of glial cells can be brought about by common synchronizing
inputs in the intact brain, such as vascular and vegetative nervous
system control or large-scale slow changes of neuronal excitability. The
latter possibility is supported by the observation that ionotropic
glutamate receptor antagonists and tetrodotoxin effectively decorrelated
the astrocytic network without altering the number of active astrocytes
(Aguado et al. 2002). Furthermore, the intact corticothalamic system
displays substantial excitability fluctuation at the time scale of the
astrocytic \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ events (Jando et al. 1995).

Although neuronal activity is not needed to generate \[Ca^2+^\]~i~
surges in astrocytes (Aguado et al. 2002; Nett et al.2002),
neurotransmitters can enhance the frequency of such events. The impact
of neuronal activity on the glial network is illustrated by the
increased activity and enhanced local correlation of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~
signal in astrocytes after regular population bursting of neurons was
brought about by the GABA~A~-receptor blocker bicuculline. These changes
shared similarities to those observed in hippocampal and neocortical
slices (Aguado et al. 2002; Tashiro et al. 2002). In contrast to the
slice situation, we did not find a time-locked triggering of astrocytic
events to the neuronal bursts (see also Nett et al.2002). This
discrepancy may be explained by the magnitude of the evoked neuronal
bursts. Bicuculline in vitro evoked rare (greater than 30 s intervals),
but very large bursts or afterdischarges (Tashiro et al. 2002; Aguado et
al. 2002). In vivo, synchronous events of moderate size occurred
frequently (approximately 0.3 Hz). The enhanced bursts, associated with
large field potentials, can be regarded as interictal epileptic spikes
(Schwartz and Bonhoeffer 2001), but seizures were never observed.
Although the exact mechanisms of neuron--astrocyte signaling remain to
be disclosed, our findings indicate that neuronal and glial networks are
coupled in the intact brain.

Many of the imaged astrocytes had processes (end feet) in close contact
with small brain vessels (Peters et al. 1970). It has been shown that
surges of \[Ca^2+^\]~i~ in astrocytes trigger the release of vasoactive
compounds (Bezzi et al. 1998). Furthermore, stimulation of single
astrocytes in cortical slices led to delayed (greater than 30 s) and
protracted dilation of the contacted arteriole (Zonta et al. 2003).
These findings support the view that a cardinal function of astrocytes
in the intact brain is to regulate local circulation according to the
metabolic needs of neurons. Overall, the approach introduced in this
paper will be a potent tool to investigate these issues in vivo.

# Materials and Methods

## 

### Subjects and surgery

Male and female rats, 12--16 d postnatal (P12-- P16), of the
Sprague--Dawley strain were used in these experiments. Animals were
deeply anesthetized with 1.7 g/kg urethane. An outline of the craniotomy
above the primary somatosensory (barrel) cortex was marked with a dental
drill. A metal frame, similar to what has been described in Kleinfeld
and Denk (2000), was attached to the skull with cyanoacrylic. A
craniotomy (3--4 mm diameter), centered at 1.5 mm posterior to bregma
and 2.5 mm from midline, was performed and the dura mater was surgically
removed. Care was taken to avoid any damage to pial vessels or the
cortex.

### Dye loading

Fluo-4 AM (F-14201, 50 μg; Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oregon, United
States) was mixed with 2 μl of Pluronic (P-3000, Molecular Probes) and 5
μl of dymethyl sulfoxide (D-8779; Sigma, St. Louis, Missouri, United
States) for 15 min. The solution was then diluted in 18 μl of artificial
cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) (125 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 10 mM glucose, 26 mM
NaHCO~3~, 1.1 mM NaH~2~PO~4~, 2 mM CaCl~2~, 1 mM MgSO~4~; pH adjusted to
7.4) and mixed for a further 15 min. A small volume (up to 12 μl) of the
dye-containing solution was applied to the cortical surface by a
micropipette. The solution was retained in place by a small piece
gelfoam. The unbound dye was removed 45--60 min after the surface
application of Fluo-4 AM by irrigating the exposed surface with ACSF for
at least 10 min. The craniotomy was then covered with 1% agar dissolved
in phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.4), and a glass coverslip was placed
on a metal frame. This arrangement allowed access for a glass recording
electrode from the side. Juvenile rats (P13--P15) were used because we
found in preliminary experiments that in adult animals, mostly vascular
cells were loaded with the current protocol.

### Electrophysiological recording

During the recording session, a heating blanket was placed under the rat
to maintain body temperature at approximately 37°C. The
electrocardiogram (EKG) was monitored continuously. The R wave of EKG
was used to monitor brain pulsation-derived movement of artifacts during
imaging. Population bursts of cortical neurons ("interictal" spikes;
Schwartz and Bonhoeffer 2001) were induced by inserting a large-tip
(20--50 μm tip diameter) glass pipette, containing 2 mM bicuculline in
0.9% (w/v) NaCl, into the deep layers of the somatosensory cortex. This
electrode also served to record local field potential and multiple unit
activity. Large population bursts were reliably induced 10--30 min after
the insertion of the pipette.

### Imaging

A custom-made 2-PLSM was constructed as described earlier (Majewska et
al. 2000). In brief, a Ti:S laser (Mira 800F; Coherent, Santa Clara,
California, United States) was pumped by a solid state CW laser (Verdi
8; Coherent) to produce a mode-locked beam (840 nm; approximately 100 fs
pulse width at 76 MHz repetition rate). The beam was directed to a
modified confocal scanhead (Fluoview 300; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The
fluorescent signal was first filtered with an emission filter (HQ525,
passband 525 ± 25 nm; Chroma, Rockingham, Vermont, United States) and
detected by an external photo-multiplier tube (R-3896, Hamamatsu
Photonics, Hamamatsu City, Japan) with a built-in preamplifier board
(F-5 PSU-B; Olympus).

### Data analysis

Fluorescence signal was quantified by measuring the mean pixel value of
a manually selected somatic area for each frame of the image stack using
ImageJ software. The values were exported to MatLab and the fluorescence
change *ΔF/F~0~* was computed, where *F~0~* is the mean of the lowest
20% of the somatic fluorescence signals. Sessions that had visible
drifts when image sequences were replayed as animation (the majority of
the cells showed correlated activity \[*\|r\|* \> 0.6\], or greater than
10% fluorescence change due to the heartbeat when the cell was imaged in
line scan \[approximately 200 Hz\]) were excluded from the analysis. For
display purposes, the signal was convolved with a Hanning window of
order three to smooth the signal trace. Power spectra of fluorescent
signals were computed using the multi-taper method *(NW = 4)*. For the
calcium event detection, *ΔF/F~0~* signal was convolved with a Hanning
window of order 15. "Spike" events were defined as transient increase of
*ΔF/F~0~* signal exceeding 20%, lasting 5--50 s. "Plateau" events were
defined as sustained increase of *ΔF/F~0~* (greater than 20%) signal
longer than 50 s. Peak amplitudes of both spike and plateau events
required an increase of at least 50% *ΔF/F~0~* from the onset of events.
Calcium events were automatically detected with the above detection.
Cross-correlation between cell pairs was computed by normalizing the
*ΔF/F~0~* signals to unity (zero mean, unity standard deviation) so that
the computed values represent the correlation coefficient between the
two signals at a given timelag. All numbers are indicated as mean ±
standard deviation, unless otherwise noted.

### Immunocytochemisty

Since Fluo-4 AM loading was best visible in the somatic region of the
putative astrocytes, we chose S100B antibody (A5110; DakoCytomation,
Glostrup, Denmark) because this antibody stains the somatic region of
astrocytes as well as its processes (Ren et al. 1992). Following Fluo-4
AM loading, acute brain slices (300 μm thickness) were cut coronally
around the dye-loaded area using standard procedures. Fluo-4 in cells of
the acute brain slices were fixed by incubating the acute brain slices
in freshly made saline containing 40 mg/ml
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDAC,
E7750; Sigma) for 30 min. Next, the slices were incubated in
formalin-based fixative (4% formaldehyde, 0.1 M phosphate buffer, \[pH
∼7.1\]) for 30 min. Once the fixation procedures were completed, the
sections were mounted on a glass slide and imaged with 2-PLSM (z-stack;
wavelength, 840 nm). After imaging of calcium-loaded cells, and three
subsequent washes in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (1.06 mM
KH~2~PO~4~, 155.17 mM NaCl, 2.96 mM NaHPO~4~, pH approximately 7.4), the
slices were treated with S100B antibody (made in rabbit, 1:50 dilution)
in Triton X-PBS (0.5% Triton X in PBS) overnight. The sections were
subsequently washed three times in PBS, followed by incubation with the
secondary fluorescent antibody (1:1000 dilution, 711-166-152, CY3
Anti-Rabbit IgG \[H + L\]; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West
Grove, Pennsylvania, United States) in Triton X-PBS solution for 2 h.
Simultaneous viewing of the two image stacks allowed a systematic
comparison of the extent of overlap between Fluo-4 loading and S100B
immunoreactivity ([Video S5](#sv005)).

# Supporting Information

###### Visualization of Loaded Astrocytes (Low Magnification)

The primary somatosensory cortex (P15) was stained with Fluo-4 AM in
vivo and subsequently imaged in vitro. Acute slices (approximately 300
μm thickness) were cut in cold ACSF after the cells were loaded in vivo.
(Z step = 1 μm; scale bar = 50 μm).

(49 MB AVI).

###### Visualization of Loaded Astrocytes (High Magnification, Layer I)

Same slice as shown in [Videos S1](#sv001), but with higher
magnification. Z step = 1 μm; scale bar = 20 μm.

(48 MB AVI).

###### Visualization of Loaded Astrocytes (High Magnification, Layers II/III)

Detailed imaging of in vivo-loaded acute slice preparation of the
primary somatosensory cortex (P15; approximately 270 μm below the pial
surface). Z step = 1 μm; scale bar = 20 μm.

(39 MB AVI).

###### High-Contrast Image Upper Layers (I to II/III) of the Fluo-4 AM-Loaded Somatosensory Cortex (P15)

Empty circles in layers II/III, presumed unloaded neurons (note their
absence in layer I). The loaded cells have typical glial morphological
appearance. Z step = 1 μm; scale bar = 50 μm.

(50 MB AVI).

###### Double-Labeling of Fluo-4 AM-Loaded Astrocytes with S100B Antibody

Acute slices (300 μm thickness) were prepared from the in vivo Fluo-4
AM-loaded somatosensory cortex. The slices were subsequently incubated
in EDAC containing saline followed by formalin fixation. The loaded
astrocytes were identified by examination at various depths and numbered
(left). Next, the slices were processed for immunocytochemistry with
astrocyte marker S100B. Depth scans (1 μm between the frames) were taken
again to determine immunoreactivity of cells with S100B (right movie).
An overlapping set of the cells was identified to be
S100B-immunoreactive, indicating that nearly all Fluo-4 AM-loaded cells
were astrocytes.

(5 MB AVI).

###### Imaging of Fluo-4 AM Fluorescence Activity in Astrocytes In Vivo

Movie taken from a P14 rat. Image was taken with 2 Hz sampling rate for
10 min and compressed to 36 s for display purposes. Note spatial- and
light-emission-stability of the recorded cells. Note also that at frames
approximately 9 s and 15 s, two of the astrocytes in the middle display
transient increased fluorescence. Scale bar 50 micro μ.

(55 MB AVI).

We thank Ian Creese for his continuous support and Karel Svoboda and
Raphael Yuste for their comments on an earlier version of this
manuscript. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health
grant NS043157 (GB) and by the Epilepsy Foundation (HH).

AM

:   acetoxylmethyl

AMPA

:   α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid

GABA

:   γ-aminobutyric acid

NMDA

:   N-methyl-D-aspartic acid

P

:   days postnatal

2-PLSM

:   two-photon laser scanning microscope

[^1]: HH and GB conceived and designed the experiments. HH performed the
    experiments and analyzed the data. HH, LQ, and PB contributed
    reagents/materials/analysis tools. HH and GB wrote the paper.

[^2]: The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.
