# Introduction

There is now compelling evidence that a subset of T-cells with
regulatory activity suppresses T-cell activation in both mice and humans
(Sakaguchi et al. 1995; Asano et al. 1996; Suri-Payer et al. 1998;
Takahashi et al. 1998; Thornton and Shevach 1998; Baecher-Allan et al.
2001; Dieckmann et al. 2001; Jonuleit et al. 2001, 2002; Levings et al.
2001; Ng et al. 2001; Taams et al. 2001). Regulatory T-cells (Treg
cells) have been shown to inhibit various autoimmune and allergic
diseases (Shevach 2000; Furtado et al. 2001; Curotto de Lafaille and
Lafaille 2002; Green et al. 2002, 2003; McHugh and Shevach 2002),
mediate transplantation and self-tolerance (Sakaguchi et al. 1995; Hara
et al. 2001; Taylor et al. 2001, 2002; Sanchez-Fueyo et al. 2002), and
block the activation and proliferation of T-cells both in vitro and in
vivo (Takahashi et al. 1998; Thornton and Shevach 1998; Annacker et al.
2000, 2001). These findings strongly suggest that Treg cells play a key
role in immune regulation.

Human and murine Treg cells are functionally characterized by a decrease
in both proliferation and IL-2 secretion in response to T-cell receptor
(TCR) stimulation and by their ability to suppress activation of
conventional T-cells (Asano et al. 1996; Takahashi et al. 1998; Thornton
and Shevach 1998; Baecher-Allan et al. 2001; Dieckmann et al. 2001;
Jonuleit et al. 2001; Levings et al. 2001; Ng et al. 2001; Taams et al.
2001, 2002). Treg cells mediate their suppressive effects only when
stimulated via their TCRs (Takahashi et al. 1998; Thornton and Shevach
1998), although their suppressive effector function is antigen
nonspecific (Thornton and Shevach 2000). Treg cells are clearly enriched
within peripheral CD4^+^ T-cells that also express the α subunit of the
IL-2 receptor (CD25), which is currently the best marker for identifying
these cells (Shevach 2002). However, CD25 is also expressed on activated
effector T-cells, and not all CD4^+^ Treg cells express CD25 (Annacker
et al. 2001; Stephens et al. 2001). In adults, Treg cells are
exclusively found in the CD45RO^+^ memory subset, and a sizable portion
of these cells express the activation marker HLA-DR and the recently
identified molecule glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor
receptor (GITR, also known as TNFRSF18) (Gumperz et al. 2002; Lee et al.
2002). Upon activation, Treg cells express the inhibitory receptor
CTLA-4 at a higher level and for a longer period of time than
conventional T-cells (Read et al. 2000; Salomon et al. 2000; Takahashi
et al. 2000). Interestingly, Treg cells have also been shown to express
high levels of certain chemokine receptors such as CCR4 and CCR8 (Iellem
et al. 2001).

The forkhead transcription factor FOXP3 was recently shown to be
specifically expressed in mouse Treg cells and is required for their
development (O\'Garra and Vieira 2003; Ramsdell 2003). A mutation in the
*FOXP3* gene carried by the *scurfy* mouse strain or a knockout of this
gene causes a CD4^+^ T-cell-mediated lymphoproliferative disease
characterized by cachexia and multiorgan lymphocytic infiltrates (Lyon
et al. 1990; Brunkow et al. 2001). The human genetic disease immune
dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked syndrome (also
called X-linked autoimmunity-allergic disregulation syndrome) is caused
by mutations in the human homolog of *FoxP3* and is characterized by
hyperactivation of T-cells with autoimmune endocrinopathy, early-onset
type 1 diabetes and thyroiditis, and in some cases manifestations of
severe atopy (Chatila et al. 2000; Bennett and Ochs 2001; Bennett et al.
2001; Wildin et al. 2001; Gambineri et al. 2003). In addition,
expression of FOXP3 in conventional T-cells either in transgenic mice or
by retroviral transduction is sufficient to confer a Treg cell phenotype
(Fontenot et al. 2003; Hori et al. 2003; Khattri et al. 2003). However,
the role of FoxP3 in the development of human Treg cells has not been
examined.

The role of Treg cells in controlling T-cell activation during immune
responses to pathogens such as chronic viral infections is currently a
subject of great interest. Recently it was shown that Treg cells can
regulate virus-specific or memory CD8^+^ T-cell responses, thus
diminishing the magnitude of the immune response (Kursar et al. 2002,
2004; Murakami et al. 2002; Suvas et al. 2003; Aandahl et al. 2004).
Because Treg cells express CD4**,** they are also potential targets of
HIV in vivo. HIV entry into target cells also requires cellular
expression of the chemokine receptors CCR5 or CXCR4 in conjunction with
CD4 (Boshoff et al. 1997). However, the ability of HIV to establish a
persistent infection is also critically dependent on activation signals
that regulate HIV replication within target T-cells. Quiescent T-cells
are resistant to infection unless TCR or cytokine activation signals are
provided (Unutmaz 2001). Indeed, chronic states of T-cell
hyperactivation, viral persistence, and T-cell depletion are all
hallmarks of HIV infection (Grossman et al. 2002). Consequently, this
state of chronic immune activation combined with the direct destruction
of CD4^+^ T-cells by HIV leads to a profound immunodeficiency
characterized by progressive deterioration of immune function (Fauci
1993). If Treg cells are lost because of HIV infection, this could
potentially result in hyperactivation of conventional T-cells due to
lack of immunoregulation. In contrast, if Treg cells are activated to
expand during certain stages of the infection, this could have a
suppressive effect on protective immune responses against the virus.
Thus, in both scenarios dysregulation of Treg subset during HIV
infection could have a profound impact on anti-HIV immune responses and
pathogenesis of the infection.

We tested the susceptibility of both naturally occurring and in vitro
genetically reprogrammed Treg cells to HIV infection. We found that Treg
cells isolated from healthy donors express CCR5 and are highly
susceptible to HIV infection. Ectopic expression of FoxP3 in
conventional human T-cells genetically reprogrammed them into a Treg
phenotype and enhanced their susceptibility to HIV infection.
Remarkably, we also found a profound defect of FoxP3^+^CD4^+^CD25^hi^
T-cells in HIV-infected patients with low CD4^+^ and a high percentage
of activated T-cells.

Our findings have important implications in understanding the role of
Treg cells and the chronic activated state of T-cells during HIV
infection. Furthermore, reprogramming of T-cells in vitro into Treg
cells establishes a novel system to understand the mechanism of T-cell
suppression and enhanced susceptibility of this subset to HIV infection.

# Results

## Isolation and Characterization of Human Treg Cells

To analyze susceptibility of Treg cells to HIV infection, we first
developed a method to isolate these cells from peripheral blood. A
sizable portion of human CD4^+^ T-cells (between 10%--20%) express CD25
([Figure 1](#pbio-0020198-g001)A). However, approximately 1%--2% of
CD4^+^ T-cells within the memory subset (CD45RO^+^) express high levels
of CD25 (CD25^hi^) ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020198-g001)A). Previous studies
suggested that human Treg cells resided within the CD45RO^+^CD25^hi^
subset (Baecher-Allan et al. 2001; Taams et al. 2001). We first
performed a phenotypic analysis of CD45RO^+^CD25^hi^ (referred to as
Treg), CD45RO^+^CD25^low/neg^ (memory T) and CD45RO^−^CD25^neg^ (naïve
T) cells. Treg cells expressed higher levels of GITR and HLA-DR ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020198-g001)B), consistent with previous reports
(Baecher-Allan et al. 2001; McHugh et al. 2002; Shimizu et al. 2002).
Treg cells also expressed high levels of CCR5 and CCR4 compared to
memory and naïve T-cells, while expression of CXCR4 and CCR7 was lower
and CXCR3 expression was similar as compared to memory T-cells ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020198-g001)B).

Identification and Phenotype of Treg Cells\
(A) Purified CD4^+^ T-cells were stained with anti-CD45RO-FITC and
anti-CD25-PE antibodies. The naïve, memory, and Treg subsets were
identified as shown in boxes.\
(B) Purified CD4^+^ T-cells were first stained with a pure antibody
against the cell surface molecule shown in the figure, followed by
antimouse IgG conjugated with allophycocyanin, followed by CD25-PE and
CD45RO-FITC. Gates were set for Treg, memory, and naïve T-cells as shown
in (A). These results are representative of one out of five donors
analyzed.

A low proliferative response and reduced IL-2 secretion are
characteristics of Treg cells (Asano et al. 1996; Takahashi et al. 1998;
Thornton and Shevach 1998; Baecher-Allan et al. 2001; Dieckmann et al.
2001; Jonuleit et al. 2001; Levings et al. 2001; Ng et al. 2001; Taams
et al. 2001). To analyze their capacity to proliferate and secrete IL-2
upon TCR triggering, Treg and memory T-cells were sorted into highly
purified populations by flow cytometry. Purified cells were then labeled
with carboxy-fluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE) to monitor
cell division in a quantitative manner and stimulated through the TCR
using plate-bound anti-CD3 and soluble anti-CD28 antibodies. The
secretion of IL-2 by TCR-stimulated Treg cells was about 10-fold lower
as compared to memory T-cells ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020198-g002)). Treg
cells also secreted lower levels of IL-4, IL-5, and IFNγ as compared to
memory T-cells ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020198-g002)). The CFSE-labeled cells
were analyzed 6 d after stimulation. Treg cells exhibited little
proliferation, whereas most of the memory T-cells had divided four to
five times ([Figure 3](#pbio-0020198-g003)A). In order to demonstrate
that purified Treg cells also displayed suppressive activity, both naïve
and CD25^low/neg^ memory CD4^+^ T-cells were labeled with CFSE and
stimulated under suboptimal T-cell activation conditions in the presence
of unlabeled purified autologous Treg, naïve, or memory T-cells.
Coculture with Treg cells significantly slowed the proliferation of
TCR-stimulated resting naïve and memory CD4^+^ T-cells as compared to
the coculture with either unlabeled naïve or memory T-cells ([Figure
3](#pbio-0020198-g003)B and [Figure3](#pbio-0020198-g003)C). Taken
together, these results confirm that human Treg cells are part of the
CD4^+^CD25^hi^ subset of T-cells.

Cytokine Secretion by Treg T-cells\
Sorted Treg and memory T-cells were activated using plate-bound anti-CD3
(3 μg/ml) and soluble anti-CD28 (1 μg/ml) antibodies. Supernatants were
collected 18--24 h postactivation and analyzed for cytokines using the
CBA assay. Results are representative of cytokine secretion from Treg
and memory T-cells from three different donors.

Proliferation and Suppressive Capacity of Treg Cells\
(A) Sorted Treg and memory T-cells were labeled with CFSE and then
activated through suboptimal anti-CD3 (100 ng/ml) and anti-CD28 (1
μg/ml) antibodies. Day 6 postactivation, cells were fixed and CFSE
expression was analyzed by flow cytometry.\
(B) Resting naïve or memory CD4^+^ T-cells (1.5 × 10^5^ T-cells) were
labeled with CFSE and cocultured with either unlabeled purified Treg,
naïve, or memory T-cells at 1:1 ratio in 96-well plates coated with
suboptimal anti-CD3 (100 ng/ml) and anti-CD28 (1 μg/ml) antibodies. At
day 4 postactivation, cells were fixed and analyzed for CFSE expression
and cell size by flow cytometry.\
(C) Regions were set based on 2-fold reduction in CFSE mean intensity of
naïve or memory T-cells as gated on (B), and plotted as number of cell
divisions. Results represent three separate experiments from three
different donors.

## Treg Cells Are Highly Susceptible to HIV Infection

The ability to obtain a pure population of functional human Treg cells
provides an excellent model to study their role in HIV pathogenesis. To
determine whether Treg cells were susceptible to HIV infection, purified
Treg cells were first activated through the TCR and were infected with
either replication-competent HIV, which uses CCR5 as a coreceptor
(R5.HIV), or replication-defective viruses pseudotyped with vesicular
stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSV-G.HIV) that encode green fluorescent
protein (GFP) as a marker of infection (Motsinger et al. 2002). Treg and
memory T-cells challenged with VSV-G.HIV resulted in an equivalent
infection rate, while in some experiments R5.HIV resulted in about a
2-fold higher infection rate of the Treg cells as compared to the memory
T-cells ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020198-g004)A). To determine the level of HIV
replication in the Treg cells as compared to activated memory T-cells,
both subsets were infected with R5.HIV for 2 d and washed to remove
input virus. Supernatants were collected from the infected cultures
daily and p24 levels were quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). HIV replicated in Treg cells as efficiently as in memory
T-cells ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020198-g004)B). To assess whether the virus
produced by Treg cells was infectious, supernatants from infected cells
were added to Hut78/CCR5 cells, which are highly susceptible to HIV
infection, and the titer of infectious virus was determined by GFP
expression. Treg cells produced levels of infectious virus similar to
those of the memory T subset (data not shown). The viability of infected
cultures was also determined at days 3 and 7 to determine if HIV
infection killed Treg cells. Indeed, infection with
replication-competent HIV was highly cytotoxic to both Treg and memory
T-cells ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020198-g004)C). We conclude that Treg cells
are highly susceptible to HIV infection and are killed by viral
replication.

HIV Infection of Treg Cells\
(A) Sorted Treg and memory T-cells were activated using plate-bound
anti-CD3 (3 μg/ml) and soluble anti-CD28 (1 μg/ml) antibodies and
concurrently infected with R5.HIV or VSV-G.HIV at a MOI of 5 (based on
prior virus titration using Hut78/CCR5 cells). The percentage of
infected cells was determined by GFP expression at 3 d postinfection by
flow cytometry.\
(B) Supernatants from Treg and memory T-cells infected with R5.HIV
cultures were collected at different time points and HIV p24 levels were
measured by ELISA.\
(C) Treg cell death was assessed by analyzing infected cells at days 3
and 7 postinfection based on forward- and side-scatter analysis and in
some experiments using propidium iodine staining analysis with flow
cytometry. All of the infection results are representative of one out of
five separate experiments with reproducible results. Statistical
significance was determined using the Student\'s two-tailed *t* test.
**\*** *p* \< 0.05.

## Genetic Reprogramming of Conventional Human T-cells into Treg Cells by Ectopic Expression of FoxP3

Treg cells constitute less than 1%--2% of total human T-cells (see
Baecher-Allan et al. 2001; see [Figure 1](#pbio-0020198-g001)). Although
we could purify several hundred thousand Treg cells from 300 ml of blood
as described below, isolation of sufficient numbers of Treg cells is
clearly an obstacle to studying their function and susceptibility to HIV
infection. Recently, a transcription factor called FOXP3 was shown to
program murine T-cells into a Treg subset (Fontenot et al. 2003; Hori et
al. 2003; Khattri et al. 2003). Therefore we hypothesized that ectopic
expression of FoxP3 in naïve T-cells could facilitate the generation of
large numbers of human Treg cells. Accordingly, we subcloned *FoxP3*
cDNA into a HIV-derived vector (HDV) that encodes murine CD24 (mCD24) as
a marker (Sundrud et al. 2003). CD4^+^ T-cells were purified from both
neonatal cord blood (CB) and adult blood (AB), activated through the TCR
and transduced with FoxP3-expressing HDV (HDV.FoxP3) or control HDV as
described previously (Sundrud et al. 2003). Expression of *FoxP3* mRNA
in transduced cells was confirmed by real-time PCR analysis and was
found to be about 50- to 100-fold higher in FoxP3 transduced primary
CD4^+^ T-cells as compared to control HDV-transduced cells (data not
shown).

FoxP3-transduced and control cells were expanded for 14 d in
IL-2-containing medium. Cells were then stained for mCD24 and also for
CD25, GITR, and CCR4 markers that are expressed at higher levels on
naturally occurring Treg cells (see [Figure 1](#pbio-0020198-g001)).
Naïve T-cells ectopically expressing FoxP3 displayed higher levels of
CD25, GITR ([Figure 5](#pbio-0020198-g005)A), and CCR4 ([Figure
5](#pbio-0020198-g005)B) as compared to control transduced T-cells.
FoxP3-transduced memory T-cells displayed much less upregulation of
these markers (data not shown). However, while the majority of these
transduced T-cells also expressed CCR5, its expression levels on
FoxP3-transduced and control T-cells were similar ([Figure
5](#pbio-0020198-g005)C). To determine whether FoxP3-transduced T-cells
display functional properties such as hyporesponsiveness to TCR
triggering, similar to freshly isolated Treg cells, transduced cells
were purified by sorting mCD24^+^ cells as described previously (Sundrud
et al. 2003). Equal numbers of purified cells were then stimulated using
plate-bound anti-CD3 and soluble anti-CD28 antibodies, and cytokine
secretion was monitored. Secretion of IL-2 from both CB and AB naïve
T-cells was reduced between 8- and 10-fold in FoxP3-expressing cells as
compared to control cultures ([Figure 6](#pbio-0020198-g006)A).
Secretion of IL-4, IL-5, and IFNγ was also reduced in FoxP3-expressing
naïve T-cells ([Figure 6](#pbio-0020198-g006)B). In contrast,
FoxP3-transduced memory T-cells secreted similar levels of IL-2 as
compared to cells transduced with HDV alone ([Figure
6](#pbio-0020198-g006)A). To assess the proliferative capacity of
FoxP3-expressing cells, transduced cells were labeled with CFSE and
stimulated through the TCR. After 4 d of activation, very few
FoxP3-transduced naïve T-cells had divided as compared to control lines
([Figure 7](#pbio-0020198-g007)A). Although, FoxP3-expressing memory
T-cells also divided fewer times as compared to HDV-transduced cells,
the effect of FoxP3 was greatly diminished in this subset ([Figure
7](#pbio-0020198-g007)A).

Phenotype of FoxP3 Transduced T-cells\
Purified CB naïve CD4^+^ T-cells were activated through the TCR and
transduced with either HDV.FoxP3 or HDV. Cells were expanded for 14 d in
IL-2-containing medium and stained with (A) anti-mCD24, anti-GITR, and
anti-CD25, (B) anti-mCD24 and anti-CCR4, or (C) anti-mCD24 and anti-CCR5
antibodies. Gates were set on the mCD24-positive population
(transduced), and expression of surface molecule was analyzed. The
expression of these markers in the CD24-negative portion of both
cultures was identical (data not shown). These results are
representative of T-cells isolated from five different donors and
transduced independently.

Cytokine Production by FoxP3-Transduced T-cells\
CD4^+^ naïve T-cells isolated from CB (CB-naïve) and AB (AB-naïve) and
memory T-cells from AB (AB-memory) were transduced with HDV or HDV.FoxP3
as described in [Figure 5](#pbio-0020198-g005). Transduced T-cells were
purified through magnetic sorting of mCD24^+^ cells and activated using
plate-bound anti-CD3 and soluble anti-CD28 antibodies. Supernatants were
collected at 18--24 h postactivation and analyzed for (A) IL-2
production or (B) IFNγ, IL-4, and IL-5 production from HDV or
HDV.FoxP3-tranduced naïve T-cells, using CBA assay. The results
represent five separate experiments from different donors with similar
relative differences in cytokine production.

Proliferation and Suppression by FoxP3-Expressing Cells\
(A) Purified CD4^+^ naïve and memory T-cells were transduced with either
HDV.FoxP3 or HDV as described. The transduced T-cells were labeled with
CFSE and activated with anti-CD3 (100 ng/ml) and anti-CD28 (1 μg/ml)
antibodies. Day 6 postactivation, cells were fixed and analyzed for CFSE
expression by flow cytometry.\
(B) Resting CD4^+^ T-cells (1.5 × 10^5^) were labeled with CFSE and
cocultured at 1:1 with either unlabeled sorted HDV.FoxP3-expressing or
HDV-transduced CB naïve T-cells and activated with anti-CD3 (100 ng/ml)
and anti-CD28 (1 μg/ml ) antibodies. At 4 d postactivation, cells were
stained with mCD24-PE as a marker for infection.\
(C) Naïve and memory T-cells isolated from adult blood were transduced
with HDV.FoxP3 or HDV. A coculture suppression experiment was set up
with resting purified autologous CD4^+^ T-cells as described above.
Region was set on mCD24 negative CFSE^+^ cells (target resting CD4^+^
T-cells) as shown in (B), and CFSE expression was analyzed 6 d
poststimulation by flow cytometry. The results are representative of
three separate experiments.

The key characteristic of Treg cells is suppression of conventional
T-cells activated through the TCR (Takahashi et al. 1998; Thornton and
Shevach 1998). Thus, purified resting CD4^+^ T-cells were labeled with
CFSE and cocultured with unlabeled naïve or memory T-cells that were
transduced either with HDV.FoxP3 or HDV and then stimulated through the
TCR as described for freshly isolated Treg cells (see [Figure
3](#pbio-0020198-g003)). FoxP3-expressing naïve T-cells, both from CB or
AB, completely suppressed proliferation of target resting CD4^+^ T-cells
([Figure 7](#pbio-0020198-g007)B and [Figure7](#pbio-0020198-g007)C). A
significant but lower level of suppression was apparent with memory
T-cells transduced with FoxP3 ([Figure 7](#pbio-0020198-g007)C). We
conclude that ectopic expression of FoxP3 in naïve human T-cells
recapitulates key phenotypic and functional features of naturally
occurring Treg cells.

## T-cells Ectopically Expressing FoxP3 Are More Susceptible to HIV Infection

We next determined the susceptibility of FoxP3-expressing cells to HIV
infection. FoxP3-transduced cells were purified by flow cytometry
sorting based on mCD24 expression and activated through their TCR or
cultured in IL-2-containing medium. Subsequently, activated cells were
challenged with either VSV-G.HIV or R5.HIV. Remarkably, FoxP3-expressing
cells were infected at a level about 2- to 3-fold higher than control
cells at different concentrations of the virus, in both activated and
nonactivated conditions ([Figure 8](#pbio-0020198-g008)A).
FoxP3-expressing cells stimulated at suboptimal levels of anti-CD3
antibody also displayed a very similar enhancement of infection compared
to HDV-transduced cells (data not shown).

HIV Infection of FoxP3-Expressing T-cells\
(A) HDV.FoxP3 and HDV-transduced T-cells were activated using
plate-bound anti-CD3 (100 ng/ml) and soluble anti-CD28 (1 μg/ml)
antibodies or maintained in IL-2-containing medium. Cells were
concurrently infected at different MOI of VSV-G.HIV, and infection was
determined by GFP expression at 72 h postinfection by flow cytometry.\
(B) Supernatants were collected at different time points from
R5.HIV-infected HDV.FoxP3-expressing or HDV-transduced cell cultures,
and HIV p24 levels were measured by ELISA. The percentages of infected
cells at days 3, 9, and 16 for HDV.FoxP3 were 2, 10, and 26, and for HDV
were 0.8, 10, and 18, respectively.

We next analyzed the level of HIV replication and cell death in
FoxP3-expressing cells as compared to HDV-transduced T-cells. Activated
FoxP3-expressing and control cells were infected with R5.HIV, and
culture supernatants were collected daily from day 3 postinfection.
FoxP3-expressing cells showed increased HIV-infection and replication
([Figure 8](#pbio-0020198-g008)B). Infectivity of virus produced by
FoxP3-expressing cells, as assessed on Hut78/CCR5 cells, as well as cell
death in these cultures, was also proportionately higher (data not
shown). These findings demonstrate that the expression of FoxP3 renders
CD4^+^ primary T-cells more susceptible to HIV infection.

## HIV-Infected Patients Have Greatly Decreased Levels of FoxP3-Expressing CD4^+^CD25^hi^ T-cells

Our findings that Treg cells are highly susceptible to HIV infection
prompted us to determine if this subset was disturbed within
HIV-infected individuals. However, a major difficulty in such analysis
is that many of the cell surface markers that define Treg cells are also
expressed on activated T-cells (CD25, HLA-DR, GITR). Because a portion
of HIV-positive individuals contain high levels of activated T-cells,
simple cell surface analysis would not be sufficiently reliable to
quantify Treg cells in these donors. Therefore, we utilized FoxP3
expression as the most reliable marker that defines Treg cells. To
accomplish this, we sorted CD4^+^CD25^hi^, naïve, and memory T-cells
from 11 HIV-negative, healthy donors (median age, 31; 64% male) and 24
HIV-infected individuals (median age, 38; 85% male; 88% receiving
antiretroviral therapy). Total RNA was then isolated from each subset
and *FoxP3* mRNA expression was quantified using real-time PCR analysis.
In order to normalize for experimental variability, *FoxP3* expression
of the CD4^+^CD25^hi^ cells was normalized to *GAPDH* levels from the
same samples and compared to the naïve T-cell subset isolated from the
same donor. We found that within HIV-negative subjects there was on
average a 49-fold higher level of expression of *FoxP3* in
CD4^+^CD25^hi^ cells as compared to naïve T-cells ([Figure
9](#pbio-0020198-g009)A). The lowest FoxP3-expressor in the healthy
subject group had 16-fold higher FoxP3 expression as compared to naïve
T-cells from the same donor ([Figure 9](#pbio-0020198-g009)A). There was
a similar increase in *FoxP3* expression as compared to memory T-cells
(data not shown). In HIV-positive subjects *FoxP3* expression was only
increased a mean of 25-fold in CD4^+^CD25^hi^ cells. In contrast to
healthy donors, we also observed that in about half of the HIV-positive
subjects, CD4^+^CD25^hi^ cells expressed very low to undetectable levels
of *FoxP3* ([Figure 9](#pbio-0020198-g009)A). *FoxP3* expression in
memory T-cells was similar in HIV-positive and HIV-negative subjects
([Figure 9](#pbio-0020198-g009)A).

FoxP3 Expression in Purified CD4^+^CD25^hi^ (Treg), Naïve, and Memory
T-cells from HIV-Infected and Healthy Individuals\
(A) RNA was isolated from sorted Treg, naïve, and memory T-cells from
HIV-positive (*n* = 24) and HIV-negative (*n* = 11) subjects, followed
by cDNA synthesis. *FoxP3* expression was quantified by TaqMan real-time
PCR. The *FoxP3*-fold difference expression was calculated for
CD4^+^CD25^hi^ (Treg) versus naïve (N), and memory (Mem) versus naïve
(N) T-cells. Treg cells sorted from HIV-positive subjects were further
subdivided into two groups based on *FoxP3* expression of Treg compared
to naïve T-cells (FoxP3-high, *n* = 13, FoxP3 difference \>10-fold;
FoxP3-low, *n* = 11, FoxP3 difference \<10-fold; HIV-negative, *n* = 9).
These groups were stained with anti-CD3, anti-CD4, anti-CD45RO,
anti-CD25, and anti-HLA-DR and analyzed by flow cytometry for (B) CD4^+^
T-cell percentage, (C) activated T-cell percentage (CD4^+^HLA-DR^+^),
and (D) CD4^+^CD25^hi^ percentage. Horizontal lines identify means.
Statistical significance between groups was determined by Mann--Whitney
*U* test and shown on top of each figure.

Progressive HIV disease is associated with decreased CD4^+^ T-cell
percentages and increased levels of activated T-cells. We hypothesized
that this hyperactivation may be due to a loss of Treg cells. Therefore,
to further evaluate relationships between FoxP3 expression and these
parameters in HIV-infected individuals, samples were divided into low
FoxP3 expressors (less than 10-fold higher expression in CD4^+^CD25^hi^
T-cells compared to naïve T-cells, designated FoxP3-low) versus high
FoxP3 expressors (greater than 10-fold higher expression compared to
naïve T-cells, designated FoxP3-high). HIV-positive subjects with a
FoxP3-low profile had significantly lower CD4^+^ T-cell percentages,
while FoxP3-high HIV-positive subjects had CD4^+^ T-cell percentages
comparable to HIV-seronegative subjects ([Figure
9](#pbio-0020198-g009)B). Similarly, HIV-positive FoxP3-low subjects had
significantly greater activated CD4^+^T-cells (CD4^+^HLA-DR^+^) than
either HIV-positive subjects with FoxP3-high profiles or
HIV-seronegative subjects ([Figure 9](#pbio-0020198-g009)C).
Interestingly, the CD4^+^CD25^hi^ T-cells are also significantly
increased in FoxP3-low expressors as compared to HIV-negative or
HIV-positive FoxP3-high expressors ([Figure 9](#pbio-0020198-g009)D).
These differences are most likely due to recently activated T-cells that
also express high levels of CD25, as shown by higher HLA-DR expression
on T-cells from the same subset of subjects ([Figure
9](#pbio-0020198-g009)C). Among HIV-positive subjects there was no
significant association between FoxP3 expression and plasma HIV-1 RNA
concentration, age, race, sex, or whether the subject was receiving
antiretroviral therapy (*P* \> 0.05 for each comparison). These findings
demonstrate that a decrease in Treg cells is associated with HIV disease
progression and suggest that loss of Treg cells may contribute to
increased T-cell hyperactivation.

# Discussion

In this study we demonstrated that human Treg cells are highly
susceptible to HIV infection and that ectopic expression of FoxP3
genetically reprograms conventional naïve T-cells, phenotypically and
functionally, into Treg cells. Remarkably, overexpression of FoxP3 also
greatly enhances the susceptibility of activated T-cells to HIV
infection. Although Treg cells constitute a small subset of the total
T-cells in humans (less than 1%--2%) and thus may not be a significant
target population for HIV, they appear to have very potent suppressive
activity against activation of T-cells (Takahashi et al. 1998; Thornton
and Shevach 1998; Baecher-Allan et al. 2001; Curotto de Lafaille and
Lafaille 2002). Here we demonstrate that FoxP3-expressing CD4^+^CD25^hi^
T-cells are greatly decreased in a portion of HIV-infected individuals
with low CD4 and high activated T-cells, suggesting a loss of Treg
cells. We therefore propose that infection and disruption of Treg cells
during HIV infection could have a major influence on T-cell homeostasis
and immune regulation.

Similar to previous reports, our findings demonstrate that human Treg
cells appear to be enriched within the CD25^hi^ subset of CD4^+^
T-cells. However, it is not clear if Treg cells are the only population
represented in the CD25^hi^ subset since they share this phenotype with
recently activated T-cells. Indeed, a portion of purified CD25^hi^ cells
proliferated and their suppressive function was less efficient as
compared to FoxP3-expressing cells (see [Figure 3](#pbio-0020198-g003)).
Because the purification of Treg cells is rather arbitrary (brightest
1%--2% of antibody-stained CD25^+^ memory T-cells), it is conceivable
that there is sizable contamination of non-Treg cells in these sorted
preparations. In addition, the differences seen in the infection
susceptibility of Tregs as compared to FoxP3-expressing cells may also
be partly due to presence of non-Treg activated T-cells within the
purified cells. Identification of the Treg subset in disease conditions
with chronic T-cell activation, such as HIV, is even more problematic
because a large proportion of CD4^+^CD25^hi^ cells possibly represent
recently activated T-cells. Availability of large numbers of genetically
reprogrammed Treg cells should facilitate the identification of novel
markers that can reliably detect human Treg cells.

Our results clearly demonstrate that, similar to the mouse system,
ectopic expression of FoxP3 is sufficient to recapitulate all of the
characteristics of Treg cells, including lower cytokine secretion,
higher expression of CD25 and GITR, and their suppressive functions.
This system has allowed us to generate large numbers of Treg cells,
which will be invaluable in characterizing their suppressive function as
well as mechanisms of enhanced HIV susceptibility. The ability to
genetically manipulate primary T-cells to reprogram them into the Treg
phenotype also could have profound implications for preventing
graft-versus-host disease, a serious clinical condition that can be
manifested following hematopoietic cell transplantation (Hoffmann et al.
2002; Taylor et al. 2002).

It is interesting to note that naïve T-cells are more prone to
reprogramming into a Treg phenotype than memory T-cells are. This loss
in flexibility of reprogramming with a master transcription factor is
reminiscent of Th1- and Th2-type T-cell reprogramming with ectopic
expression of lineage-specific transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3,
respectively (Sundrud et al. 2003). The loss of flexibility in genetic
modification of effector/memory T-cells could reflect heritable
epigenetic changes at effector gene loci that might otherwise be
responsive to FoxP3-mediated transcription. A recent study supports this
hypothesis by demonstrating that lineage-committed human memory cells
failed to modify their histone acetylation patterns of cytokine genes,
unlike naïve T-cells, to differentiate into Th1- or Th2-type cells
(Messi et al. 2003).

The cause of progressive depletion of CD4^+^ cells and the reason for
high T-cell activation or turnover during HIV infection remains
controversial (Hazenberg et al. 2000; Grossman et al. 2002). It is
thought that HIV-mediated destruction of CD4^+^ T-cells results in
decline of this subset and that to maintain homeostasis the immune
system attempts to replenish this subset, resulting in a massive
turnover of T-cells (Ho et al. 1995; Wei et al. 1995; Perelson et al.
1996; Mohri et al. 1998, 2001). This excessive turnover rate eventually
compromises proper function of homeostatic responses. Alternatively,
T-cell depletion could result from disrupted thymic and peripheral
homeostatic mechanisms by virus-induced generalized T-cell activation
and gradual wasting of T-cell supplies, eventually leading to T-cell
depletion (Hazenberg et al. 2000; Grossman et al. 2002).

Indeed, several mechanisms control unwanted activation of T-cells,
including thymic deletion of autoreactive T-cells and induction of
anergy in the periphery. In addition to these passive mechanisms, recent
evidence clearly demonstrates that Treg cells exert an active
suppression of T-cell activation. We postulate that the high
susceptibility of Treg cells to HIV in vivo, as demonstrated by our in
vitro studies, could result in gradual elimination of this subset. This
Treg cell decline during HIV infection would in turn reduce active
suppression of conventional T-cells and, hence, contribute to
hyperactivation of T-cells. Our analyses of peripheral blood T-cells
from HIV-infected subjects support this hypothesis that loss of Treg
cells during HIV infection contributes to HIV disease progression.
Indeed, we found that in a subset of HIV-infected subjects, the
CD4^+^CD25^hi^ T-cell subset had greatly reduced FoxP3 expression,
suggesting that these cells represent recently activated T-cells rather
then Treg cells. The presence of a higher percent of activated T-cells
in this FoxP3-low profile supports this conjecture. The HIV-infected
subjects with lower levels of FoxP3^+^ T-cells also contained a lower
percentage of CD4^+^ T-cells. It is conceivable that the loss of Treg
cells may be a correlative factor for disease progression; however, more
detailed prospective studies will be required to address this important
implication of our findings.

Our findings show a 2- to 3-fold enhancement of HIV infection in
FoxP3-expressing T-cells. While freshly purified Treg and memory T-cells
are similar in their susceptibility to HIV infection, activated effector
T-cells become gradually more resistant to infection (unpublished
results). Indeed, preactivated T-cells require reactivation to render
them susceptible to infection after about 1--2 weeks in culture
(unpublished results). We do not yet know the mechanisms by which FoxP3
renders activated T-cells more susceptible to infection; however, two
possibilities can be considered: (1) FoxP3 may be overcoming innate
resistance factor(s) that accumulate in activated T-cells that block HIV
infection, or (2) FoxP3 expression may be inducing critical host factors
that are required for efficient completion of the HIV life cycle in
primary T-cells. It is important to note that since FoxP3 expression
enhances VSV-G.HIV single-round infections, it likely affects an early,
postentry step in viral replication. Determining the mechanisms by which
FoxP3 enhances HIV infection could reveal host factors involved in this
process.

In summary, our results indicate that both naturally occurring and
genetically reprogrammed Treg cells are susceptible to HIV infection and
that ectopic FoxP3 expression greatly increases the susceptibility of
T-cells to HIV infection. Our finding that FoxP3-expressing
CD4^+^CD25^+^ T-cells are greatly reduced in HIV patients with low
CD4^+^ T-cell percentages and increased T-cell activation suggests that
loss of Treg cells may contribute to HIV disease progression. Further
prospective studies will be required to unravel the role of this
important subset in HIV infection. The ability to genetically reprogram
conventional human T-cells to generate Treg cells will also lead the way
to identifying unique markers expressed on this population in order to
further investigate their status in HIV-infected individuals. Moreover,
understanding how FoxP3 enhances HIV infection and programs T-cells into
the Treg subset could help in the identification of novel host factors
that mediate HIV infection in primary T-cells and decoding the molecular
mechanisms by which Treg cells mediate their suppressive function.

# Materials and Methods

## 

### Study subjects and statistical analysis

Healthy subjects (*n* = 11) were adults who were HIV-negative and with
no history of chronic viral infections such as Hepatitis B or C. Blood
samples from adults with HIV infection (*n* = 24) were obtained during
routine primary care visits at the Comprehensive Care Center, Vanderbilt
University Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee, United States. There
were no selection criteria based on race or sex. All subjects provided
written consent, and the study was approved by the Vanderbilt
Institutional Review Board. Continuous variables were compared by a
Mann--Whitney *U* test, and categorical variables by an χ^2^ test. All
significance levels were based on two-tailed tests. Statistical analyses
were performed using SPSS, version 12.0 (SPSS, Chicago, Illinois, United
States).

### Cell isolation and culture

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were separated from buffy
coats of healthy and HIV-positive donors through Ficoll--Hypaque
separation (Pharmacia-LKB Technology, Uppsala, Sweden). Resting CD4^+^
T-cells were purified as previously described (Unutmaz et al. 1999).
This purification protocol typically resulted in 99.5% purity of
positively selected cells, as determined by postpurification
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis. To isolate Treg
cells, PBMCs, or purified CD4^+^ cells, were stained with CD45RO, CD25,
CD4, and HLA-DR antibodies (BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San Diego,
California, United States), and CD4^+^CD45RO^+^CD25^hi^ and
CD4^+^CD45RO^−^CD25^low/neg^ cells were sorted using flow cytometry
(FACS Aria; BD Biosciences Pharmingen). For some experiments, adult
CD4^+^ T-cells were sorted into CD45RO^+^ (memory) and CD45RO^−^ (naïve)
T-cells with anti-CD45RO conjugated magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec,
Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) using AutoMACS (Miltenyi Biotec). Purified
resting T-cells were activated by cross-linking with plate-bound
anti-CD3 antibody (OKT-3; American Type Culture Collection, Manassas,
Virginia, United States) and soluble anti-CD28 antibody (1 μg/ml, BD
Biosciences Pharmingen). The plates were first coated with goat
antimouse IgG (10 μg/ml, CalTag Laboratories, Burlingame, California,
United States) followed by either 3 μg/ml anti-CD3 for optimal TCR
stimulation or 100 ng/ml anti-CD3 for suboptimal stimulation. The
culture medium used in all experiments was RPMI (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, California, United States) and was prepared as previously
described (Motsinger et al. 2002). All cytokines were purchased from R &
D Systems (Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States). Monocyte-derived
dendritic cells were generated as previously described (Motsinger et al.
2002). Superantigen, staphylococcal enterotoxin B (Sigma, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States) was used to stimulate resting T-cells in the
presence of dendritic cells (Motsinger et al. 2002).

### Virus production and infections

VSV-G.HIV particles were generated as previously described (Unutmaz et
al. 1999). R5-HIV was prepared similarly by transfecting 293T-cells with
HIV that encodes R5-tropic (BAL) envelope and enhanced GFP (Clontech,
Palo Alto, California, United States) in place of the *nef* gene as
previously described (Unutmaz et al. 1999). Typically viral titers
ranged from 1--5 × 10^6^ ifu/ml for replication-competent viruses and
10--30 × 10^6^ for VSV-G.HIV. T-cells were infected at varying
multiplicities of infection (MOI), and infection was quantified by GFP
expression using flow cytometry. In some experiments, cells inoculated
with virus were centrifuged for 1 h at 2,000 rpm to enhance infectivity,
as described by O\'Doherty et al. (2000). Viral replication in T-cell
cultures was determined by measuring p24 levels within supernatants by
an ELISA (Motsinger et al. 2003), and infectious virus production by
infected T-cells was determined by culturing Hut78 cells expressing CCR5
(Hut78/CCR5) (Wu et al. 2002) in infected T-cell supernatants.

### CFSE labeling

Cell division was measured by labeling the T-cells with CFSE (Molecular
Probes, Eugene, Oregon, United States). Purified cells were first washed
and resuspended in PBS. While vortexing the cells, CFSE was added at a
final concentration of 5 μM. The mixture was vortexed for an additional
15 s and incubated at 37 °C for 3 min. Labeling was quenched by addition
of 50% fetal calf serum in PBS. Cells were washed one more time with 50%
serum PBS, followed by two washes with RPMI-supplemented medium. All
CFSE labeling and culturing were performed under dark conditions.

### FACS analysis and cytokine assay

T-cells were stained with the relevant antibody on ice for 30 min in PBS
buffer containing 2% fetal calf serum and 0.1% sodium azide. Cells were
then washed twice, fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde, and analyzed with a
FACSCalibur four-color cytometer. Live cells were gated based on
forward- and side-scatter properties, and analysis was performed using
FlowJo software (Tree Star, Ashland, Oregon, United States). The
following antihuman antibodies were used for staining: CD3, CD4, CD45RO,
CD45RA, CD25, GITR, HLA-DR, CCR5, CCR4, CCR7, CXCR4, CXCR3, and
antimouse CD24, all obtained from PharMingen (San Diego, California,
United States). Cytokines (IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and IFNγ) in the
supernatants were assayed using a commercially available cytometric bead
array (CBA) (BD Biosciences Pharmingen) (Cook et al. 2001) and analyzed
using CBA 6-bead analysis software (BD Biosciences Pharmingen).

### Cloning of human FoxP3

RNA was isolated from activated human T-cells using an RNeasy kit
(Qiagen, Valencia, California, United States). To synthesize cDNA 100 ng
RNA was used (Superscript II Reverse Transcriptase; Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, California, United States). *FoxP3* was PCR amplified from
T-cell cDNA with the following primers: *FoxP3* forward,
5′-AGATATCCCAGCCATGCCCAACCCCAGGCCTGGCAAG-3′; *FoxP3* reverse,
5′-TCAGGGGCCAGGTGTAGGGTTGGAACACCT-3′. The forward primer included an
EcoRV restriction site to facilitate cloning. The *FoxP3* PCR product
was subcloned into a TOPO shuttle vector (pcDNA3.1/CT-GFP-TOPO;
Invitrogen). Following an EcoRV digest, FoxP3 was ligated into an
HDV-encoding mCD24 down stream of an internal ribosome entry site
(Sundrud et al. 2003). The FoxP3 coding sequence was confirmed by DNA
sequencing.

### Real-time PCR protocol

RNA was extracted, as described above, from cells transduced with HDV or
HDV.FoxP3 or sorted Treg, naïve, and memory T-cells from HIV-positive
and HIV-negative subjects. RNA (100 ng) was used to synthesize cDNA (as
described above). Taqman Assays-on-Demand Gene Expression Primers
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, United States) were used
in real-time PCR analyses: *GAPDH* primer mix assay ID Hs99999905_m1;
*FoxP3* primer mix assay ID Hs00203958_m1.

Real-time PCR was performed using the ABI 7700 apparatus (PE Applied
Biosystems, Weiterstadt, Germany). The reaction mixtures (20-μl total
volume) contained 2 μl of serially diluted cDNA, 10 μl of Taqman
Universal PCR Master Mix (PE Applied Biosystems), and 1 μl of either
*FoxP3* or *GAPDH* primer mix. The reactions were amplified as follows:
50 °C for 2 min and 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for
1 min and 65 °C for 1 min. Expression of *FoxP3* was normalized to
*GAPDH* expression in each sample.

# Supporting Information

## Accession Number

The GenBank (<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/>) accession number for the
gene *FoxP3* discussed in this paper is AF277993.

We thank Vineet KewalRamani, Luc Van Kaer, Sebastian Joyce, Karla Eger,
and Wasif Khan for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful
comments. We are grateful to Janet Nicotera, Therese Remus, Husamettin
Erdem, and Melissa Rueff for providing clinical data and samples from
HIV-positive subjects. This work was supported by a National Institutes
of Health grant (A1055349) and the Vanderbilt Meharry Center for AIDS
Research (P30AI054999).

AB

:   adult blood

CB

:   cord blood

CBA

:   cytometric bead array

CFSE

:   carboxy-fluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester

ELISA

:   enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay

FACS

:   fluorescence-activated cell sorting

GFP

:   green fluorescent protein

GITR

:   glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor receptor

HDV

:   HIV-derived vector

HDV.FoxP3

:   FoxP3-expressing HIV-derived vector

MOI

:   multiplicity of infection

R5.HIV

:   CCR5-tropic HIV

TCR

:   T-cell receptor

Treg cell

:   regulatory T-cell

VSV-G.HIV

:   HIV pseudotyped with vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein
    envelope

[^1]: DU conceived and designed the experiments. KO-R, SG and ML
    performed the experiments. KO-R, SG, and DU analyzed the data. NS,
    MS, and DWH contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. KO-R and
    DU wrote the paper.

[^2]: The authors have declared that no conflicts of interest exist.
