# Introduction

Most patients who succumb to cancer do so not from primary tumor burden,
but from metastatic disease (Fidler 2003). For example, advanced-stage
peritoneal carcinomatosis (e.g., from metastatic ovarian and breast
cancer) and disseminated peritoneal lymphomas are often resistant to
current chemotherapy treatment (Parsons et al. 1996). Posttreatment
survival rates for patients presenting with metastatic ovarian
peritoneal carcinomatosis or lymphoma are less than 20% and less than
50%, respectively (Lam and Zhao 1997; Deppe and Baumann 2000; Hofstra et
al. 2000). Consequently, the development of novel therapeutic strategies
to reverse these numbers is clearly warranted.

A significant effort has been aimed at understanding the function of
tumor suppressor gene pathways that are genetically and epigenetically
altered during oncogenesis (Macleod 2000). One rationale for the study
of tumor suppressor pathways is the hypothesis that reconstitution of
these pathways in cancer patients will be therapeutically beneficial
(Macleod 2000). The p53 tumor suppressor protein induces growth arrest
and apoptosis in response to cellular stress (Vousden and Lu 2002).
Mutation of genes in the p53 pathway is thought to be nearly universal
in human cancer (Vousden and Lu 2002). Thus, any strategy designed to
restore p53 activity in tumor cells will likely be an effective means of
inducing cancer cell death and will be applicable to a large fraction of
cancer patients. The inability of large tumor suppressor proteins, all
of which are intracellular, to cross the plasma membrane precludes the
therapeutic administration of recombinant tumor suppressors in a manner
analogous to administration of extracellular biological therapeutics
(e.g., insulin or G-CSF). Thus, the development of an efficient
methodology for restoring tumor suppressor function to cancer cells in
vivo remains a challenge for both basic and clinical researchers.

Gene therapy approaches aimed at restoring tumor suppressor function
have been extensively investigated. Both viral and nonviral vectors have
been employed to express exogenous tumor suppressor genes, such as
*p53*, in cancer cells (McCormick 2001). Although gene therapy may be
useful under certain conditions, problems associated with immunogenicity
and lack of systemic biodistribution to disseminated metastases are
likely to curtail its anticancer efficacy (McCormick 2001).

Delivery of macromolecules by protein transduction has recently emerged
as an alternative methodology for directly introducing tumor suppressor
proteins into cancer cells in vivo. Several small cationic peptides,
including TAT, Antp, and polyArg (referred to as protein transduction
domains \[PTDs\]), are capable of traversing the plasma membrane and
entering the cytoplasm of cells by a concentration-dependent, but
receptor-independent, macropinocytic mechanism (Wadia et al. 2004). PTDs
have recently been used to deliver a wide range of cargo, including
biologically active proteins, peptides, nucleic acids, and iron beads,
into cells in culture (Fischer et al. 2001; Lindsay 2002). PTDs have
also been employed to deliver biologically active cargo into most, if
not all, tissues in preclinical models (Schwarze et al. 1999).

Because of the presence of either wild-type or mutant p53 protein in
most tumors, it has been hypothesized that restoration of endogenous p53
activity in cancer cells will be a therapeutically efficacious
alternative to delivery of exogenous p53. However, this hypothesis has
been tested in vivo in only a limited number of cases (Foster et al.
1999; Bykov et al. 2002) and has never been tested in preclinical models
of terminal human malignancy. We therefore focused on a strategy to
activate endogenous p53 in cancer cells by PTD-mediated delivery. The
C-terminus of p53 is a lysine-rich domain that is subjected to a variety
of posttranslational modifications (Apella and Anderson 2001). A peptide
derived from the C-terminus was previously shown by D. Lane\'s group
(University of Dundee, United Kingdom) to activate specific DNA binding
by p53 in vitro by an unknown mechanism (Hupp et al. 1995). In cancer
cells, p53C′ peptide can induce apoptosis by activating wild-type p53
protein and by restoring function to several p53 DNA contact mutants.
Importantly, the p53C′ peptide also restores specific DNA binding to
some p53 DNA contact mutants in vitro and induces apoptosis in cancer
cells expressing p53 DNA contact mutants (Selivanova et al. 1997, 1998;
Kim et al. 1999). However, the peptide fails to induce apoptosis in
p53-deficient tumor cells or in tumor cells containing *p53* structural
mutations. In contrast, primary cells are resistant to p53C′ peptide
action (Selivanova et al. 1997; Kim et al. 1999). This resistance is
likely a result of the extremely low levels of endogenous p53 present in
normal cells and the absence of continual DNA damage often associated
with tumor cells (Selivanova et al. 1997; Kim et al. 1999).

Here we report a proof-of-concept that in vivo delivery of a
transducible, proteolytically stable p53C′ peptide (termed RI-TATp53C′)
is a therapeutically effective means of activating the p53 tumor
suppressor pathway in preclinical models of terminal metastatic cancer.

# Results

## Activation of p53 by Transducible Retro-Inverso D-Isomer p53C′ Peptide

Although PTDs solve one major obstacle to the use of intracellular
peptides as therapeutics, the susceptibility of peptides to degradation
in vivo remains problematic. To circumvent the problem of proteolytic
degradation, we synthesized a retro-inverso version of the parental
p53C′ peptide by inverting the peptide sequence, using D-isomer
residues, and adding the TAT PTD to obtain a transducible RI-TATp53C′
peptide ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020036-g001)A). This double inversion of
peptide structure often leaves the surface topology of the sidechains
intact and has been used extensively to stabilize biologically active
peptides for in vivo applications (Chorev and Goodman 1993). Because of
their greater stability, retro-inverso peptides often display increased
potency.

RI-TATp53C′ Induces the Hallmarks of p53 Activity in TA3/St Mammary
Carcinoma Cells\
(A) Sequence of p53C′TAT peptide (L-amino acids) and its retro-inverso
analogue (D-amino acids). To generate a negative control peptide, three
essential lysine residues (Selivanova et al. 1997) were mutated while
leaving the remaining peptide sequence intact.\
(B) Induction of G1 arrest in TA3/St cells by wild-type RI-TATp53C′, but
not mutant peptide, 24 h after peptide addition.\
(C) Dose-dependent induction of G1 arrest by RI-TATp53C′ (open square)
(D-amino acids) and the less potent p53C′TAT (open circle) (L-amino
acids) but not mutant (open triangle) peptide at 24 h (left) and 48 h
(right) after single treatment.\
(D) Induction of a permanent growth arrest in TA3/St cells by
RI-TATp53C′. Cells were treated with RI-TATp53C′ peptide or vehicle for
2 d, replated, and allowed to proliferate in the presence of serum for
10 d. Colonies were then stained with methylene blue.\
(E) Induction of a senescence-like phenotype in TA3/St cells by
RI-TATp53C′. Cells were treated with RI-TATp53C′ peptide and stained for
acidic β-galactosidase activity.

To determine whether the RI-TATp53C′ peptide retained functionality, we
compared the transducible parental L-isomer p53C′TAT and D-isomer
RI-TATp53C′ peptides for the ability to induce a cell cycle arrest
([Figure 1](#pbio-0020036-g001)B). Treatment of murine TA3/St mammary
carcinoma cells (which express wild-type p53) with either the L-isomer
p53C′TAT or D-isomer RI-TATp53C′ peptides resulted in a
concentration-dependent G1 cell cycle arrest ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020036-g001)B and [1](#pbio-0020036-g001)C). The control
D-isomer mutant peptide had little to no effect ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020036-g001)B and [1](#pbio-0020036-g001)C). Compared to the
L-isomer p53C′TAT, the D-isomer RI-TATp53C′ peptide induced a stronger
cell cycle arrest at substantially lower concentrations ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020036-g001)C). A single administration of the L-isomer
p53C′TAT peptide partially arrested cells for 24 h, but by 48 h cells
had reentered the cell cycle ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020036-g001)C). In
contrast, a single dose of the D-isomer RI-TATp53C′ peptide was
sufficient to sustain a G1 arrest for greater than 7 d ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020036-g001)C; data not shown).

To ascertain whether sustained arrest required the continuous presence
of RI-TATp53C′ peptide, TA3/St cells were treated with peptide or
vehicle for 2 d and then replated under mitogenic conditions in the
absence of peptide. Peptide-treated tumor cells formed less than 1% as
many colonies as vehicle-treated cells ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020036-g001)D). This observation suggested that RI-TATp53C′
peptide induced a permanent growth arrest in TA3/St cells. We therefore
assayed RI-TATp53C′ peptide-treated cells for induction of senescence, a
state of terminal arrest that can be induced by p53 activation (Roninson
et al. 2002). By 6 d after peptide addition, greater than 80% of viable
TA3/St cells were positive for acidic β-galactosidase activity ([Figure
1](#pbio-0020036-g001)E), the standard marker of senescence (Roninson et
al. 2002). The treated cells also displayed other features of senescence
(Roninson et al. 2002), including increased size, increased granularity,
and a flattened morphology ([Figure 1](#pbio-0020036-g001)E; data not
shown). These observations suggest that treatment of mammary carcinoma
cells with the RI-TATp53C′ peptide induces hallmarks of p53 activation,
namely a G1 cell cycle arrest followed by induction of senescence.

We next investigated the ability of the RI-TATp53C′ peptide to
transcriptionally activate p53-responsive genes. We transiently
transfected p53 null human H1299 lung carcinoma cells with p53-dependent
luciferase reporter plasmid (PG13-Luc) and either wild-type p53
expression plasmid or empty vector. The use of p53 null cells allows for
negative controls that are not possible in cells expressing endogenous
p53. As expected, we observed a p53-dependent induction of luciferase
activity in cells transfected with p53 expression vector ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020036-g002)A). However, RI-TATp53C′ peptide treatment of
cells transfected with p53 expression vector resulted in a significant
increase in p53-dependent luciferase activity ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020036-g002)A, left). Consistent with observations in TA3/St
cells (see [Figure 1](#pbio-0020036-g001)B and
[1](#pbio-0020036-g001)C), mutant peptide and L-isomer p53C′TAT
displayed substantially reduced potency in this assay when compared to
RI-TATp53C′ peptide (data not shown). Importantly, RI-TATp53C′ peptide
treatment of cells transfected with empty vector and luciferase plasmids
caused no increase in p53 target promoter activity ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020036-g002)A). In addition, RI-TATp53C′ peptide activated
p53-dependent transcription in SW480 colon carcinoma cells expressing a
p53 DNA contact mutant (R273H) and in H1299 p53 null colon carcinoma
cells transfected with a p53 DNA contact mutant (R248Q and R273H)
([Figure 2](#pbio-0020036-g002)A, right), though to a lesser extent than
in the presence of wild-type p53 ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020036-g002)A,
left). These observations show that RI-TATp53C′ peptide retains the
ability to specifically activate p53-dependent gene transcription.

RI-TATp53C′ Peptide Activates p53-Dependent Transcription and Inhibits
Tumor Cells Expressing p53\
(A, left) Induction of transcription from a p53-dependent promoter by
RI-TATp53C′ only when p53 protein is expressed. H1299 cells (*p53^−/−^*)
were cotransfected with p53-responsive reporter (PG13-Luc) and either
empty vector or p53 expression vector. Depicted are mean and standard
deviation of triplicate results that are representative of multiple
experiments.\
(A, right) RI-TATp53C′ peptide activates p53-dependent transcription in
cells expressing DNA contact mutant p53. SW480 cells containing a DNA
contact mutant (R273H) p53 were transfected with p53-dependent reporter
(PG13-Luc). H1299 cells (*p53*^−/−^) were co-transfected with PG13-Luc
and either R248Q or R273H mutant p53 expression vector. RI-TATp53C′ was
added to cells, and promoter activity was assessed 24 h later.\
(B) Inhibition of tumor cell proliferation in a p53-dependent manner by
RI-TATp53C′. Increasing concentrations of peptide were added to HCT 116
cells (*p53^+/+^*) and their *p53^−/−^* isogenic derivatives. After 2 d,
the number of viable cells was assessed by Trypan blue exclusion and
normalized to the number of viable untreated cells. Mean and standard
deviation of multiple experiments are depicted.\
(C) Inhibition of the proliferation of tumor cells expressing wild-type
or mutant p53, but not *p53^−/−^* tumor cells or nontransformed human
fibroblasts. Cell viability was assessed as in (B). Mean and standard
deviation of multiple experiments are depicted.

To confirm that the RI-TATp53C′ peptide inhibited tumor cell
proliferation in a p53-dependent fashion, we compared parental
*p53^+/+^* HCT116 colorectal carcinoma cells to HCT116 cells that were
rendered p53-deficient at both loci by targeted genetic recombination
(Bunz et al. 1998). Treatment of wild-type *p53* HCT116 cells with
RI-TATp53C′ peptide inhibited cell proliferation in a dose-dependent
manner ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020036-g002)B). In contrast, RI-TATp53C′
peptide treatment of p53-deficient HCT116 cells did not significantly
alter the number of viable cells. p53-deficient human H1299 lung
adenocarcinoma cells also failed to respond to the RI-TATp53C′ peptide
([Figure 2](#pbio-0020036-g002)C), further confirming the specificity of
peptide action. RI-TATp53C′ peptide inhibited proliferation of TA3/St
cells (*p53^+/+^*) and human Namalwa lymphoma cells that express a p53
hotspot DNA contact mutant (R248Q) ([Figure 2](#pbio-0020036-g002)C). In
contrast, RI-TATp53C′ peptide did not alter the proliferation of normal
human foreskin fibroblasts containing wild-type p53 ([Figure
2](#pbio-0020036-g002)C). These results are consistent with previous
observations that certain p53 contact mutations are susceptible to p53C′
peptide activation and that the p53C′ peptide induces apoptosis in tumor
cells, but not normal cells (Selivanova et al. 1997, 1998; Kim et al.
1999). Taken together, these observations demonstrate both the p53 and
tumor dependency of the RI-TATp53C′ peptide.

## Systemic Delivery of RI-TATp53C′ Peptide Inhibits Solid Tumor Growth

We (Schwarze et al. 1999) and others (Datta et al. 2001; Harada et al.
2002) have previously shown that intraperitoneal (IP) administration of
TAT--fusion peptides and proteins results in systemic delivery in animal
models. Consistent with these observations, IP injection of a
biotinylated RI-TATp53C′ peptide into mice harboring subcutaneous tumors
resulted in distribution of the peptide throughout the tumor ([Figure
3](#pbio-0020036-g003)A).

Solid Tumor Growth Is Inhibited by Systemic RI-TATp53C′ Peptide
Administration\
(A) Delivery of RI-TATp53C′-biotin to subcutaneous TA3/St tumors after
IP administration to immune competent A/J mice.\
(B) Reduction of solid TA3/St tumor growth in immune competent mice as a
result of systemic administration of RI-TATp53C′. TA3/St cells were
injected subcutaneously into A/J mice and allowed to grow to an average
size of approximately 100 mm^3^. Mice were then sorted into treatment
groups that received eight daily injections of vehicle (open circle)
(*n* = 17), 650 μg of mutant peptide (open diamond) (*n* = 7), or 650 μg
of wild-type RI-TATp53C′ peptide (open triangle) (*n* = 11). Final mean
tumor volumes were 573 mm^3^ for vehicle-treated mice, 550 mm^3^ for
mice treated with mutant peptide, and 268 mm^3^ for the wild-type
RI-TATp53C′ peptide group.

We next tested the ability of IP administration of RI-TATp53C′ peptide
to inhibit the growth of distant solid tumors in immune competent mice.
Subcutaneous tumors in mice receiving either vehicle or mutant peptide
grew rapidly, reaching an average volume of nearly 600 mm^3^ by the end
of treatment ([Figure 3](#pbio-0020036-g003)B). In contrast, tumors in
mice treated with wild-type RI-TATp53C′ peptide were significantly
retarded in growth and reached a final mean volume less than 50% that of
tumors in the control-treated mice (*p* = 0.01) ([Figure
3](#pbio-0020036-g003)B). These observations demonstrate that systemic
delivery of RI-TATp53C′ peptide in immune competent mice can
significantly inhibit the growth of an aggressively proliferating solid
tumor at a distant site.

## RI-TATp53C′ Peptide Treatment of Terminal Peritoneal Carcinomatosis

Because of their encapsulation and ectopic site of growth, subcutaneous
tumors fail to replicate many of the features of terminal human cancer.
We therefore tested the efficacy of RI-TATp53C′ peptide in a terminal
peritoneal carcinomatosis mouse model that more closely resembles
metastatic human disease. TA3/St carcinoma cells inoculated into the
peritoneum of immune competent, syngeneic A/Jax (A/J) mice proliferated
in a rapid logarithmic fashion, doubling in 24 h and increasing their
numbers 100-fold 5 d postinoculation (Nagy et al. 1993). This
aggressive, terminal peritoneal carcinomatosis model of human disease
has been used extensively to study the pathophysiology of peritoneal
tumor growth (Nagy et al. 1993, Nagy et al. 1995).

We assayed the ability of the RI-TATp53C′ peptide to alter the tumor
burden and increase the longevity of mice harboring TA3/St peritoneal
carcinomatosis. Vehicle-treated mice rapidly succumbed to peritoneal
tumor burden with a mean survival time of 11 d ([Figure
4](#pbio-0020036-g004)A). Mice treated with control mutant peptide
succumbed to their tumor burden with similar kinetics and a mean
survival time of 10 d ([Figure 4](#pbio-0020036-g004)A). In contrast,
peritoneal tumor-bearing mice treated with wild-type RI-TATp53C′ peptide
lived on average more than 70 d after tumor inoculation ([Figure
4](#pbio-0020036-g004)A), a greater than 6-fold increase in lifespan
over mutant peptide- or vehicle-treated mice (*p* \< 10^−6^). These
observations demonstrate the ability of transducible peptides to
significantly extend survival in a mouse model of terminal peritoneal
carcinomatosis.

RI-TATp53C′ Treatment Extends Survival of Mice Harboring Terminal
Peritoneal Carcinomatosis\
(A) A 6-fold increase in survival of A/J immune-competent mice harboring
lethal TA3/St mammary peritoneal carcinomatosis burden after RI-TATp53C′
peptide treatment. A/J mice were given IP injections of TA3/St cells,
and cells were allowed to double in number (approximately 24 h).
Peritoneal tumor-bearing mice were then treated once a day for 12
consecutive days with vehicle (*n* = 15), 600 μg of wild-type
RI-TATp53C′ (*n* = 10), or 600 μg of mutant peptide (*n* = 10). Mean
survival duration was 11 d for vehicle-treated mice, 10 d for mice
receiving mutant peptide, and greater than 70 d for the group receiving
wild-type RI-TATp53C′ peptide.\
(B) Reduction of tumor cell number in vivo by RI-TATp53C′ treatment.
Mice were injected with TA3/St tumor cells and treated with wild-type
peptide as in (A). Three days after tumor cell injection, cells were
flushed from the peritoneal cavity and serially diluted in 6-well
plates. Growth of colonies was then assessed by methylene blue staining
and used to measure the number of viable tumor cells present in the
peritoneum after treatment with vehicle or wild-type peptide.

We next investigated the biological consequences of peptide treatment to
tumor cells in vivo. Peritoneal-TA3/St tumor-bearing mice were given
daily injections of wild-type RI-TATp53C′ peptide or vehicle control.
Mice were sacrificed 3 d after tumor cell inoculation for assessment of
tumor burden. Vehicle-treated mice contained a significant tumor burden
of recoverable dividing TA3/St tumor cells ([Figure
4](#pbio-0020036-g004)B). In contrast, mice treated with wild-type
RI-TATp53C′ peptide showed a dramatic reduction in tumor cell number,
suggesting that RI-TATp53C′ peptide treatment extended survival by
directly inhibiting overall tumor proliferation. Consistent with cell
culture studies, cell cycle analysis of tumor cells from peptide-treated
mice showed an increase in G1 phase of the cell cycle (data not shown).

## RI-TATp53C′ Peptide Treatment of Terminal Peritoneal Lymphoma

To broaden these results, we also tested the efficacy of the RI-TATp53C′
peptide in a mouse model of aggressive, disseminated peritoneal
lymphoma. Wild-type RI-TATp53C′ peptide, but not mutant peptide, induced
G1 phase accumulation and substantial apoptosis in Namalwa human
lymphoma cells ([Figure 5](#pbio-0020036-g005)A). When injected IP into
SCID (severe combined immune deficiency) mice, Namalwa cells proliferate
in the peritoneum and disseminate to other locations (e.g., spleen,
lymph nodes, and blood \[de Menezes et al. 1998\]), modeling human
B-cell lymphoma (Bertolini et al. 2000). Mice harboring peritoneal
lymphoma succumbed to tumor burden with similar kinetics when treated
with either vehicle or mutant peptide, with a mean survival time of 35 d
and 33 d, respectively ([Figure 5](#pbio-0020036-g005)B). In contrast,
wild-type RI-TATp53C′ peptide treatment resulted in 50% long-term
survival (*p* \< 0.0007) ([Figure 5](#pbio-0020036-g005)B), with six of
12 treated mice still healthy at more than 200 d after tumor cell
injection. Taken together, these observations demonstrate that in models
of terminal metastatic human disease, transducible p53-activating
peptides can modulate tumor biology in vivo, resulting in significantly
decreased tumor burden, increased lifespan, and long-term disease-free
survival.

RI-TATp53C′ Treatment Leads to 50% Long-Term Survival of Mice Bearing
Terminal Peritoneal Lymphoma\
(A) Treatment of human Namalwa B-cell lymphoma cells with RI-TATp53C′
peptide induces apoptosis. Cells were treated with wild-type or mutant
peptide, and DNA content was analyzed by flow cytometry 24 h after
peptide addition.\
(B) Long-term survival of SCID mice harboring lethal peritoneal Namalwa
lymphoma tumor burden after RI-TATp53C′ peptide treatment. Namalwa
lymphoma cells were IP injected into SCID mice and allowed to
proliferate for 48 h. Mice were then injected 16 times over 20 d with
vehicle control (*n* = 16), 900 μg of wild-type RI-TATp53C′ peptide (*n*
= 12), or 900 μg of mutant peptide (*n* = 6). Mean survival duration was
35 d for vehicle-treated mice and 33 d for mice receiving mutant
peptide, whereas 50% of mice treated with wild-type RI-TATp53C′ peptide
remained healthy at 150 d after tumor cell injection.

The subset of RI-TATp53C′ peptide-treated animals that succumbed to
peritoneal carcinomatosis could have failed treatment either because of
the emergence of peptide-resistant tumor cells or because of
insufficient treatment duration. To distinguish between these two
possibilities, we isolated TA3/St and Namalwa cells from animals that
failed treatment. In both cases, the cells readily proliferated in
culture under the same conditions as the parental cell population (data
not shown). RI-TATp53C′ peptide treatment of reconstituted TA3/St cells
induced a G1 arrest similar in extent to that of the parental cell line
([Figure 6](#pbio-0020036-g006)A). RI-TATp53C′ peptide treatment of
reconstituted Namalwa cells also inhibited the viability of both
parental and reconstituted cells to the same degree ([Figure
6](#pbio-0020036-g006)B). These observations demonstrate that treatment
failure is not due to acquisition of RI-TATp53C′ peptide resistance and
suggests that an extended treatment protocol (greater than 12 d) may
lead to a further enhancement of survival in these preclinical cancer
models.

Tumor-Reconstituted Cells from Treated Mice Remain Sensitive to
RI-TATp53C′ Peptide-Induced G1 Arrest or Apoptosis in Culture\
(A) TA3/St cells were recovered from an A/J mouse treated with
RI-TATp53C′ peptide and grown in DMEM/10% FBS. Recovered cells were
treated with increasing concentrations of RI-TATp53C′ peptide and then
analyzed for DNA content by flow cytometry 24 h later.\
(B) Namalwa cells were recovered from a SCID mouse treated with
RI-TATp53C′ peptide and grown in RPMI plus 10% FBS. Recovered cells were
treated with increasing concentrations of RI-TATp53C′ peptide. After 2
d, the number of viable cells was assessed by Trypan blue exclusion and
normalized to the number of viable untreated cells. Mean and standard
deviation of multiple experiments are depicted.

# Discussion

Advanced-stage peritoneal carcinomatosis and disseminated peritoneal
lymphomas are often resistant to current chemotherapy treatment (Parsons
et al. 1996), and new strategies for treating these diseases are clearly
needed. The need to develop different therapeutic modalities to restore
tumor suppressor function is acutely illustrated by the current
limitations of viral/DNA-based strategies for delivering tumor
suppressor genes to cancer cells in patients (McCormick 2001). Here we
show that macromolecular biological cargo can be delivered via
TAT-mediated transduction in order to modulate tumor biology in vivo.
Specifically, we find that delivery of a transducible p53-activating
peptide in sensitive tumor cells inhibits solid tumor growth in vivo
(see [Figure 3](#pbio-0020036-g003)) and dramatically extends survival
(greater than 6-fold), yielding disease-free animals in terminal
peritoneal cancer models of human metastatic disease (see Figures
[4](#pbio-0020036-g004) and [5](#pbio-0020036-g005)).

The vast majority of tumors express either wild-type p53 protein or a
full-length p53 point mutant (Vousden and Lu 2002). This observation has
led to the hypothesis that reactivation of endogenous p53 protein will
be a useful means of treating cancer. The data presented here provide
evidence for this hypothesis by showing that TAT-mediated delivery of a
p53-activating peptide in vivo is an effective treatment for multiple
preclinical cancer models. This macromolecular approach to p53
reactivation has certain advantages over the limited number of small
molecule-based strategies reported to reactivate mutant p53 in vivo
(Foster et al. 1999; Bykov et al. 2002). First, the RI-TATp53C′ peptide
can activate wild-type p53 in addition to several p53 contact mutants.
Second, small molecules may suffer from a lack of specificity (Rippin et
al. 2002) in comparison to larger, more information-rich macromolecules.
Finally, recent investigations into the mechanism of TAT-mediated
transduction (Richard et al. 2002; Fittipaldi et al. 2003) suggest that,
unlike small molecules, TAT-linked cargo is taken up by macropinocytosis
(Wadia et al. 2004) and is therefore not susceptible to the multidrug
resistance phenotype. Theoretically, tumors could avoid the RI-TATp53C′
peptide action by mutating or deleting p53; however, we did not observe
peptide resistance here (see [Figure 6](#pbio-0020036-g006)). Therefore,
we conclude that linking PTDs to p53C′ and to other p53-activating
peptides may be an effective therapeutic strategy applicable to a
significant fraction of human cancers.

The work presented here provides several broad lines of evidence for the
general feasibility of applying in vivo TAT-mediated transduction to
cancer therapy. First, we find that inversion of the p53C′TAT peptide
sequence and synthesis with D-amino acids results in a highly stable
peptide (RI-TATp53C′) that retains both biological activity and the
ability to transduce into cells. Given the rapid degradation of
L-residue-containing peptides in vivo (Chorev and Goodman 1993), use of
retro-inverso transformations with D-isomer residues and/or other
stabilizing procedures will likely be essential for the pharmacological
use of transducible peptides. Second, given the history of
virus-mediated gene delivery, the necessity of validating new
therapeutic approaches to systemic disease in the context of an intact
immune system cannot be underestimated. Consequently, here we
demonstrate that TAT-mediated systemic delivery inhibits tumor growth in
immune competent animals.

Finally, most studies on anticancer transduction peptides have relied
primarily on the use of solid, subcutaneous tumor growth as a measure of
efficacy (Datta et al. 2001; Harada et al. 2002). Although informative,
such studies are inherently limited by the minimal impact that
subcutaneous tumors have on the biology of the host and by the failure
of this type of tumor to closely mimic human disease. In contrast, the
more rigorous peritoneal carcinomatosis and peritoneal lymphoma models
used here require that therapeutic agents be able to suppress tumors to
such an extent that the deleterious effects of the tumor on host
physiology are substantially ameliorated. This is a particularly salient
point because cancer patients generally do not succumb to the primary
tumor burden but to complications from metastatic disease (Fidler 2003).
Indeed, anticancer therapeutics are defined as clinically successful by
their ability to alleviate pathology and extend survival and not simply
by their ability to reduce tumor volume. Our work here, combined with
that of Fulda et al. (2002), demonstrates that transducible agents can
effectively treat rigorous models of terminal cancer.

Current clinical use of macromolecular biological therapies is limited
to agents that have an extracellular mode of action. The preclinical
data presented here demonstrate a proof-of-concept that intracellular
delivery of biologically active macromolecular cargo by TAT-mediated
transduction can modify specific pathways in vivo and that this approach
potentially serves as a foundation for the generation of new classes of
intracellular biological therapeutics.

# Materials and Methods

## 

### Cell culture and flow cytometry.

TA3/St (gift of W. G. Kaelin), H1299 (gift of R. K. Brachmann), and
human foreskin fibroblast (M. Haas) cells were maintained in DMEM plus
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). Namalwa
cells (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, Virginia, United
States) were maintained in RPMI plus 10% FBS, P/S. HCT116 cells (gift of
B. Vogelstein) were grown in McCoy\'s medium plus 10% FBS, P/S. All
cells were maintained at 37°C in 5% CO~2~. Short-term cell viability was
assessed by counting Trypan blue-excluding cells on a hemocytometer.
Long-term cell viability was assessed by colony formation assay. After
serial dilution and 10 d of culture, colonies were washed in PBS and
stained with 1% methylene blue. Cellular senescence was assessed by
X-Gal staining as previously described (Schwarze et al. 1999), except
for the use of PBS (pH 6.0). For cell cycle analysis, TA3/St cells were
treated with 0.25--10 μM peptide and Namalwa cells with 40 μM peptide.
DNA was stained 24 h later with 10 μg/ml propidium iodide in 0.5% NP-40
(TA3/St cells) or Draq5 (Namalwa cells) per the manufacturer\'s
instructions (Qbiogene, Carlsbad, California, United States). DNA
profiles were analyzed using a FACScan and CellQuest software (Becton
Dickinson, Palo Alto, California, United States).

### Peptide synthesis.

Peptides were synthesized by standard Fmoc chemistry on an ABI 433A
Peptide Synthesizer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, United
States). Crude peptides were purified by reverse-phase HPLC over a C18
preparatory column (Varian, Palo Alto, California, United States). The
identity of all peptides was confirmed by mass spectrometry.

### Promoter activity assays.

In a 96-well dish, 4 × 10^4^ cells were plated per well. The next day,
H1299 cells were transfected with 15 ng of TK-Renilla (Promega, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States), 200 ng of PG13-Luc, and one of the following:
0.3 ng of empty vector, 0.3 ng of p53 expression vector, or 1 ng mutant
of p53 expression vector (gift of R. K Brachmann). SW480 cells were
transfected with 25 ng of TK-Renilla and 250 ng of PG13-Luc reporter
plasmid. Cells were all transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 per the
manufacturer\'s protocol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, United
States). After 5 h, the transfection medium was removed and peptides
were added to cells. Luciferase activity was measured 24 h later with
the Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay System per the manufacturer\'s
instructions (Promega).

### Animal tumor models.

For TA3/St tumor models, 4- to 8-wk-old immune competent A/J female mice
were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, United
States). Solid TA3/St tumors were generated by subcutaneous injection of
1.5 × 10^6^ TA3/St cells in 200 μl of Hanks\' balanced salt solution
(HBSS). Tumor volume was estimated by *V* = (*a*^2^ × *b*)/2, where *a*
is the short axis and *b* is the long axis of the tumor. IP TA3/St
tumors were generated by injection of 2 × 10^6^ TA3/St cells IP in 400
μl of HBSS. For the Namalwa lymphoma tumor model, 6- to 8-wk-old CB17
SCID female mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratory
(Wilmington, Massachusetts, United States). Then, 5 × 10^5^ Namalwa
lymphoma cells were injected IP in 400 μl of HBSS. Peptide was dissolved
in water, brought to 600 μl in PBS, and injected IP. All animal studies
were approved by the University of California, San Diego, Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee.

### Histology.

Mice harboring solid TA3/St tumors were injected with 650 μg of
biotinylated RI-TATp53C′ peptide and sacrificed 1 h postinjection.
Sections from frozen tumors were stained with Vectastain Elite ABC Kit
and DAB substrate per the manufacturer\'s instructions (Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, California, United States).

### Statistical analysis.

Student\'s *t*-test was used to determine statistical significance (*p*
\< 0.05) in all experiments except animal survival experiments, in which
the Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test was performed.

We thank R. K. Brachmann, B. Vogelstein, W. G. Kaelin, and M. Haas for
reagents and cell lines. We thank P. Gent for technical assistance with
mice and L. Gross for assistance with mass spectrometry. This work was
supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the National
Institutes of Health (CA96098).

A/J

:   A/Jax strain

FBS

:   fetal bovine serum

HBSS

:   Hanks\' balanced salt solution

IP

:   intraperitoneal

P/S

:   penicillin/streptomycin

PTD

:   protein transduction domain

SCID

:   severe combined immune deficiency

[^1]: ELS and SFD conceived and designed the experiments. ELS, BRM, and
    CCS performed the experiments. CCS and SFD analyzed the data. BRM
    and CCS contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. ELS and SFD
    wrote the paper.

[^2]: SFD is the scientific founder of Ansata Therapeutics, a biotech
    company utilizing protein transduction technology to treat human
    disease. However, he owns less than 5% of the stock, does not
    receive any research funds from Ansata, does not have a seat on the
    board of directors, and has no say in the governance of the company.
