In their essay in the April 2004 issue of *PLoS Biology*, Elizabeth
Blackburn and Janet Rowley (2004), two distinguished cellular biologists
and members of the President\'s Council on Bioethics, strongly question
the scientific foundation of two reports from the Council (President\'s
Council on Bioethics 2003, 2004). The Council on Bioethics was formed by
executive order "to advise the President on bioethical issues that may
emerge as a consequence of advances in biomedical science and
technology." An open discussion between ethicists and scientists is
critical to the advisory system. The recent administrative dismissal of
Dr. Blackburn from the Council is very alarming. By stacking the deck
with conservative opinions, and not accurately discussing the scientific
issues, the Bioethics Council has become irrelevant to the scientific
community and presents a jaundiced view to the public.

Stem cell research and its applications have the potential to
revolutionize human health care. Recent polls show support for embryonic
stem cell research, even with conservative voters. The public, as the
major benefactor of biomedical research and the target population of
beneficial clinical advances, has the right to a fact-based discussion
of the science regarding stem cells. It is therefore time that the
debate on stem cell research, with its risks and benefits, be taken to
the public. A debate on stem cell research restricted to the
President\'s Council on Bioethics is a disservice to the public.

Nearly three decades ago, the advent of recombinant DNA technology and
in vitro fertilization (IVF) techniques, raised similar concerns
regarding research. Contrary to apprehensive expectations, recombinant
DNA technology has boosted enormous advances in the health care and
pharmaceutical industry. IVF evolved to be a widely accepted, safe
medical procedure, with over one million healthy babies born by IVF and
related treatments. Similarly, once stem cells are successfully used in
the clinic, most of today\'s political and ethical issues will
evaporate.

The International Society for Stem Cell Research (ISSCR), a society
whose membership encompasses the bulk of the stem cell research brain
trust, holds the position that research on both adult and embryonic stem
cells will guarantee the fastest progress in scientific discovery and
clinical advances. The ISSCR also strongly opposes reproductive cloning
and supports the National Academy of Science\'s proposal to develop
voluntary guidelines to encourage responsible practices in human
embryonic stem cell research.

One of the original recommendations of the President\'s Council on
Bioethics was a four-year moratorium on stem cell research. The purpose
of this moratorium was theoretically to open a large, national discourse
on the topic of stem cell research, a debate intended to bring all sides
into thoughtful reflection on the issue. To that end, the ISSCR has
repeatedly and consistently offered an open forum for all sides in the
debate at our conferences, and has carefully offered invitations to join
our society and to speak at our annual meeting to members of the
President\'s Council, including colleagues whose opposition to stem cell
research has been clear. None have accepted. Dr. Kass, in particular,
has received several direct appeals but has turned down every such
opportunity to make his case to the researchers who arguably are his
discourse partners, from whom he could learn much, and whom he should be
actively engaged in teaching. It is tragic that voices of dissent and
debate are stilled, for it is this very quality of open debate that is
at the heart of both the scientific method and an ethically directed
American democracy---surely a goal that we all share.

[^1]: Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland, United
    States of America

[^2]: Children\'s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Cambridge,
    Massachusetts, United States of America

[^3]: International Society for Stem Cell Research, Northbrook,
    Illinois, United States of America

[^4]: Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University, Evanston,
    Illinois, United States of America
