In the very thoughtful essay "Reason as Our Guide" by Drs. Elizabeth
Blackburn and Janet Rowley (2004), the authors highlight a key concern
with the reports published by the President\'s Council on
Bioethics---the lack of credible scientific information being passed on
to policy makers.

Blackburn and Rowley point out many areas of the report "Monitoring Stem
Cell Research" that needed correction from a scientific standpoint.
While it is impossible to include every suggestion in a report that
seeks to draw consensus from a large panel of members, in a heated,
political debate like that surrounding embryonic stem cell research and
therapeutic cloning, providing the most accurate and complete scientific
information to policy makers is crucial. Unfortunately, with the recent
dismissal of Dr. Blackburn from the Council, there will now be one less
voice for scientific research and for the potential the research holds
for curing disease and alleviating the suffering of millions.

Speaking for the Coalition for the Advancement of Medical Research, our
concern is not only the small number of researchers on the Council and
lack of complete scientific data being shared with policy makers, but
the absence of patient representation on the Council itself. With the
exception of public comment periods, patient organizations have no voice
in the work of the Council as it discusses issues that profoundly impact
them. Now, with one less member standing up for research and thus
patients, our concern grows even stronger.

The Blackburn and Rowley essay also correctly points out that there is
more published work on adult stem cell research because of a "paucity of
funding for research using embryonic stem cells." Despite this lack of
federal and private funding, advances continue to be made---but just
think of the advances we could have had if only there were a supportive
federal policy that encouraged embryonic stem cell research instead of
stifling it. We hope---in light of scientific advances made over the
past several years and the strong support of the scientific community,
including the National Institutes of Health, the Health and Human
Services Department, and the National Academy of Sciences---that the
President will reevaluate the current federal policy for stem cell
research and consider easing the restrictions.

We commend Drs. Blackburn and Rowley for trying to set the record
straight in their essay, and applaud their efforts to stand up for
medical research, which has the potential to benefit us all.

[^1]: Coalition for the Advancement of Medical Research, Washington,
    District of Columbia, United States of America. E-mail:
    <camresearch@yahoo.com>
