# Introduction

One goal of sensory systems neuroscience is to understand how the
representations of complex, natural stimuli arise from the basic
response properties of neurons. The present experiments explore the
representation of textures in the rat somatosensory system. Rats have
texture discrimination capacities rivaling those of humans \[1\]. In
rats, as in humans \[2\], object exploration in the tactile modality
derives from active palpation. Thus, rats create sensory signals by
sweeping their whiskers across surfaces in a rhythmic forward-backward
cycle with a frequency ranging from 5 to 15 Hz \[1,3,4,5\]. Several
hundred primary afferent fibers---"first-order neurons"---innervate
specialized receptors on each whisker shaft \[6\], and these are excited
by whisker movement. Signals travel along the sensory nerve, past the
cell body in the trigeminal ganglion, to the brain stem. Here the first
synapse is located. The axons of second-order neurons cross the brain
midline and travel to the thalamic somatosensory nuclei, where the
second synapse is located. Thalamic neurons project to the primary
somatosensory cortex, conveying information to layer IV cell populations
called "barrels" \[7,8\].

There have been no reports concerning the cortical or subcortical
neuronal activity generated by whisking along irregular surfaces, and
the differences in activity associated with two surfaces remain unknown
\[9\]. However, recent work suggests the framework for a texture coding
model. For nonnatural whisker deflections such as ramps \[10\],
sinusoids \[11,12\], and temporally unstructured movement \[13\],
first-order sensory neurons and cortical neurons emit spikes with
probabilities that increase in proportion to stimulus velocity. This
raises the possibility that neurons represent texture by encoding the
kinetics of whisker vibrations. However, key elements of the model are
untested. Does whisker movement across different textures produce
distinct vibrations? If so, do neurons in the central pathway reliably
report these vibrations? Through what coding mechanisms?

To answer these questions, the model must be challenged under conditions
where the sensory input is precisely controlled and yet resembles what
occurs during natural tactile behavior. Guided by this strategy, in
anesthetized rats we produced whisker movements across textures while
measuring vibrations of the whisker shaft. We then played back the
identical vibrations to other rats, and measured the neuronal activity
at two stages of the sensory pathway---the first-order neurons that
innervate the sensory receptors, and the barrel cortex neurons, which
are the first site of cortical integration. Texture discrimination
depends on the integrity of the cortical barrels \[14\]. By measuring
the activity of trigeminal ganglion neurons (the cell bodies of the
first-order neurons), we investigated how the sweeping motion of
whiskers along a surface is converted to a neuronal impulse code. By
measuring activity in the cortex, we explored the neuronal
representation that rats rely on to judge the identity of external
objects \[15,16\]. Comparing two levels of the pathway, we reveal the
transformation of neuronal signals at successive levels of integration,
and show how the neuronal signals emerge from elemental feature
extraction.

# Results

## Kinetic Signatures of Textures

The experimental strategy ([Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)) was to
collect records of the natural movement of whiskers across surfaces
([Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)A) and use them as a stimulus set to
probe the neuronal representation of texture ([Figure
1](#pbio-0030017-g001)C). In one group of rats (*n* = 3), we
electrically stimulated cranial nerve VII, generating 8-Hz whisking
movements \[17,18\] that resemble whisker trajectories in awake rats
\[4\]. Meanwhile, whisker displacements transmitted to the receptors in
the follicle were measured by an optical sensor placed 1 mm from the
skin. The vertical and horizontal channels of the sensor ([Video
S1](#sv001)) reported whisker position with less than 3-μm spatial and
0.13-ms temporal resolution. Movements were measured under different
conditions ([Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)B, "texture" column): whisking
with no object contact ("free whisk"), whisking on compact disk surface
(smooth), and whisking on sandpapers of four different grades: P1200,
P400, P280, P100 (from fine-grained to coarse-grained; [Table
1](#pbio-0030017-t001)). The surface was oriented so that the whisker
rested on it and remained in contact during the entire whisk trajectory.
The proximal edge of the surface was 7 mm from the base of the whisker.
The illustrated data ([Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)) come from whisker
C3 in rat EW3.

Collection and Playback of Texture Library\
(A) Whisker vibration data were collected during "electrical whisking,"
induced by stimulation of the facial nerve (1) with pulse trains (2) in
rat EW3. An optical sensor, shown schematically by two orthogonal light
paths (3), monitored vertical and horizontal whisker motion of whisker
C3.\
(B) "Texture" column: Photographs of the 5 surfaces used. "Trajectory"
column: Sample whisker trajectories (first whisk of trial 50) associated
with free whisking and the five surfaces. Each point, separated by 1 ms,
gives the horizontal and vertical position; the trajectory begins with
protraction (P) at *t* = 0 and terminates 125 ms later at the end of
retraction (R). Speed is given by the color of each point. Note the
irregularities---jumps, stops, and starts---induced by whisking on
sandpaper. "Velocity profile" column: Whisker trajectories displayed
according to the horizontal and vertical velocities (V~H~ and V~V,~
respectively). P refers to protraction phase (positive V~H~), and R to
retraction phase (negative V~H~). In this and all figures, V~H~ and V~V~
were calculated 7,634 times per second. "Velocity spectrogram" column:
Velocity spectrograms for each texture (see [Materials and
Methods](#s4)).\
(C) Playback of the whisker trajectories to a second group of rats
through a piezoelectric motor (4), shown schematically by the horizontal
and vertical arrows at the base of the whisker.

10.1371/journal.pbio.0030017.t001

###### Parameters of the Sandpapers

See <http://www.fepa-abrasives.org>

ND, no data

Under free whisking conditions the trajectory was a smooth ellipsoid
\[4\], the principal axis aligned with protraction and retraction
movements (P and R, respectively, in [Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)B,
"trajectory" column). As the rat whisked on the compact disk surface,
the trajectory was similar but covered a more restricted vertical range.
In contrast, whisking across grainy surfaces produced irregularities in
the trajectory, and each texture was associated with a characteristic
whisker shaft vibration. These distinct "kinetic signatures" are evident
in the velocity profile---that is, the temporal sequence of velocity
features across the course of a whisk ([Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)B,
"velocity profile" column). Each velocity profile covers 125 ms (one
complete forward and backward whisk) and consists of two
histograms---horizontal (V~H~) and vertical (V~V~) velocity. For V~H~,
whisker protraction (forward movement) is positive and whisker
retraction (backward movement) negative. For V~V~, upward movement is
positive and downward movement negative. To better visualize the
time-varying frequency content of the velocity profiles, the velocity
spectrograms are also plotted ([Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)B,
"velocity spectrogram" column). The spectrograms were formed by
computing the magnitude of all sinusoidal components (0--500 Hz) of the
velocity profile in a 6-ms wide window, and then sliding the window with
0.13-ms time steps (see [Materials and Methods](#s4)). The velocity
profile and the velocity spectrogram, taken together, illustrate the
kinetic features that make each texture unique---the duration and
frequency content of each velocity peak, as well as the number of peaks
and the temporal spacing between them.

In a different group of rats, the texture-induced vibrations were played
back to the base of a whisker ([Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)C and
[Video S2](#sv002)) and neuronal activity was recorded. Construction of
the stimulus sequence off-line allowed us to smoothly "stitch together"
the vibrations: The transitions between textures and free whisks were
always inserted at time zero, corresponding to the point of maximal
retraction, when whisker velocity was zero. The replay was an accurate
replica of the motion recorded during electrical whisking ([Figure
S1](#sg001)).

## Receptor and Cortical Coding Properties

The physiological dataset (seven rats) consists of six first-order
neuron recordings, five cortical cluster recordings, and seven "paired"
recordings---simultaneous first-order neuron and cortical cluster. The
principal result is that time-varying neuronal activity in the
trigeminal ganglion and cortex captured the kinetic features of the
texture-induced vibrations. From the same texture library given in
[Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001) (rat EW3, whisker C3), [Figure
2](#pbio-0030017-g002)A gives the velocity profile, averaged across 100
trials, for two free whisks (−250 to 0 ms) followed by two whisks on
P280 sandpaper (0 to 250 ms). Note the distinct kinetic signatures of
whisker movement: Unlike free whisking, the coarse (P280) sandpaper
caused irregular bursts of high and low velocity, particularly during
whisker retraction. The response of one first-order neuron (named
Zurvan) is shown in [Figure 2](#pbio-0030017-g002)B as a raster plot of
100 trials and in [Figure 2](#pbio-0030017-g002)C as a peristimulus time
histogram (PSTH). Several coding properties are evident: (i) The
first-order neuron fired a greater number of spikes for the coarse
texture than for free whisks; (ii) spikes were closely aligned to
instants in which the whisker moved at high velocity (blue arrowheads);
(iii) it fired in a reproducible manner across trials---the spikes were
aligned; and (iv) it was selective to whisker retraction (did not fire
for high-velocity protractions; red arrowhead).

Sensory Receptor and Cortical Coding Properties\
(A) V~H~ and V~V~ for two free whisks followed by two P280 whisks. The
labeling conventions are as in [Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)B. Each
presented trial was unique due to small variations in whisker trajectory
even on the same surface ([Figure 7](#pbio-0030017-g007)); the
illustrated velocity profiles are the averages of 100 trials. The red
arrowhead indicates the time of the first V~H~ peak during whisker
protraction on P280; blue arrowheads indicate the times of the three
V~H~ peaks during whisker retraction on P280.\
(B) Raster plot of first-order neuron aligned with the whisker
trajectories, in response to 100 unique trials. Stimuli were applied to
whisker E4.\
(C) PSTH of first-order neuron with 0.2-ms bins. Blue arrowheads
indicate the times of maximum response to the three peaks in retraction
velocity. The red arrowhead indicates the expected time of response to
the peak in protraction velocity; however, the neuron did not respond to
whisker protraction.\
(D) Raster plot for the cortical neuron cluster recorded simultaneously
with the first-order neuron.\
(E) Two cortical PSTHs, both with 2-ms bins. The upper PSTH corresponds
to the raster plot in (D); the lower PSTH is from a second cortical
neuron cluster recorded simultaneously at a neighboring electrode
(distance 560 μm). Blue and red arrowheads indicate the times of maximum
response to the peaks in whisker protraction and retraction velocity,
carried down from (A). The cortical neuron clusters responded to high
velocities for both protraction and retraction. Because the first two
peaks in retraction velocity were separated by just 7 ms, the resulting
peaks in cortical response were fused. All PSTHs are extended to 260 ms
to show responses to the final velocity feature.

Two barrel cortex neuron clusters were recorded simultaneously with the
first-order neuron, allowing direct comparison of different stations
along the sensory pathway. [Figure 2](#pbio-0030017-g002)D shows the
raster plot for one of the cortical clusters, while [Figure
2](#pbio-0030017-g002)E shows PSTHs for both cortical clusters. Like the
first-order neuron, the cortical clusters responded to high velocities
(arrowheads, [Figure 2](#pbio-0030017-g002)A, [2](#pbio-0030017-g002)C,
and 2E) and, as a result, fired a greater number of spikes for P280
sandpaper than for free whisks. Key differences from the first-order
neuron are clear: (i) The cortical neuron clusters fired in a less
reproducible manner across trials---there was more variability in the
number of spikes per whisk and in the temporal alignment of spikes; and
(ii) they fired for both whisker protraction and retraction (red and
blue arrowheads, respectively).

The selectivity of first-order neurons and cortical clusters for the
direction of whisker movement is described in more detail in [Figure
3](#pbio-0030017-g003).

Directional Selectivity in First-Order and Cortical Neurons\
(A) Mean spike count per whisk for ten first-order neurons separated
into protraction and retraction phases. Responses to free-whisk and all
textures were combined, giving a total of 8,000 whisks. First-order
neurons are arranged from left to right according to their
retraction:protraction spike count ratio. Five first-order neurons
preferred retraction, three preferred retraction, and two responded to
both phases. Principal whisker of each neuron is indicated. The neuron
Zurvan is indicated by an asterisk.\
(B) Same analysis for 12 cortical clusters. Individual cortical neuron
clusters did not present a clear preference for either retraction or
protraction. Conclusions about single unit directional selectivity
cannot be drawn, however, because the directional selectivity of any
cluster must always be less than that of the most selective single unit
in the cluster. The neuron cluster ([Figure 2D, 2E](#pbio-0030017-g002))
recorded simultaneously with Zurvan is indicated by an asterisk.

## Texture Coding by Firing Rate

To permit sensory discriminations, some properties of neuronal firing
must vary systematically from texture to texture. Earlier work \[11,12\]
showed that neuronal firing rate, in response to sinusoidal whisker
movement, is dictated by mean vibration speed, proportional to the
product of amplitude and frequency, *Xω* (referred to in previous
publications as *Af*). The generalization of *Xω* to the natural,
texture-induced vibration is 〈\|*X(ω,τ)*\|*ω*〉~Ω,Τ~, a quantity known
as "equivalent noise level" (see [Materials and Methods](#s4)). In
[Figure 4](#pbio-0030017-g004), we compare response magnitude for the
full population of first-order and cortical neurons to each texture\'s
equivalent noise level. The Pearson correlation coefficient between
equivalent noise level and spike count was 0.93 for the first-order
neurons and 0.99 for the cortex. This finding indicates that neuronal
spike count is a function of the magnitude of the composite frequency
components of the whisker vibration, whether the stimulus is a simple
sinusoid (where all the power is at a single frequency) or a complex,
texture-induced vibration.

Texture Coding by Firing Rate\
Equivalent noise level (plus SD) of texture-induced vibrations averaged
across 100 trials of 500 ms each (see [Materials and Methods](#s4)).
Average spike count per trial (plus SD) pooled from ten first-order
neurons and 12 cortical neuron clusters. Note separate scales for spike
counts of neurons recorded in Ganglion and Cortex.

## Texture Coding by Firing Patterns

Since different sandpapers can induce vibrations with similar equivalent
noise levels and thereby evoke similar spike counts (e.g., P400, P280,
and P100 in [Figure 4](#pbio-0030017-g004)), we must expect additional
texture coding mechanisms to be at work. We therefore examined more
closely the neurons shown in [Figure 2](#pbio-0030017-g002), on the
hypothesis that spike patterns might carry texture-specific information.
V~H~ and V~V~ profiles associated with two whisks on each texture are
plotted ([Figure 5](#pbio-0030017-g005)A), together with PSTHs for the
first-order neuron ([Figure 5](#pbio-0030017-g005)B) and the cortical
neuron cluster ([Figure 5](#pbio-0030017-g005)C). Textures evoking
similar spike counts due to similar equivalent noise levels were readily
distinguished by spike patterns. The patterns arose from the alignment
of spikes to the velocity profile of the input vibration. An assessment
of spike alignment to other stimulus features (whisker position and
whisker acceleration) is given in [Figure 6](#pbio-0030017-g006) and
indicates that these features were reported less reliably than whisker
velocity. The first-order neuron reported the velocity profile for
whisker retraction, while the cortical neuron cluster reported both
protraction and retraction profiles, albeit with lower fidelity to
individual velocity features.

Texture Coding by Firing Patterns\
(A) V~H~ and V~V~ for two whisks on texture P400 (left), P280 (middle),
and P100 (right). Each illustrated velocity profile is the average of
100 unique profiles.\
(B) First-order neuron PSTHs (0.2-ms bins) aligned with the whisker
trajectories.\
(C) Cortical PSTHs (2-ms bins). PSTHs are extended to 260 ms. The
arrowheads on the left side of PSTHs indicate mean firing rates.

Test for First-Order Neuron Encoding of Position and Acceleration\
To investigate whether first-order neurons represented stimulus features
other than velocity, we repeated the same analysis as in [Figure
5](#pbio-0030017-g005), in relation to whisker position (A) and
acceleration (B), because it has been suggested that neuronal activity
is determined by these stimulus parameters \[10,13\]. Alignment between
the PSTH (C) and stimulus position or acceleration revealed no
consistent correlation. For texture P100, the boxes extending across A,
B, and C highlight the absence of correlation. For example, two periods
with similar positions produced first no spikes (red-outlined box on
left) and then a large response (red-outlined box on right). Moreover,
high acceleration (left box) produced no spikes, while lower levels of
acceleration (right box) produced a large response. For this neuron,
only velocity was encoded.

## Sources of Neuronal Variability

In a number of sensory modalities, first-order neuron responses can be
remarkably reliable when a stimulus is presented repeatedly \[19\],
whereas cortical responses vary across trials \[20\]. It is of interest
to elucidate the mechanisms that permit reliable first-order neuron
responses and, by the same token, to identify the sources of
trial-to-trial variability among cortical neurons. In the data shown so
far, the 100 trials for a given texture were composed of 400 unique
whisks (four whisks per trial). Each whisk differed in the minute
details of its trajectory ([Figure 7](#pbio-0030017-g007)). To discover
the origin of neuronal variability, we selected trial 50 for each
texture and repeated the four-whisk sequence 100 times. If neuronal
variability originates purely in stimulus variability, it will disappear
across repeated trials; variability due to internal brain fluctuations,
however, will remain.

Velocity Profile Variability across Trials\
Ten successive trials are shown (numbers 46--55), each trial composed of
the final two free-whisks (--250 to 0 ms) and the first two whisks on
P280 (0 to 250 ms). Free whisk velocity profiles varied little across
trials. When the whisker swept across P280 repeatedly, the fundamental
kinetic signature was conserved (e.g., the three peaks in retraction
velocity for P280) but minute details of the profile varied---note, for
example, the velocity event (red asterisk) that occurred uniquely on
trial 50.

The velocity profile for the final two free whisks (−250 to 0 ms) and
the first two P280 whisks (0 to 250 ms) of trial 50 is given in [Figure
8](#pbio-0030017-g008)A. The response of the first-order neuron is shown
as a raster plot ([Figure 8](#pbio-0030017-g008)B) and a PSTH ([Figure
8](#pbio-0030017-g008)C). These can be compared to responses of the same
cell in [Figure 2](#pbio-0030017-g002)B and [2](#pbio-0030017-g002)C.
Response was nearly identical on each trial, because of the precise
temporal alignment of spikes on the high-velocity events. Indeed, some
stimulus features evoked 0.7--0.8 spikes per bin per trial, meaning that
neuronal jitter fell within the 0.2-ms PSTH bin size.

Sources of Neuronal Variability\
(A) V~H~ and V~V~ across the final two free whisks and the first two
P280 whisks of trial number 50. Here, as in [Figure
2](#pbio-0030017-g002), the red arrowhead indicates peak whisker
velocity during protraction, and blue arrowheads indicate the peak
whisker velocities during retraction.\
(B and C) First-order neuron raster plot (B) and PSTH (C), aligned with
the whisker trajectories, for 100 stimulus repetitions. Due to the
temporal precision of neuronal responses, the vertical scale of the PSTH
has been altered (compare to [Figures 2](#pbio-0030017-g002) and
[5](#pbio-0030017-g005)) to reflect the large numbers of spikes within
single bins.\
(D) Cortical neuron cluster raster plot.\
(E) Two cortical PSTHs from activity recorded simultaneously with the
first-order neuron. The upper PSTH corresponds to the raster plot in
(D); the lower PSTH is derived from a second cortical neuron cluster
recorded simultaneously at a neighboring electrode (distance of 560 μm).
PSTHs have 0.2-ms bins for the first-order neuron and 2-ms bins for the
cortical neuron clusters. All PSTHs are extended to 260 ms to show
responses to the final velocity feature. Response peaks are signaled by
red and blue arrowheads according to the velocity events that evoked
them.

In [Figure 8](#pbio-0030017-g008)D and [8](#pbio-0030017-g008)E, the
cortical response to repeated trials is presented. Direct, quantitative
comparisons between the variability of first-order responses and that of
cortical responses cannot be made, because the cortical recordings were
made from multi-neuron clusters. However, the cortical response to
repeated trials can be compared to the same cluster\'s response to 100
unique trials in [Figure 2](#pbio-0030017-g002)D and
[2](#pbio-0030017-g002)E. Eliminating trial-to-trial variability in the
timing of stimulus features reduced but did not eliminate neuronal
jitter.

The remarkable response locking of first-order neurons to stimulus
features is further highlighted in [Figure 9](#pbio-0030017-g009).
Unlike Zurvan, the illustrated neuron was selective to whisker
protraction. For texture P280, the velocity histograms ([Figure
9](#pbio-0030017-g009)A) contained well-separated peaks during
protraction. With 100 repetitions of trial number 50, the raster plot
([Figure 9](#pbio-0030017-g009)B) and PSTH ([Figure
9](#pbio-0030017-g009)C) yielded discrete response peaks aligned with
high-velocity protraction events. Applying the green horizontal line to
the PSTH as a threshold, we extracted six separable response clusters.
Every cluster contained exactly 100 spikes resulting from one spike per
trial for each velocity event. The final response was evoked by a clear
protraction event (red asterisk in [Figure 9](#pbio-0030017-g009)A) and
was selected for closer inspection (red inset). Here, the 100 spikes
spanned a range of 0.38 ms; standard deviation (SD) in spike time was
0.08 ms. For the five preceding response clusters, spike time SDs were
0.13, 0.09, 0.09, 0.13, and 0.11 ms. The minimum measured spike time SD
in the dataset was 0.07 ms. These must be taken as underestimates of
spike time precision, given that they include measurement noise inherent
to the recording system (e.g., the SD in spike time caused by digitizing
the action potential threshold crossing time at 30 samples per ms is
nearly 0.02 ms).

Precision of a First-Order Neuron\
(A) V~H~ and V~V~ across the first two P280 whisks of trial number 50
(see [Figure 7](#pbio-0030017-g007)).\
(B and C) Raster plot (B) and PSTH (C) of the first-order neuron for 100
repetitions of the stimulus given in (A). Inset in red frame shows a
magnified view of spikes emitted in response to a single velocity event
(red asterisk in \[A\]) and their SD in time. The same measurement of
jitter was carried out for each of the response peaks that surpassed the
green horizontal line (see text).

From these observations we conclude that, under our experimental
conditions, the trial-to-trial response variability of first-order
neurons is caused exclusively by stimulus jitter, whereas that of
cortical neurons results mainly from variations across time in sensory
integration, and must emerge at some integration site between the
trigeminal ganglion and cortex. A question of current interest is
whether the variability in cortical responses results from noise and
imprecision in neuronal integration \[20\], or else reflects
functionally significant modulations in responsiveness \[21,22,23\].

## From Response Properties to Natural Responses

We hypothesize that the firing patterns of first-order and cortical
neurons during presentation of textures can be explained by their
extraction of elemental features from the complex input signal, and that
these elemental features are bursts of high velocity. To test this
directly, we presented a "white noise" stimulus in which the two
stimulus features V~H~ and V~V~ varied randomly across time. Responses
to noise stimuli allowed us to quantify velocity sensitivity and then to
generate simulated spike trains based on the sequence of velocity events
in the actual texture-induced vibrations. Finally, comparison between
simulated and observed responses reveals the extent to which the
responses to natural stimuli are explained by neuronal selectivity to
velocity features: If simulated responses closely resemble real
responses, we can conclude that neurons are in fact operating on natural
texture stimuli according to their tuning to elemental kinetic events.

Typically, neuronal tuning curves are mapped out using an "unbiased"
stimulus---a stimulus that avoids the temporal correlations present in
natural stimuli. The first step, therefore, was to map out how
first-order and cortical neurons encode whisker kinetic features when
these features are extracted from the context of the natural stimulus.
We applied a stimulus that varied randomly in velocity---Gaussian
velocity noise---and therefore was not constrained by the velocity
patterns present in texture trajectories (see [Materials and
Methods](#s4)). [Figure 10](#pbio-0030017-g010)A tracks V~H~ and V~V~
(white circles) across 5 ms of filtered white noise.

Velocity Tuning Curves and Simulated Texture Responses\
(A) A 5-ms trajectory of velocity white noise. Radial coordinates give
V~H~, V~V~. Velocity space was subdivided such that each segment
included the same number of events (3,435,300). One segment (red
outline) is selected for further explanation (see text).\
(B) 100-ms ganglion and cortical spike train aligned below occurrences
of the velocity event of interest (red bar). After each such event,
spike times were accumulated to build up a spike probability profile.\
(C) First-order neuron spike probabilities, given by color scale, in
relation to joint *A,R* events. To estimate the tuning curve in finer
detail, the number of angles was increased to 20. Each segment now
contains about 1,374,120 velocity events. One P280 whisk trajectory is
superimposed.\
(D) Spike probabilities for cortical neuron cluster, given by color
scale, in relation to joint *A,R* events. One P280 whisk trajectory is
superimposed.\
(E) Simulated raster plot for first-order neuron and simulated (black)
and real (red) PSTHs.\
(F) Simulated raster plot for cortical neuron cluster and simulated
(black) and real (red) PSTHs.

We then constructed firing probability profiles in relation to millions
of occurrences of each velocity event, such as the velocity event in the
fifth angular sector and ninth radial sector, or *A~5~,R~9~* (red
outline in [Figure 10](#pbio-0030017-g010)A). [Figure
10](#pbio-0030017-g010)B shows how response probabilities were
constructed in relation to this particular velocity event. The first
trace shows the occurrences of *A~5~,R~9~* across a 100-ms window---the
first occurrence of the event (asterisk in [Figure
10](#pbio-0030017-g010)A) corresponds to the crossing of *A~5~,R~9~* in
[Figure 10](#pbio-0030017-g010)A (also marked by an asterisk). Below,
first-order sensory neuron and cortical spike times are shown. After 10
min of stimulus noise, the postevent spike probability profiles
associated with *A~5~,R~9~* and all other events could be constructed.

For the first-order neuron Zurvan, spike probabilities in the 1--2-ms
postevent interval are given in [Figure 10](#pbio-0030017-g010)C for all
joint events (*A,R*). To construct the neuron\'s "tuning curve" in finer
detail, velocity space was subdivided into 20 angular and 10 radial
segments. The neuron emitted spikes with increasing probability as
velocity increased, but only for restricted directions, preferring high
speeds that combined retraction (negative horizontal velocity) and
upward movement (positive vertical velocity). For the simultaneously
recorded cortical neuron cluster, spike probabilities in the 5--20-ms
poststimulus interval are given in [Figure 10](#pbio-0030017-g010)D;
like the first-order neuron, the cortical cluster emitted spikes with
increasing probability as speed increased, but its directional
selectivity was less pronounced and was radially symmetric.

Can the neurons\' responses to complex, natural stimuli be explained as
the outcome of these elemental tuning properties? To find out, we
projected whisk velocity trajectories upon the white noise-derived
tuning curves. One whisk (first whisk of trial 50) on P280 sandpaper is
depicted on both tuning curves. The first observation is that the
intersection of the velocity trajectory with the tuning curves explains
why the first-order neuron was selective for whisker retraction while
the cortical cluster was directionally nonselective (see [Figures
2](#pbio-0030017-g002) and [5](#pbio-0030017-g005)).

[Figures 10](#pbio-0030017-g010)E and [10](#pbio-0030017-g010)F show the
simulated responses of the first-order neuron and cortical cluster to
two P280 whisks, delivered 100 times. The simulation was of 100 unique
trials (see [Figure 2](#pbio-0030017-g002)) rather than repeated trials
(see [Figure 8](#pbio-0030017-g008)). Thus, on each trial the minute
details of the whisks gave rise to a unique sequence of *P*(*t*) and a
corresponding raster plot for that trial. The 100-trial raster for one
run of the simulation was summated to form a PSTH. The close match
between the simulated PSTHs (black) and the real PSTHs (red lines,
reproduced from [Figure 2](#pbio-0030017-g002)C and
[2](#pbio-0030017-g002)E) indicates that the real responses to natural
stimuli could be explained by neuronal selectivity to velocity features.
The Pearson correlation coefficients between the predicted and observed
PSTHs were 0.94 for the first-order neuron and 0.84 for the cortical
cluster. Because these correlation values fall within the range obtained
by comparing two real PSTHs generated from separate sets of 50 trials,
we conclude that simulated spike trains are as similar to real spike
trains as real spike trains are to each other. Thus, the velocity
feature extraction properties of the neurons are sufficient to explain
texture responses.

# Discussion

Texture coding appears to derive from two fundamental processes: First,
the whisker transmits a "kinetic signature" of the palpated surface to
the receptors in the follicle. Second, the first-order neurons relay to
the whisker region of cortex (through intervening stations) precise
information about the kinetic features transmitted to the follicle. One
kinetic feature is the "equivalent noise level": Spike counts per whisk
both for first-order neurons and for cortical neurons are proportional
to the equivalent noise level of the texture-induced vibration. Thus,
when texture vibrations differ in this quantity, neuronal spike counts
also differ and thereby carry information that could, by itself,
separate the textures. By the same token, when texture vibrations have
similar equivalent noise levels, spike counts per whisk appear not to
carry sufficient information. The second kinetic feature, then, is the
temporal sequence of velocity events---distinctive velocity profiles
induce distinctive temporal patterns in the spike trains with spike
alignment of better than 0.2 ms in the first-order neurons and a few ms
in the cortex.

The stimulus playback method used here might not produce the identical
input to the sensory receptor as occurs during active whisking \[18\].
The optical sensor at the base of the whisker did not register the
bending nor tension (pulling) of the whisker. Moreover, active muscle
contractions might affect sensory receptors at the interface between the
whisker shaft and the inner membrane of the follicle. Thus, additional
information related to surface texture might be available to the sensory
system. In the present dataset, even after the possible loss of some
texture-dependent information due to passive stimulation, the neuronal
responses afforded a high degree of discriminability. We interpret the
dataset as showing that vibration patterns, by themselves, must be a
fundamental feature supporting the neuronal coding for texture. This
awaits confirmation in experiments in actively whisking rats.

A classical approach to investigating sensory coding is to map the
relationship between well-controlled artificial sensory stimuli and
evoked neuronal activity. This can provide a complete description of
neuronal feature extraction properties \[24,25\], but it sheds little
light on the brain activity underlying normal perceptual experiences.
Moreover, the processing mechanisms that have evolved to extract
behaviorally relevant information may operate inefficiently during
artificial stimulation \[26\]. Another approach \[27,28\] is to measure
neuronal activity during natural stimuli (i.e., visual scenes or animal
calls). Here, the drawback is that the features evoking spikes during
natural stimulation can be multidimensional, complex, and difficult to
quantify, offering only limited insight into sensory processing
mechanisms \[27\].

In principle, one can bridge the gap between artificial and natural
stimuli by (i) measuring neuronal activity during ecologically relevant
stimuli, stimuli that are collected from an animal\'s normal interaction
with the environment, (ii) constructing tuning curves under artificial
stimulation (usually white noise), and (iii) applying the tuning curves
to the natural stimuli to test whether they account for the observed
response. Because artificial stimuli only partially cover dimensions of
stimulus space present in natural stimuli, and because of neuronal
nonlinearity, this procedure typically provides neuronal simulations
that match real neuronal output with a correlation of less than 0.5
\[27,29,30\]. Yet, the present experiments followed this same procedure
and generated simulated PSTHs that were highly correlated with real
responses (first-order neuron, 0.94; cortex, 0.84), approaching the
upper bound set by the trial-to-trial variability that limits the
correlation even between two real PSTHs. The simulations were successful
for two reasons. First, recent work \[11,12\] uncovered the critical
physical dimension---velocity---encoded by neurons. Second, receptor and
cortical stimulus integration is linear to a first
approximation---ongoing responses depend upon an integration process
where preceding events affect the neurons independently of one another.

As an alternative to the temporal model outlined here, a spatial model
for texture coding has recently been proposed. It begins from the
observation that whisker length varies systematically across the
anterior-posterior dimension of the rat\'s snout \[31\]. When stimulated
near the distal end, the posterior whiskers resonate at lower
frequencies than do the shorter, anterior whiskers \[32\]. If different
textures cause systematically different vibration frequencies, there
might be texture-specific differences in the magnitude of vibration of
posterior versus anterior whiskers \[33\]. Because whisker position is
relayed in a somatotopic manner to the cerebral cortex \[7\], texture
could be encoded by the location of the focus of activity in barrel
cortex, much like frequency is encoded by the tonotopic organization of
the cochlea and the auditory cortex.

The resonance frequency hypothesis predicts that rats would fail to
discriminate between surfaces using just a single whisker, yet they have
been shown to perform texture discriminations after progressive
clippings down to one or two whiskers \[34\]. Our results help explain
the behavioral findings by emphasizing that, although additional
information might be available due to differences in the mechanical
properties among whiskers, even a single whisker can transmit large
amounts of texture-specific information to its central neural circuits.
This occurs because of the match between the feature of the whisker
output signal that best distinguishes one texture from another (the
kinetic signature of the vibration) and the tuning properties of
first-order neurons. Cortical neurons conserve this kinetic signature in
their firing patterns.

# Materials and Methods

## 

### Recording the texture library and construction of the stimulus set

Experiments were conducted in accordance with NIH and institutional
standards for the care and use of animals in research. Subjects were ten
adult male 250--350-g Wistar rats. In one set of anesthetized rats
(urethane, 1.5 g/kg), "electrical whisking" \[17,18\] was generated by
stimulating the right facial nerve (see [Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)A)
with 1--2-V pulses of 100 μsec at 200 Hz for 60 ms to produce whisker
protraction, followed by a passive 65-ms whisker retraction. For a
selected whisker, horizontal and vertical movements at the base were
registered by a two-channel optical sensor, each channel consisting of
an LED light source and phototransistor ([Video S1](#sv001)). The two
voltage signals were digitized (7,634 samples per second). Whisker
movement was studied for 10 min under each of six conditions (see
[Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)B). The angle traversed at the whisker
base, averaged across all trials and all textures, was 25 degrees (SD ±
1 degree). Average translation across the edge of the textured surface
was 3.08 mm (SD ± 0.14 mm).

For each texture, a 50-s continuous record was extracted and sliced into
100 trials of 500 ms, each trial composed of two-dimensional position
signals across four 125-ms whisks. For free whisks, a 250-s record was
sliced into 500 unique trials. The stimulus set was constructed by
splicing trials together at the point of maximum retraction (V~H~ = 0),
avoiding the introduction of any position or velocity discontinuity. A
free whisk trial always separated two successive texture trials. A block
was composed of five different texture trials (t~1--5~) with free whisk
trials (fw) interspersed, e.g., fw-t~3~-fw-t~5~-fw-t~1~-fw-t~2~-fw-t~4~.
Before stimulus delivery, signals were low-pass filtered at 500 Hz. All
data were manipulated in MATLAB software (<http://www.mathworks.com>).

### Analysis of vibration kinetics

We sought to quantify the kinetic features that characterized each
texture-induced vibration. We refer to the whisker trajectory in one
dimension as *x(t)* and the whisker velocity profile as

For each texture, we computed the spectrogram \|*V(ω,τ~n~)*\| of the
velocity profile

where *Δt* is the 6-ms interval within which each spectrum was computed
and *τ~n~* represents the series of *N* sequential time windows. Thus,
each spectrogram (see [Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001), "velocity
spectrogram" column) was composed of *N* = 906 spectra.

Considering the duality between the direct and inverse Fourier space

we can substitute [Equation 1](#pbio-0030017-e001) into [Equation
2](#pbio-0030017-e002), to rewrite [Equation 2](#pbio-0030017-e002) as

Note that *\|X*(*ω,τ~n~*)\| also corresponds to the spectrogram of the
trajectory in position.

Previous studies have shown that, when the stimulus set consists of
sinusoidal whisker movements, the spike count per stimulus for cortical
neurons is proportional to the product of the sinusoid\'s amplitude and
frequency, *Xω* \[11,12\]. To test whether this coding principle extends
to natural stimuli, we generalized the measure of *Xω* to the
texture-induced vibration. *X* becomes a time-varying spectrum *X(ω,t)*

where *T* is the entire time domain and *Ω* is the entire domain of
frequency ω.

This quantity---known as the "equivalent noise level"---represents the
average amplitude of white noise velocity that dissipates the same
average power as the signal of interest. It serves to characterize the
entire kinetic signature by a single quantity, equivalent to mean value
of the product *Xω* across all time intervals and all values of *ω*.

Our experiments measured velocity in two dimensions, V~H~ and V~V~.
[Equations 1--5](#pbio-0030017-e001) were generalized to a second
dimension by adding, for each time window *τ~n~*, the separately
measured spectrograms for the two dimensions. The "velocity spectrogram"
column in [Figure 1](#pbio-0030017-g001)B gives two-dimensional
spectrograms as above. Similarly, in [Figure 4](#pbio-0030017-g004) the
equivalent noise level was calculated in two dimensions, averaged across
100 trials of each texture vibration, and then plotted in relation to
neuronal spike count.

### Measurement of neuronal responses

In a second set of urethane-anesthetized rats, neuronal recordings were
made simultaneously from two sites. First-order neurons were recorded by
advancing a single electrode (FHC, Bowdoinham, Maine, United States;
<http://www.fh-co.com>) into the right trigeminal ganglion according to
stereotaxic coordinates. Cortical recordings were obtained by inserting
a 100 microelectrode array (Cyberkinetics, Foxborough, Massachusetts,
United States; <http://www.cyberkineticsinc.com>) to a depth of
700--1,000 μm in the left barrel cortex \[35,36\]. Ganglion recordings
were always single units, whereas cortical recordings consisted of a
multiunit cluster at each channel.

The principal whiskers (receptive field centers) in the first-order-only
recordings were C3, E1, D6, E6, and γ (twice). The principal whiskers in
the cortex-only recordings were A1, B4, E5, and E3 (twice). The
principal whiskers in the paired first-order neuron-cortex recordings
were δ (twice), E3 (twice), C2 (twice), and E4.

Texture stimuli were delivered to a single whisker using a motor
constructed from two orthogonal pairs of parallel piezoelectric wafers
driven independently by horizontal and vertical signals ([Video
S2](#sv002)). The whisker was inserted into a metal tube (0.33 mm inner
diameter) with opening 1 mm from the skin. By optically monitoring the
whisker shaft, we verified that movements precisely reproduced the
previously recorded signals ([Figure S1](#sg001)). The second set of
rats thus received whisker vibrations identical to those previously
recorded during active whisking in the first set of rats.

### Construction of neuronal tuning curves and response simulations

We selected V~H~ and V~V~ independently from a Gaussian distribution
7,634 times per second. The stimulus was then low-pass filtered
(Chebyshev type II) at 500 Hz so as to not exceed the physical
capacities of the piezoelectric wafer stimulator (instantaneous
reversals of velocity cannot be achieved by any device). The noise
stimulus was presented for 10 min after conclusion of the texture
stimuli.

We adopted a method of "forward correlation" between stimulus and
response where, for all occurrences of a particular stimulus event, the
ensuing neuronal spike trains were averaged to construct a response
probability profile for that event. This required subdividing velocity
space into discrete segments. In [Figure 10](#pbio-0030017-g010)A,
velocity space was partitioned into eight 45-degree angular sectors
(*A~1--8~*) and ten radial sectors (*R~1--10~*). At each time point,
angle corresponds to the direction of whisker movement, while radial
distance corresponds to instantaneous speed. The positions of the radial
boundaries were chosen to make each segment contain an equal number of
instantaneous velocity events: Because velocity had a Gaussian
distribution with a mean of zero, high-velocity events were less common,
and consequently the radial boundaries were increasingly widely spaced
as distance from zero increased.

To test whether the complex, texture-induced spike patterns followed
directly from the tuning curves, a more elaborate analysis was
necessary. Each instantaneous velocity (*A,R*) during the whisk gave an
ensuing spike probability profile. To simulate a spike train, a spike
was generated in each time bin *t* (size 0.13 ms) with probability
*P*(*t*), given by the average of the overlying spike probabilities
associated with velocity events in the time window before *t* (time
window was 1--2 ms before *t* for first-order neurons and 5--20 ms
before *t* for cortical neurons). After completion of the simulation,
*P*(*t*) was normalized so that the overall simulated spike count
matched that in the real data; this normalization did not affect the
temporal profile of the simulated PSTH.

# Supporting Information

###### Comparison of Recorded and Played Back Whisking Trajectories

The whisker movements presented as sensory stimuli were accurate
reproductions of the movements recorded during electrical whisking in
other rats.

\(A\) Trajectories of two whisks (only horizontal channel shown)
recorded during contact with sandpaper P280.

\(B\) To test playback, a whisker was inserted in the piezoelectric
motor guide tube and whisker displacements were measured by the optical
sensor placed adjacent to the insertion point of the whisker. The trace
shows recordings of the playback of the same two whisks of part A.

\(C\) Magnified view of the traces indicated in the rectangle in (A) and
(B).

(161 KB PDF).

###### Two-Dimensional Optic Sensor and Electrical Whisking

Each optic sensor channel consisted of a pair of light tubes (one is a
light source, the other leads to a photodiode). The two channels were
mounted normal to each other in a metallic ring. Electrical stimulation
of cranial nerve VII with 1-V pulses of 100 μs at 200 Hz for 60 ms
produced whisker protraction that was followed by a passive 65-ms
whisker retraction. The film shows four 125-ms free whisks in the air
(8-Hz whisking), consisting of protraction (right to left) and
retraction (left to right). Recorded at 500 frames per second with a
Motion Scope 500 digital camera (Redlake, San Diego, California, United
States; <http://www.redlake.com>). Rat EW3, whisker C3.

(9.1 MB MOV).

###### Texture Playback with the Two-Dimensional Piezoelectric Motor

The motor consists of two pairs of piezoelectric wafers with axes
meeting at a mobile joint. The whisker to be stimulated was placed
inside the metal tube, which is orthogonal to the joint. The film shows
playback of four 125-ms free whisks in the air, consisting of
protraction (left to right) and retraction (right to left). Recorded at
500 frames per second.

(9.0 MB MOV).

This paper is dedicated to the memory of Irving T. Diamond. We thank
Moritz von Heimendahl, Miguel Maravall, and John Nicholls for valuable
discussions. Research was supported by European Community
IST-2000--28127, Telethon Foundation GGP02459, J. S. McDonnell
Foundation 20002035, and the Human Frontiers Science Programme
RG0043/2004-C.

*A~\[number\]~*

:   angular sector \[number\]

fw

:   free whisk trial

ms

:   millisecond

PSTH

:   peristimulus time histogram

*R\[number\]*

:   radial sector \[number\]

SD

:   standard deviation

t~\[number\]~

:   texture trial \[number\]

V~H~

:   horizontal velocity

V~V~

:   vertical velocity

μm

:   micrometer

[^1]: EA and MED conceived and designed the experiments. EA and EZ
    performed the experiments. EA, EZ, and MED analyzed the data. EZ
    designed and built custom instrumentation. EA and MED wrote the
    paper.

[^2]: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
