Males and females of the same species can be strikingly different.
Peacocks strut around with flashy feathers to attract mates, while
peahens blend into their surroundings with more subdued colors. But
differences are not always as obvious or easily explainable as in this
classic example. Even the amount of genetic reshuffling that goes on
during egg and sperm production differs between males and females in
most species. An evolutionary reason for this has eluded researchers
since the phenomenon was originally discovered in fruitflies, Chinese
silk worms, and amphipods almost 100 years ago.

Genetic diversity among organisms is promoted when genetic information
is rearranged during meiosis, the cell division process that yields
sperm and eggs (generically called gametes). During this genetic
reshuffling, chromosome pairs overlap, forming structures called
chiasmata ("crosses" in Greek), and physically recombine. This process
does not just create diversity, it is also an example of
diversity---recombination rates vary across chromosomes, sexes, and
species.

Male and female recombination rates differ

An early 20th century hypothesis to explain the sex difference in
recombination proposed that recombination is restrained within a pair of
unlike sex chromosomes (X and Y, for example) and that the suppression
spills over to the rest of the chromosomes. Under this idea, the sex
with dissimilar sex chromosomes (XY instead of XX, for example) should
be the one with the least amount of recombination in all chromosomes.
But that is not always the case. Some hermaphroditic species of
flatworms, for example, lack sex chromosomes altogether but still
display marked differences in male and female recombination rates. In
one salamander genus, more reshuffling unexpectedly occurs in the sex
with two different sex chromosomes.

In a new study analyzing an updated dataset of 107 plants and animals,
Thomas Lenormand and Julien Dutheil bolster the argument against the
recombination suppression hypothesis by showing that in species with sex
chromosomes, the sex with two dissimilar sex chromosomes doesn\'t
necessarily have a reduced recombination rate. Additionally, they found
that, as a trait, the sex difference in recombination rate is not a lot
more similar between two species in the same genus than between two
species in different genera, suggesting that the difference evolves
quickly.

An alternative hypothesis suggests that sexual selection might play a
role in recombination differences. Reproductive success among males is
often highly influenced by selection, so mixing up successful genetic
combinations in males could be evolutionarily counterproductive. But in
past studies, sexual selection was not related to variation in
recombination rates.

Putting a new twist on this hypothesis, Lenormand and Dutheil realized
that selection was not necessarily limited to the adult stage and that
differences in selection among eggs or sperm might help account for
recombination differences between the sexes. The authors reasoned that
more opportunity for selection on sperm than egg should correspond to
less recombination during sperm than egg production (and vice versa),
consistent with the idea that genetic combinations surviving selection
should remain more intact in the sex experiencing the strongest
selection at the gametic stage.

Though male gametes might be expected to be under stronger selection in
many species, in true pines it seems to be the female gametes. The
ovules compete with each other for resources over an entire year before
being fertilized, and, indeed, from the dataset analysis, ovule
production involves low recombination rates compared with male pollen in
this group. In males, the opportunity for pollen competition was
indirectly estimated using self-fertilization rates. The authors assumed
that pollen grains competing for ovules of a self-fertilizing plant
would be genetically similar and therefore experience less selection.
Again, in the analysis, low selection correlated with less recombination
in female gamete production, as predicted.

Is selection among eggs and sperm the evolutionary force generating
sex-based variation in genetic shuffling? By demonstrating that
differences may be influenced by gamete selection in plants, this work
has added clarity to otherwise contradictory observations.
