One of the more intriguing recent discoveries in brain science is the
existence of "mirror neurons," a set of neurons in the premotor area of
the brain that are activated not only when performing an action oneself,
but also while observing someone else perform that action. It is
believed mirror neurons increase an individual\'s ability to understand
the behaviors of others, an important skill in social species such as
humans. A critical aspect of understanding the behavior of another
person is recognizing the intent of his actions---is he coming to praise
me or to bury me? In this issue, Marco Iacoboni and colleagues use
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to show that the mirror
neuron system tracks not only the actions, but also the intentions, of
others.

The researchers presented subjects with one of three types of movie
clips, "context," "action," and "intention." The "context" clip came in
two versions. In the first, a mug of tea, a teapot, a pitcher of cream,
and a plate of cookies sit neatly on a nondescript surface. In the
second, the mug is empty, the pitcher is on its side, and a napkin lies
crumpled beside scattered cookie crumbs---the dregs of an apparently
well-enjoyed snack. The "action" clip shows only an empty mug, being
grasped either by the whole hand around the rim (called whole-hand
prehension), or with the fingers on the handle (precision grip). The
"intention" clip puts it all together, providing the context needed to
understand the intent of the action. In the first context scene, the mug
is grasped in the context of a well-laid spread, signaling intent to
drink the tea. In the second, the mug is grasped against the backdrop of
the rest of the tea-time dregs, signaling the intent to clean up. In
both cases, the type of grasp used is alternated, to avoid implying
intent merely based on grip type.

The essential interpretive technique in fMRI is to subtract the
activation patterns from two different stimuli, thereby highlighting
brain regions that are activated differentially in response to the
difference in stimulus. In this study, "intention minus context" showed
areas involved in recognizing both action and intention, while
"intention minus action" showed areas for both context and intention.
Comparing these two results, Iacoboni and colleagues found that an area
in the right inferior frontal cortex, an area known to be involved in
the mirror system, was activated only by scenes in which intention could
be inferred. In the authors\' words, "it appears that there are sets of
neurons in human inferior frontal cortex that specifically code the
'why' of the action and respond differently to different intentions."

They note that these neurons differ in function from previously defined
mirror neurons in that they apparently code not current actions, but
some aspect of future ones. In this interpretation, an action observed
within a familiar context activates mirror neurons for "logically
related" actions, those that most likely will follow the observed one.
This suggests the mirror neuron system is intimately involved not only
with understanding the behavior of others, but predicting it as well.
