Average earth temperatures rose 0.6 °C over the last century, according
to the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. But that
increase pales in comparison to the 1.4--5.8 °C expected increase over
this century. As temperatures climb, climate models predict that
high-latitude, high-altitude regions like Yellowstone National Park will
experience shorter winters and earlier snow melts. How these
environmental shifts will impact species and ecosystems remains to be
seen.

The effects of climate change are already evident at the species level,
with disruptions in range, reproductive success, and seasonal phenomena
like migration, and the decoupling of evolutionarily paired events like
new births and food availability. Both experimental and data-driven
modeling studies predict that climate change may well precipitate shifts
in the structure of ecosystems as well.

In a new study, Christopher Wilmers and Wayne Getz investigated the
effects of climate change on ecosystem dynamics by studying a keystone
species in Yellowstone, the gray wolf (Canis lupus). Gray wolves
inhabited most of North America until US extirpation campaigns nearly
eradicated them by the 1930s. In 1995, the US Fish and Wildlife Service
reintroduced the persecuted predator into Yellowstone.

Wilmers and Getz used data from the past 50 years at two weather
stations in the park\'s northern range (where elk over winter and four
to six wolf packs now live) to establish winter trends and model
wolves\' impact on the fate of resident scavengers faced with a changing
climate. Not surprisingly, their models show that this top predator
exerts significant influence over animals at lower levels in the food
chain: wolf kills temper the potentially devastating effects of
climate-related carrion shortages on scavengers. Unlike mountain lions
and grizzly bears, wolves abandon their prey (usually elk or moose) once
sated, leaving much-coveted leftovers for ravens, eagles, coyotes,
bears, and other scavengers. These findings indicate that individual
species stand a better chance of adapting to climate change in an
ecosystem with an intact food chain.

Wilmers and Getz\'s weather data analysis found that both late-winter
snow depth and snow-cover duration have decreased significantly since
1948---winters in Yellowstone are getting shorter. That\'s good news for
elk---navigating deep snow taxes stamina and reduces access to
forage---but bad news for scavengers that rely on elk carcasses to carry
them through the winter.

The authors generated two sets of models to estimate the effects of
shorter winters on the wolf--elk--scavenger dynamics. In the first,
late-winter carrion availability drops by 66% without wolves but by only
11% when the predators are present. The second model examines the impact
of elk and wolf population dynamics on carrion availability. This
analysis predicts that more elk will die in early winter than in late
winter, a scenario that favors eagles and ravens---which can cover a lot
of ground quickly---over bears and coyotes. Altogether, these modeling
studies show that shorter winters without wolves will create
intermittent food supplies that no longer track the needs of local
scavengers. With or without wolves, late-winter carrion abundance will
decline with shorter winters. But wolf kills buffer these shortages,
providing meals that could determine whether scavengers will be able to
survive and reproduce.

Reintroduced wolves do their part: an intact food chain buffers the
impact of deteriorating environmental conditions (Photo: Dan Hartman)

It seems clear that wolves have the potential to provide a safety net
for scavengers, extending the time they need to adapt to a changing
environment. Thanks to a rebounding wolf population, field researchers
can measure the magnitude of this predicted buffer effect. The models
described here can guide their efforts and help species adjust to major
environmental shifts like climate change.

As a young US ranger "full of trigger-itch," Aldo Leopold killed his
share of wolves under the federal eradication policy---until he "watched
a fierce green fire dying" in the eyes of a slain mother flush with pups
and realized he had not understood the wolf\'s ecological role. Wilmers
and Getz\'s study shows that a robust food chain---including this still
embattled top predator---may be even more important as ecological
conditions deteriorate.
