News and Notes
================

Resignation of Dr Letitia Fairfield, Hon. Medical Secretary
At a meeting held on January 9th, 1934, the Executive Council of the
^?A.M.W. received with much regret the resignation of Dr Letitia Fairfield
rom the office of Honorary Medical Secretary of the Association, which she
1 u s^nce !926. Dr Fairfield was present at the meeting and said that
although she still had the interests of the Association deeply at heart, her
resignation was inevitable, as she found herself unable to support the Executive
ouncil in the attitude it had taken up with regard to the question of
Sterilisation.

Dr Fairfield's wide experience and knowledge of mental deficiency has
pCen ?f the utmost service to the Association during her years of office and the
xecutjve Council is most grateful to her for the help she has given in connec-
tion with the many different branches of the work. We are glad to feel that,
excePt ?n the question which has necessitated her resignation, her advice and
assistance will always be at the disposal of the Association.

New Committee for Research in Mental Disorders
-------------------------------------------------

The Medical Research Council, in consultation with the Board of Control,
^Ve appointed a new Committee to advise and assist them in the promotion
research into mental disorders. The reconstituted Committee will include
representatives not only of psychiatry, medical psychology, and the study of
Cental deficiency, but also of neurology, physiology, biochemistry, pathology,
and genetics.

p The Chairman of the Committee will be Professor E. D. Adrian, M.D.,
o. *C.P., F.R.S., a member of the Council, and the following will also serve:
C. Hubert Bond, K.B.E., D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P., Board of Control; Bernard
art, M.D., F.R.C.P., University College Hospital, London; Professor D. K.
Anderson, M.D., Royal Edinburgh Hospital for Mental and Nervous Dis-
2^ders; T. A. Ross, M.D., F.R.C.P., Cassel Hospital, Penshurst; E. O. Lewis,
?Sc., M.R.C.S., Board of Control; C. P. Symonds, M.D., F.R.C.P., Guy's
ospital, London; J. H. Quastel, D.Sc., Cardiff City Mental Hospital; J. G.
reenfield, M.D., F.R.C.P., National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, London;
? L. Golla, M.B., F.R.C.P., Maudsley Hospital, London; and L. S. Penrose,
tt Royal Eastern Counties' Institution, Colchester. Sir David Munro,
?C.B., M.B., of the Council's staff, will act as Secretary.

^evelopments in Mental Deficiency Work
Northamptonshire
- At the request of the Northamptonshire County Council the services of
lss Laxton, Organiser for the C.A.M.W., were placed at the disposal of the
48 MENTAL WELFARE
Committee for the Care of the Mentally Defective, for the purpose of investi-
gating the position of defectives in the County and making suggestions for the
further development of the work of the Committee.

In her report to the Committee the Organiser drew attention to the fact
that many of the feeble-minded children who left the Elementary Schools at 14
without any kind of protection, re-appeared as the defective parents of defective
children. In 69 families one or both parents were deemed to be either mentally
defective or of low intelligence. In 55 families more than one defective exists
and in 11 families the total number of defectives is 44, an average of 4 per
family. The Northamptonshire County Council considered this report last
month and have now authorised the Committee for the Care of the Mentally
Defective, in conjunction with the Education Committee, to appoint a perman-
ent mental welfare worker to work on the staff of the County Medical Officer
of Health. An appointment is to be made shortly.

Oxfordshire
------------

In 1928 Miss Laxton was loaned to the Oxfordshire Rural Community
Council, with the permission of the County Mental Deficiency Committee, to
investigate the position with regard to mental deficiency in the County. In
presenting her Report, the Organiser suggested the formation of a Voluntary
Mental Welfare Association in the County. This was formed, but owing to
difficulties of finance the County were not able to give practical support at
that moment and the matter was left in abeyance.

The Oxfordshire County Council have recently considered the matter and
discussed it with the City Council. It has now been decided that a mental
welfare worker, employed by the City Council, should be loaned as a half-time
worker to the County in order to carry out the Statutory (County) Mental
Deficiency work. In place of a previous half-time appointment, the City
Council have now appointed a full-time worker to assist with the City mental
deficiency work and with the work connected with the Education Clinic and
to devote half her time to working in the County.

The joint worker has been appointed for an experimental year and it will
be interesting to watch the progress of this scheme in an area where a joint
County and City Committee in co-operation with other Authorities, have
recently opened Boro Court Institution, and where the Mental Hospital is also
run by a joint County and City Committee.

Institutional Accommodation in Somerset
----------------------------------------

The Somerset County Council have recently felt it desirable to review the
position with regard to their Institutional Accommodation for Mental
Defectives.

A Scheme has been prepared to meet the probable requirements of the
next ten years and it is an interesting fact that the estimated number of Defec-
tives under the Mental Deficiency Acts for whom it is likely Institutional care
will be needed during the next ten years is just over 1,000, the number being
based on the actual experience of recent years. It was arrived at without any
reference to the figures given in the Wood Report and yet it coincides with
them almost exactly.

Children of School Age under the Board of Education are not included.
For them there is a Residential School with 50 beds for each sex and a few are
sent to the Western Counties Institution.

On the passing of the Local Government Act, two Poor Law Institutions
Were transferred to the Mental Deficiency Acts Committee. It is proposed to
accommodate about 145 men in one and 145 women in the other, of the type
approved by the Board of Control. At a small expenditure these have been
adapted for their present purpose but, in order to make them satisfactory
institutions, it is proposed to spend about ^13,000 on them for the provision of
adequate sewage, water supply and electric light, together with general im-
provement of premises.

The main Colony for Employable High-Grade Defectives of both sexes
will still be at Sandhill Park near Taunton. The acquisition of this beautiful
estate was only made possible by the generosity of the late Mr. Henry Herbert
Wills, who devoted ^41,000 to this purpose.

It is proposed to erect immediately at Sandhill a new Hostel for adult
grade patients and a Hostel for 40 Cot and Chair cases, to enlarge the
jj^tchen and laundry, and gradually, as required, to provide two additional
yiostels and a Hospital Block, which means that there will be accommodation
0r 120 men, 175 women, 100 school children and 40 Cot and Chair cases.
The County Council have a Home for Imbecile children of both sexes at
atton, which provided for 76 Mental Defectives.

The County Council have agreed with the Local Authorities of Devon,
orset, Exeter and Plymouth, and the Managers of the Royal Western Counties
restitution to participate in the development of a Colony at Dawlish which
Will give them 180 beds in this excellent Institution.

It is hoped to provide for the remainder of the Defectives in other Homes
arid Institutions specially suited for certain Defectives, and by placing others
0llt on Licence.

The total cost of the new Scheme is estimated to be .?48,699 in addition
about ^20,000 for participating in the Western Counties Institution, and it
ls claimed that the Scheme provides at a comparatively low cost for a large
^urnber of Defectives and affords facilities for Special Classification by the
variety of accommodation available in different places, affording many altern-
ative types of work. It will also enable patients to be readily moved from one
I ace to another as may prove desirable.

Guardianship Leisure Club
-------------------------

Three years ago a Leisure Club was started in Hitchin for the use of girls
P aced out under the C.A.M.W. Guardianship Scheme in Hertfordshire, The
Club, which is organised by a Committee consisting of Voluntary helpers and
some of the girls, has now 40 members and meets one afternoon weekly. The
time is spent in sewing, handwork, singing, dancing, etc., and tea and cake is
provided at id. per head.

Apart from the annual organised outing the Club has been very fortunate
in receiving invitations during the summer months from several of the girls'
Guardians. A party of the girls also went to the C.A.M.W. Holiday Home at
Littlehampton for a fortnight.

The Club has been held on the premises of the Y.W.C.A. in Hitchin.
Unfortunately, this is now closing down and it will be necessary to find new
quarters. These will probably be found in Letchworth which is within easier
reach of the majority of girls. Miss Rainbird, who has acted as Hon. Secretary
and Treasurer since the foundation of the Club will unfortunately have to give
up this work if the Club moves. We should like to thank her for her devoted
and regular help and all those who have helped us in making this Club
successful.

We have found that such a Club is a great asset to these girls who, lacking
in resources of their own, welcome any organised recreation. Many of them
are placed out in service and without such a centre find that their free time
hangs rather heavily on their hands.

The Maudsley Lecture
--------------------

Lord Macmillan has consented to give the Maudsley Lecture for the
Royal Medico-Psychological Association this year. Every other year this lecture
is given on a popular subject and is open to the public. This year Lord
Macmillan has chosen " The Professional Mind " as the title of his address,
which will be given at the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene,
Manson House, 26, Portland Place, on Thursday, May 17th, at 3.0 p.m.
Middlesex Mental Hospital

The Middlesex County Council's new mental hospital at Shenley, Herts.,
was opened for the reception of patients in February.

The hospital, which is built on the villa system, will accommodate over
a thousand patients. It has been planned on the latest ideas in design and
equipment and special attention will be paid to curative treatment. Special
villas are to be allocated to voluntary and temporary patients.

Lectures in Physical Education
---------------------------------

For some time we have felt that more could be done in correcting faulty
posture in cases of defectives attending Occupation Centres. One of the diffi-
culties of defectives living at home is that they are so often conspicuous by their
gait and movement and for this reason are an added difficulty to members of
their families who may be sensitive about taking them about where they may
attract undue attention.

We have perhaps accepted too easily those peculiarities in posture which
are so typical of certain types of defectives and we feel that if more attention
Were paid to these by experts in Physical Education it might result in the
correction of at least the more conspicuous faults. For this reason we have
arranged a special course of ten lectures and demonstrations which will be
attended by the Sup ervisors of London, Middlesex and Essex Occupation
Centres.

The Course has been designed by Miss Vulliamy of the Hampstead School
or Physical Education, in conjunction with Miss Fitch, Miss Hutchison and
yhss Seaman of the Bergman Osterberg Physical Training College and Mrs.
Lewis of the Bedford Physical Training College.

The Course is of necessity experimental, but it is hoped that it may be
1 lc beginning of further work along these lines.

Forthcoming Conferences
------------------------

C-A.M.W. Conference, 1934
The biennial Conference of the C.A.M.W. has been fixed for November
~9th and 30th, 1934, and will be held at British Medical Association House,
1 avistock Square, W.C.i.

Training College Association Conference
----------------------------------------

A Week-End Conference for staffs of Training Colleges has been arranged
y the Training College Association, on the Teaching of Dull and Backward
hildren and is to be held at Pentland House, Lee, from April 20th-22nd, 1934.
The aims of the Conference are to gain a closer acquaintance with the
Mature and extent of the problem of the backward and difficult child in the
. ?ol and to consider a proposed scheme for a Third Year Course of Training
ln Training Colleges.

Dr Crowley will be in the Chair and amongst the speakers are Miss
akefield (Bishop Otter Training College), Miss Smith, H.M.I., and Miss
0ss (Inspector of Birmingham Special Schools).

^?yal Sanitary Institute Congress at Bristol
----------------------------------------------

The 45th Health Congress and Exhibition of the Royal Sanitary Institute
Wl11 be held from July 9th to 14th, 1934, in Bristol.

A discussion has been arranged at a joint meeting of the section on Pre-
penj-ive Medicine and the Conference of Medical Officers of Health on " The
r?blem of the Mental Defective," and the discussion will be opened by
1 rofessor R. J. A. Berry.

British Social Hygiene Council Summer School
---------------------------------------------

The Summer Vacation School of the British Social Hygiene Council will
be held this year from Monday to Saturday, June 25th to 30th, at Digswell
Park Conference House, Welwyn Garden City, Herts. There will be three
courses of five lectures each on Anthropology, Biology and Psychology. The
inaugural address will be given by Professor F. A. E. Crew.
Particulars are enclosed with this issue of Mental Welfare or may be
obtained from The Secretary, British Social Hygiene Council, Carteret House,
Carteret Street, S.W.i.

Dr Ralph H. Crowley
---------------------

A notice of Dr Crowley's retirement from the Board of Education ap-
peared in the last issue of Mental Welfare. Dr Crowley has now kindly
consented to serve on the Executive Council of the C.A.M.W., and at its last
meeting held on April 9th he was formally co-opted a member. It is gratify-
ing to know that we shall still have the benefit of his wide knowledge and
experience of educational matters.

Death of Miss K. E. Freshney, Leicestershire
----------------------------------------------

We regret to report the death, in Oxford on April 9th, 1934, of Miss
Kathleen Freshney, J.P., who was the first Secretary of the Leicestershire
Association for Mental Welfare, and who held that position until last Christ-
mas, when she was obliged to resign on account of ill health. Miss Freshney
was particularly successful in securing the support and co-operation of the
various official and voluntary bodies working in the county, and under her
the Leicestershire Association became a real force in the development of mental
welfare work. She is succeeded by Miss E. N. Colman, who worked with her
for some months before her resignation.
