Birthday Honours
=================

News and Notes

We should like to offer our hearty congratulations to the following, who
appeared in the recent Birthday Honours: ?
Alderman }. C. Grimes, O.B.E., of Manchester City Council, the Mental
Hospitals Association, and representative of the Lancashire Mental
Hospitals Board on the Council of the C.A.M.W.
Mr. John Douglas Johnstone, O.B.E., whose article on Juvenile Delin-
quents appears in this number.
Miss F. A, Cullwick, M.B.E., Matron of Monyhull Certified Institution.
Miss Jean MacLeod, M.B.E., Matron of Newcastle-on-Tyne Mental
Hospital.
Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilisation
In the April number of " Mental Welfare " it was reported that the Cen-
tral Association for Mental Welfare had issued invitations to organisations
whose work would be affected by the adoption of the recommendations of the
Brock Report, asking them to appoint representatives to serve on a Joint Com-
mittee to give effect to these recommendations.

This Joint Committee has now held two meetings, and the following
organisations have appointed representatives to serve on it: ?
The Central Association for Mental Welfare,
The Eugenics Society,
The Mental Hospitals Association,
The National Council for Mental Hygiene.

The County Councils Association have also agreed to send three of their
members " to attend the meetings of the Committee but without power to
commit the Association to any opinion or course of action."

The immediate objective of the Committee is to secure legislation on the
lines of the Brock Report as soon as possible, by preference as a Government
measure or, failing that, as a Private Member's Bill adopted by the Govern-
ment. On June 7th the Committee passed the following resolution: ?

That the Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilisation, having considered
the Report of the Departmental Committee on Sterilisation, and being
in general agreement therein, urge upon the Government the need for
the introduction of a measure to legalise voluntary sterilisation in con-
formity with the said recommendations.

Meanwhile, a sub-committee has been appointed to draft a Bill, which
will be submitted to the constituent organisations of the Committee and to
other interested bodies for their comments as soon as possible.
The offices of the Joint Committee are at 69, Eccleston Square, London,
S.W.i, where the Brock Report (minus appendices) can be obtained for 6d.,
and copics of an explanatory leaflet entitled "What is Voluntary Sterilisation?"
for id. each.

Manchester Education Committee?Report of School Medical Officer
Some interesting information with regard to the After Care of Feeble-
minded Children is to be found in Dr Herd's Report for 1933. Of the 1,176
cases under supervision of the Mental Welfare Association, 669 are in regular
work, 179 were referred to the Local Mental Deficiency Authority for super-
vision, 124 were unemployed, 62 were unemployable, and the remainder had
been sent to Institutions and Homes, had moved from the City, or were
untraced.

One table given appears to be of particular interest, and we reprint it
below?it shows the number of children who have been under supervision for
each year since 1926, and the number of those who have been in continuous
employment with one, two or more employers: ?
Period of Supervision Employers
One Two Three Four Five Six
1926-1934 49 37 23 12 17 2
I927~I934 3 7 5 ? 25 8 3 i
I928-I934 22 20 19 2
I929"I934 41 29 9 i ? ?
I93?"I934 33 24 8 ? ? ?
I93I-I934 43 *3 ? ? ? ?
I932"I934 76 4
1933"1934 63 ? ? 1
364 i77 84 24 20 3
C.A.M.W. Conference, 1934

The public Health Congress is to be held during the third week in
November at the Royal Agricultural Hall, Islington. One of the questions to
be discussed by the Mental Health Section is " Boarding Out Patients from
Mental Hospitals," which it was also proposed should be discussed at the
C.A.M.W. Conference.

It has been decided, therefore, in order to save travelling expenses of dele-
gates, that a Joint Session of the Public Health Congress and the C.A.M.W.
shall be held at the Agricultural Hall on the morning of Wednesday, Novem-
ber 21 st, and that the other sessions of the C.A.M.W. Conference shall take
place at the British Medical Association House, Tavistock Square, W.C.i, on
Thursday and Friday, November 22nd and 23rd, instead of November 29th
and 30th as stated in the April number of " Mental Welfare."
Further details will appear in the October number of the Magazine.

Birmingham Special Schools' Holiday Home?Memorial to Miss Martineau
--------------------------------------------------------------------

It h as been the custom in Birmingham for many years to send parties of
children, drawn from schools for the mentally and physically defective, parti-
ally blind or deaf, to a seaside school for 2 weeks during the summer months,
premises being hired for the purpose. This side of the welfare work for special
school children was one in which the late Miss Martineau was keenly inter-
ested, and she had always hoped that a permanent holiday home might be
obtained. To further this end, by her will she bequeathed ^1,000 to be used
for this purpose. The purchase of a suitable house and land has now been
completed?the additional /i,ooo needed having been raised by private effort.
The home, which it is hoped to open in 1935, will be presented to the City, and
be maintained as a memorial to Miss Martineau.

Staffordshire Association for Mental Welfare?Study Week
We have received a preliminary notice of a study week which is being
arranged by the Staffordshire Association from October 22nd to 25th, 1934.
It is intended for those engaged in the teaching of mental defectives in Occupa-
tion Centres, etc., and will include an intensive course of lectures on speech
defects and remedial training by the C.A.M.W. Travelling Speech Therapist,
demonstrations in physical education, rhythmic training, handicrafts, etc.
Further information can be obtained from the Secretary of the Staffordshire
Association, 15a, Eastgate, Stafford.

Obituary
----------

We much regret to report the death of Dr Meredith Young, which
occurred in Chester on May 7th. He had great experience in all questions of
Public Health, having been for 23 years County Medical Officer for Cheshire,
and previous to this, Medical Officer of Health at Brighouse, Crewe, Stockport
and Marylebone. He was for a time the representative of the Society of
Medical Officers of Health on the Council of the C.A.M.W. He was keenly
interested in the various aspects of mental deficiency, and always ready to give
practical assistance in furthering the cause of the care of the mentally defective.
