The Present State of Lunacy in England and Wales
==================================================

The eleventh very able Report recently issued by the Commissioners of Lunacy,
presents great variety of interesting and valuable information on the present
state and statistics of insanity throughout England and Wales; and cannot fail
of being perused with the greatest interest by the psychologist especially, the
philanthropist, political economist, and by our readers generally.

This lleport brings before us much matter for reflection, both in a moral and
social aspect; canvassing on a large and comprehensive scale, yet with clear-
ness and precision, questions and facts of gravest character and importance
bearing upon that " most dread affliction," insanity?a malady of already fear-
fully wide extension, and unquestionably still on the increase.

liut were the suggestions and plans of the Commissioners really adopted and
carried out, we are sanguine enough to believe that this " direful affliction"
might be materially abridged in its duration, and more successfully treated
generally. We allude here especially to that large and unfortunate class?
" the pauper lunatics"?who are now being gradually brought within the pale
of a higher humanity. Yet much remains to be done in " ways and means,"
before the desideratum of systematic and scientific management can be realized,
and we can only endorse our sincere wish, that the Commissioners of Lunacy
were invested with even more ample and plenary powers for this purpose than
they at present possess.

It is shown in the present Report, that the number of the insane domiciled
in asylums, hospitals, workhouses, and licensed houses, on the 1st January,
1857, amounted to 21,34-4 individuals of both sexes, viz., 10,0S4 males, and
11,200 females: 1G,G57 being pauper lunatics, and the remainder, 4G87, private
patients.

SUMMARY.
Asylums . . . .
Hospitals . . . .
Metropolitan Licensed
Houses . . . .
Provincial Licensed
Houses ....
Royal Naval Hospital
Private.
119
812
657
787
94
744
621
724
2375,2183
129
2504
2183
Total.
213
1556
1278
1511
4558
129
Pauper.
6409
95
471
605
7580
4687 7580
F. Total.
7687 14,096
80j 175
828, 1,299
482 1,087
907 7,16,657
^9077 16,657
Total
Males.
Total
Fe-
males.
6,528
907
1,128
1,392
9,955
129
10,084
7,781
824
1,449
1,206
Total
Luna-
tics
11,260
11,260
14,309
1,731
2,577
2,598
21,215
129
21,344
Asylums . . . .
Hospitals . . . .
Metropolitan Licensed
Houses ....
Provincial Licensed
Houses ....
Found Lunatic
by Inquisition.
5
22
65
78
170
106
Total.
6
37
110
123
276
Criminals.
197
88
20
151
456
125
Total.
260
108
33
180
581
Chargeable to
Counties
or Boroughs.
534 586
lj -
35, 69
34 14
604 669
Total.
1120
1
104
48
1273

At the same date that 1 person in every 701 of the population of England
anu Wales was of unsound mind?a considerable increase in five years, as will
be seen by comparison of the following years :?

In 1852 the ratio was 1 in 847
In 1854 ? 1 ?762
In 1857 ? 1 ? 701

The last five years,?from 1852 to 1857,?exhibits an increase of 3,932
private and pauper lunatics, according to the Report of the Commissioners of
Lunacy; and that of the Poor-law Board is still higher,?proving a decided
increase of insanity beyond that of the increase of population. Of the entire
number of lunatics, 3,227 only were deemed curable, and 17,9S4 incurable, or
about 1 in every G persons?a very sad and melancholy calculate proportion.
For the maintenance and clothing of the pauper lunatic class alone, taking
the rate stated in the Commissioners' Report, at 6s. 8d. each person weekly,
requires an outlay of 266,270/. 6s. Sd. annually?truly a large draught on
the public purse.

In praise of the ability, zeal, and searching investigations of the Commis-
sioners, too much cannot be said; many, very many abuses have been exposed
and rectified; but we repeat, much " hard work" remains before them in their
arduous duties, before "establishments for the insane" have attained that
working excellence of arrangement and management of which we believe them
capable.

As regards establishments for the reception of pauper lunatics?the class to
which we shall now principally confine our observations?the Commissioners do
not hesitate in expressing their convictions, and give largely the preference to
well-conducted middle-sized asylums, over workhouses, hospitals, or licensed
houses; considering the last-named establishments as the worst and most ob-
jectionable. In this judgment we fully agree.

On the subject of asylums, the Commissioners report a decided advance made
both in county and borough asylums during the past year ; still, they have to
speak with strong regret and disappointment of the continued avoidance, by
large numbers of the boroughs and cities, of the provisions of the Legislature
in this matter, and of duties imperfectly discharged by county authorities also.
The Commissioners complain of want of accommodation generally, even for
present purposes being sadly deficient; how much more so must they soon
become, taking into consideration the increasing ratio of population, and the
increasing ratio of insanity to population.

The amount of space allotted to the thirty-three county and four borough
asylums, which comprise all the public accommodation yet provided for the
lunatic poor, suffices only for the reception of 15,GOO patients at the present
time, and contain at present 14,309; that many of these establishments have
attained their full limit of size, available space remaining for little more than
1300 additional inmates; and during last year, taking the aggregate of ten of
these asylums only, nearly 1000 patients were unable to find admission for
want of neccssary room. And if we couple this with another fact (Appendix to
Report, E), it appears that while space lias had to be found in licensed houses
for nearly 2000 pauper lunatics, for whom there is no available accommodation
in county asylums or hospitals, the number of additional lunatics and idiots
detained in workhouses, or with friends, amounted, on the 1st January, 1S57, to
no less than 12,297. The obvious conclusion is, that what was found necessary
at Colney Hatch and Ilanwell must soon bccome a general requirement, and
that no temporary expedients will satisfy a want so steadily increasing.

To meet these requirements, the Commissioners suggest the building of
additional, differently constructed, more simple and economical edifices, rather
than enlargement of existing asylums generally; and illustrate their position by
reference to the already overgrown state of Hanwell and Colney Hatch, which
institutions are still undergoing, or about to undergo, increased dimensions:
and we entirely concur in the opinion of the Commissioners, that it would have
been in every way preferable and wiser to have crectcd a third asylum of a more
simple and less expensive kind. Moreover, beyond a certain size, asylums are
objectionable; they forfeit the advantage?which nothing can replace, whether
in general management or the treatment of disease?of individual and respon-
sible supervision; few aids being so important in the cure or alleviation of
insanity as those derivable from vigilant observation of individual peculiarities :
but where the patients arc so numerous that no medical officer can bring them
within range ot his personal examination and judgment, such opportunities are
altogether lost; and amid the workings of a great machine, the physician and
patient lose alike their individuality. Besides, the more extended the establish-
ment, the more abridged become its means of cure; and this should be the
first objcct of any and every asylum, there being a danger?as in the examples
of Hanwell and Colney Hatch?instead of being hospitals for the treat-
ment and relief of insanity, according to their original intention, of becoming
permanent places of refuge for too large a proportion of such cases, in which
the chances of relief are few, to the exclusion of cases of more recent standing,
which, by timely medical care therein, might never have contributed, as they
now so largely do, to the permanent burdens on the ratepayers; besides limiting
space, and thereby preventing sufficient proper and healthful opportunities of
exercise and employment, indispensable to any due treatment of the insane.
To workhouses as receptacles for the insane, their disadvantages greatly
outweigh any small benefit that may accrue from such establishments, in the
opinion of the Commissioners. The result is, that detention in workhouses
not only deteriorates the more harmless and imbecile cases, to which originally
they are not unsuited, but has the tendency to render chronic and permanent such
as might have yielded to early care; the one class, no longer associated with
the other inmates, but congregated in separate wards, rapidly degenerate into
a condition requiring all the attendance and treatment to be obtained only in
a well-regulated asylum; and the others, presenting originally every chance of
recovery, but finding none of its appliances and means, rapidly sink into that
almost hopeless state which leaves them for life a burden on their parishes.
Nor can a remedy be suggested as long as this workhouse system continues.
The attendants are generally pauper inmates, totally unfitted for the charge;
the wards gloomy, unprovided with means of occupation, exercise, or amuse-
ment; and the diet?above all essential to the unhappy objects of mental dis-
ease?rarely in any case exceeds that allowed to healthy and able-bodied
inmates.

We might add many more and serious objections, did space permit, to
workhouses as receptacles for the insane. We must dismiss very summarily
the third division of our analysis?viz., that which relates to licensed houses as
habitations for pauper lunatics; and we shall quote the opinions of the Com-
missioners ofLunacy, as expressed at pagesl7andl8 of their present Report:?
"That existing licensed houses in any adequate respect supply the want to
which we have been directing attention?even where the means are large and
ample?it is impossible to admit. The accommodation is necessarily of an
inferior order; and it is never possible entirely to suppress a question as to the
disinterestedness of those with whom the duty rests of receiving, treating, and
detaining the inmates. So long as the patient is in a public asylum, no motive
exists on the score of economy for depriving him of any comforts which his
case requires; but in private institutions it is otherwise, where the same
advantages do not exist, and where the difficulty of enforcing recommendations
for his benefit can only be appreciated by those upon whom the duty of in-
specting these establishments is imposed. The Commissioners in their Report,
pages 18, 19, 20, give ample proof of these positions."

The inferences to be drawn from the foregoing data may be summed up as
follows:?

1st. That insanity is on the increase.
2nd. That the best means of cure or alleviation of mental disease, especially
as bearing upon pauper lunacy, are, well-conducted, airy, and middle-sized
asylums.

3rd. That all other existing establishments whatever, for the " poor lunatic,"
are unfit, ill-arranged, and badly conducted.
3 G 2
