Principles Of Eraly Mental Education
======================================

Art. III.?
In the last number of this journal, in an artiolo on the artificial
production of stupidity in schools, we sought to call the attention
of ouv reaclevs to the possibility that hfuuij itvthei thcvu ^ood, its it y
frequently result from the powerful educational influences of the
present day:?"when those influences are either undesirable in
their nature, or misdirected in their application.

Our argument was mainly intended to show, in the first
place, that the variations witnessed among adults, in point of
mental capacity, are far too considerable to be explained by dif-
ferences in original conformation; and, secondly, that the ten-
dency of the encephalon to automatic action may be regarded as
the chief source of practical errors in the art of teaching.
We return to this subject, at the risk of being thought to
expound a truism, because we are deeply impressed with its im-
portance to the community. We believe that education can never
be successfully and economically conducted, as regards the
masses, until it is based upon sound physiology; and that empi-
rical teaching, however, or from whatever cause, it may occa-
sionally develope the powers of individuals, must always be
wholly insufficient to afford secure foundation for a national
system. The facts and arguments by which. these propositions
are supported, are of a kind to appeal with peculiar force to the
members of the medical body; and hence our brethren, or at
least those among them who have been led to reflect at all upon
educational questions, are enabled to be in advance of, and are
called upon to lead, the opinions of the general public. Outside
the pale of the profession, it is still a matter of novelty, and
even of wonder, that physiology should furnish rules for the
preservation of bodily health; and that the wholesale violation
of these rules should be followed by commensurate calamities.
Official personages, from the departments of the War Office to a
country hoard of guardians, from the country board of guardians
to a village Dogberry, are almost unanimous in endeavouring to
believe that the laws of vital action, as enunciated by medical
authority, are only the crotchets of the individual doctor who may
give them utterance; and that they may be disregarded without
guilt, or forgotten without punishment. It is conceivable that
the public mind may once have been in a similar position, rela-
tively to the forces that govern inert matter; that architects may
have striven to build in spite of gravitation ; or shipwrights to
defy the conditions of buoyancy. It is conceivable that, a cen-
o! ]>-tury hence, a verdict of insanity would screen a martinet who
might reproduce Crimean disasters, or await a constable who had
connived at his neighbour's cesspool. But, in the present state
of public enlightenment, it has yet to be realized that physical
and vital forces are modes of the same agency, producing their
effects, under known conditions, with equal and with unerring cer-
tainty. Still less is it generally known or admitted that the
various actions which are called intellectual can be referred, each
to its proper organ in the nervous centres, each to definite cir-
cumstances modifying the course of the impression in which it
had its origin. On this, and on many other subjects, there is,
we think, a tendency to credit intelligent persons with a larger
amount of scientific information than they usually possess; and
to expect from them more just opinions than they have ever been
enabled to form. The editor of a provincial newspaper did us
the honour to criticize in his columns our article oil the produc-
tion of stupidity; and to select our physiological heresies for
special animadversion. 1 We argued, he said, as if from a tripar-
tite division of the central nervous system, and referred to a
brain proper, a sensorium, and a spinal centre; whereas it was
well-known that the central nervous system can be divided into two
parts only,?the coktical and the medullary ! We transfer
this exquisite morceau to our pages, not only because it is the
most ludicrous blunder that ever was couched in language, but
because it furnishes a clue to the value of popular notions upon
all kindred subjects. If such be the ignorance of those who
write our newspapers, how much knowledge may we expect
from those who read tliem ? The only possible answer must
lead to the inference that the elements of physiology are not
sufficiently comprehended by the public to be of general utility
in guiding conduct or habits, even where bodily health alone is
concerned ; and, as our knowledge of the functions of the nervous
system is not only somewhat intricate in itself, but is, moreover,
among the latest triumphs of research, so, in this department,
more conspicuously than in any other, it is the duty of the pliy?
sician to diffuse abroad that light which, by reason of his elevated
scientific position, falls first across his path:?when as yet its
source has not risen liigli enough to dispel the clouds and mists
which obscure the lower portions of the track, or to illuminate
the gloomy caverns which are the lurking-places of prejudice and
error.

There is, perhaps, no pursuit known among men that lias
occupied a larger share of time, employed a larger amount of
skill, or been watched with a more absorbing interest, from the
beginning of history to the present day, than the work of edu-
cating the young. Ambitious teachers, seeking their own fame
through the reputation of their pupils; parents, noting the pro-
gress of their offspring with the most aspiring or the most affec-
tionate solicitude; philosophers, bent upon discovering in what
degree the intellectual development of the human race could be
modified or controlled by cultivation; all alike have devoted
their best talents, stimulated by their most ardent desires, to the
solution of the great problem that surrounds the earlier years of
life. It is not too much to say that all alike have failed. They
liave failed not only in obtaining any uniformity of result, not
only in every attempt to define the limits of their own powers,
hut even in establishing upon satisfactory evidence that they
possess, as regards the faculties of the mind, any powers what-
ever. The same household, the same school, the same college,
may send forth the senior wrangler and the wooden spoon; leaving
it an open question whether the difference depended on conforma-
tion or on training; and a still more open question whether the
positions of the two men might not be reversed in after life.
With regard to children, there is probably no professed teacher
who would hesitate to promise that he would do what was best
for each pupil entrusted to his charge; but there are very few
who would attempt to predict what the results of that best would
be. There is, apparently, no measure by which to ascertain the
natural type upon which each brain is formed ; and, consequently,
no standard by which to estimate the effects of cultivation.

There is, it need hardly be said, an abundance of education, in
the sense in which the word is used by Paley; namely, to express
every preparation that is made in our youth for the sequel of our
lives. The nature of this preparation has varied, and will vary,
with the fluctuations of fashion and circumstance; but we may
always learn from it that, several years being given to the task,
and average capacity to the pupil, any desired attainments may
be secured with tolerable certainty.

This much being granted, there remains the remarkable fact
that the power to confer attainments is not the result of any
direct control over the faculties of the mind. Of two boys at a
public school, who had spent the whole period of youth in
making verses, it might be found that the exercise, in one case,
had served to call into activity the highest powers of the intel-
lect ; in the other, the exercise itself having still been tolerably
well performed, these powers might be in comparative abeyance.
The old explanation of this would be, that the brain of the
latter pupil was sterile ground ; but the case is too common for
the explanation to be a sound one. In such instances, lament-
ably frequent even in the best schools, there is usually a certain
relation between the length of time given to teaching, and the
duration of the acquirements which result from it. Descending
a step lower in the social scale, to classes who can neither com-
mand the best schools for their children, nor retain them for a
very prolonged period under tuition, it may be observed that
mental cultivation among the pupils becomes more exceptional;
and also that their attainments are less permanent; while on
reaching the level of elementary schools under inspection, or the
lower depth of those, for pupils of the samo rank, that are not
luuk'r inspection, we fm4 mental cultivation only in rare mu]
solitary instances, and attainments so fleeting tliat they can
scarcely be said to have any duration at all.

If this view be correct, and we entertain it as the result of
careful and repeated inquiry, a doubt naturally occurs as to
whether the schools devoted to the education of the lower middle,
and labouring classes, serve, nationally speaking, any useful pur-
pose. Persons now living have witnessed a great change in their
character and management; but has this produced any concur-
rent change in their efficiency ? The late Dr Nott, tutor to the
Princess Charlotte, used to relate that the " dame" of his native
village taught her pupils to call every word of more than three
syllables "Nebuchadnezzarwhile the certificated masters of the
present day profess to pay especial attention to punctuation,
meaning, and proper emphasis. But go into any elementary
school, and subject the reading of the pupils to a real test, and
there will not be found, we apprehend, one school in a hundred
in which the advance on the Nebuchadnezzar system will be
sufficiently important to deserve record, or to influence in the
slightest degree the power of the pupils to read, or their pleasure
in reading. Certain prepared passages may be pronounced aloud
from an open book, in such a manner as to convey their sense;
but unprepared passages, even of simple words, if they afford a
single opportunity to blunder, will seldom indeed see the oppor-
tunity lost. As a rule, the eye and mind of the reader do not
precede his voice ; than which there can be no clearer proof that
the meaning of the matter read is not taken into account. Ludi-
crous mistakes between words of somewhat similar sound but
diverse sense, such as saying " mutton" for " motion," are of con-
tinual occurrence. Here the fault is in the eye, or rather in the
optic ganglia of the sensorium, and the intelligence does not cor-
rect it, because not at all employed or concerned in the operation.
We recently heard an error of an analogous kind, on the occasion
of the admission of some youths into a benefit society. They
were required to repeat after the secretary a prescribed formula,
containing a promise, if they saw any other member committing
a fault, " gently to apprize him of it, as becometh a brother of
this order." They all said, " gently to praise him for it." They
had all recently been pupils at what is called a " good" elementary
school, and they were all alike incapable of ascending to the
height of an intentional paraphrase. It is difficult, however, or
hardly possible, to ascertain the presence or the lack of general
improvement in the art of reading, because the materials for com-
parison do not exist. Of course, more children are taught to
read now than formerly ; many more relatively to the population
as well as absolutely; but the question is, whether they are so
taught as to derive any advantage, any really useful and available
knowledge, from the teaching ? " It must he strange," writes
Mr. Dickens, "to shuffle through the streets, unfamiliar with the
shapes, and in utter darkness as to the meaning, of those mys-
terious symbols, so abundant over the shops, and at the corners
of the streets, and on the doors, and in the windows ! To see
people read, and to see people write, and to see the postmen
deliver letters, and not to have the least idea of all that language,
to he, to every scrap of it, stone blind and-dumb !" This is a
striking picture; but is the condition of the man to whom every
long word is Nebuchadnezzar, and in whose mouth the sound /
Nebuchadnezzar represents no idea, really much in advance of
what the novelist describes ? ' Is the sensational knowledge of an
artificial connexion between certain symbols and certain sounds,?
a knowledge not only unconnected with the intelligence, hut
almost antagonistic to it, a sufficient end to be gained by the
annual expenditure of nearly a million sterling, by the constant
labour of Privy Councillors, inspectors, teachers, children ? The
so-called "reading" is often the only attainment afforded by the
elementary school that is discoverable a few months after the
removal of the pupils ; and any one who will be at the trouble of
inquiring, may soon be satisfied as to its precise value.

Litera scripta manet. In the art of writing, the works of the
past and of the present are alike open to our observation; and it j
is not difficult to ascertain how much improvement (as regards
the results of teaching, not the number of people taught) has
been produced by educational grants and Minutes in Council. We
have before us two letters, written, with an interval of nearly a
century between them, by persons in humble life, whose families
were tenants upon the same estate, in an agricultural county.
There is a great difference in the subjects of which they treat;
the first having reference to a dispute about possession of a
garden, and the second being from a young soldier, describing
his experiences of recent Indian warfare. But the extracts we
give will suffice to show that the teaching of former times is not
greatly surpassed by that of the present day, in so far at least as
the power of the pupils to write intelligibly is concerned.
The correspondent in the eighteenth century writes :?
" I shoud be a blicht to your Onear Avud writ to the "Weddear
Con sorning the Gardon for she ont Let me Gardeney. * * * * * I
Shoud Be Glad if I Ded now wen that man oud be to a bout the
Hepears most Be Don soun for Spreng oul Draw a Long * * * *
Pies to Let me now wot Day Hegh oul be thear Be Caus I Lev at a
destenc I mit not be thear els with out I now the de of his coming
* * * * Pies to zend me ancear Dey lieckley and if you zend a leter
to the Wedear I can com to hor."

The Indian soldier writes:?
" wee march fus marches til wee joind head Quarters of our
Armey on the 18 small body of the Enemey advanced on our head
Quarters the com in con tack with each uther the fout about 3 hours
wee was not soon anaf for the fit wee was on day to Leat. We coud
hear the begg Guns the fout verre hard for the tim it Leas * # * *
wee was fores to fit her an thear all nit we was faust to keep sheften
our pesshenfor our Enemey keep letten oup blu Lits all the night that
the coud see as clar as Day for 3 mils rown soon as the see us the fir
of all their beeg Guns at us than wee was fus to shef our pesshen agen
our Deer Commerats was Lien ded all rown us * * * * our Enemy
mead thar retreat wen the seed the British infintary and cavalry com-
min ful charg fess to fess the mead thar retreat the did not lik to see
the Bennett glezsen in their fess * # * * our tilleary wos fus to fier
blaink their ball Aminshen was Don for to mak the Enemey think the
plenty * * * * I ward my sheart 2 months with thout vvashin when
i took him of for to wash him her falld in pesses than i went with
thout shert," &c., &c., &c.

The young soldier's letter is of considerable length; and, in
many passages, displays considerable descriptive power. Our
extracts from it show errors of precisely the same character as
those in the letter written nearly a hundred years before. In
both cases they are the errors of men not much accustomed to
write, and not in the habit of reading; but who endeavoured to
find means of expressing their ideas upon paper. We may safely
conclude that writing was a laborious task to them both, only
undertaken under the pressure of a strong motive; and also
that reading was certainly not among their pleasures. Had it
been so, they would have been as familiar with the sight as they
were with the sound of the words they wished to use; and could
not have fallen into ludicrous mistakes through trusting to their
ears for guidance. The effect of such guidance is conspicuously
manifest, in the first letter, in " Dey Beckleyand, in the
second, in "Commerats" and "Bennet." In a descriptive pas-
sage, not cited above, the writer states that his regiment did great
" exqushn an attempt to set down what was colloquially familiar
to him. In both letters, dim memories of words once seen in
print, appear to obscure the simple phoneticism that is the mani-
fest ruling principle; and of this the correct spelling of " head
Quarters " (words often before the eyes of the soldier) furnishes
a good example. On the whole we think it is fair to conclude
that the comparatively modern school, equally with the compara-
tively ancient one, had failed to confer the power of reading,?of
reading unconsciously, that is, the mind being occupied about
the ideas or information conveyed by the composition, and not
upon tlie mere deciphering of the words themselves. If children
are taught to read, in the proper acceptation of the term, they
?will inevitably like reading, will become engrossed by it, and will
seize eagerly upon all books within their reach. If they are only
taught to decipher, they will find the labour irksome; and, when
freed from restraint, will seldom or never practise it. In the
former case they become so well acquainted with the appearance
of words that it would not be possible for them to commit very
grave errors in spelling; while, in the latter, the unaided ear may
lead them astray through all possible permutations of the alphabet.
We have selected these two acquirements, reading and writing,
as the subjects of the present article, not only because they are
common to all schemes of education, nor entirely because the
plan upon which they are taught will often, we believe, determine
the character of mind of the learner, but in some measure because
the actions performed are sufficiently simple to be easily analysed
and tested, and referred to the organs concerned in producing
them. Reading and writing may be so taught as to stimulate
the intellectual faculties, and to keep the sensorium in its duly
subordinate position. They often are taught (not only in the
humble dame school, where writing is the Ultima Thule of the
educational chart, but) even by those whose province it is to
instruct the budding minds of hereditary legislators, in a manner
that stimulates, or even morbidly excites, the sensorium alone,
while it leaves the intellect torpid and unexercised. Ce n'est que
le premier pas qui coute; and a habit of sensational learning,
acquired in the nursery, may be strong enough to baffle the best
efforts of a teacher: the apparent progress of the pupil being, in
reality, only a constantly increasing divergence from the path
along which he ought to travel.

The specimens of correspondence that we have already laid
before our readers are taken from the letters of persons in the
rank of peasants. To show that the errors they committed are
not peculiar to any class, either of schools or learners, we have
yet another example of the epistolary art. The original was
written by a young gentleman in the seventeenth year of his age,
one nearly related to the possessor of an earldom, not labouring
under any discoverable natural deficiency, and who had enjoyed
all the advantages commonly attendant upon his social station.
The occasion was the arrival of the writer at a fresh school, the
master of which requires, from each pupil, upon joining, a letter
that may serve as a test of his capacity, and as a starting point
from which to estimate his progress. We need only observe
further that the explanatory foot notes are not conjectural;
but that they rest, in every instance, upon the authority of the
author.

Schol,
Januaryn 24th, 185-
Dear Sire,?The last week I spent the hollidays starern Eukerlera
and history the first to or three reansb, And the other part of the
hollidays 1 spent in shouting0 and driving.

At d I youst too learn history gorifea0 a leate of latanf and
dronges and comperehinh and ear if me reafmetic* somtines tables in the
morning before becface in Sunday we use to go to church ones in the
day then we yuesd to have diner at liarepast one then from 3 to 4 we
used to easement and read ore seat dawn tillk oding1 nothin at ole if we
liked then we used to have teed at five then after we used to take
wakem a noure and harf then when we came we used to have svavn in
one of the roomes,
I reamin dear Siere
Your abeadint puple
The last few weeks, it may be observed, have placed before the
public evidence from which we may infer that bad spelling is
the rule, rather than the exception, among the rising generation
in the upper section of the middle classes. We have ourselves
met with many flagrant examples of it, but tried to encourage
the hope that such cases were in reality unusual, and that their
coincidence under our observation was accidental. The Civil
Service Commissioners, however, have been told that a fault so
trivial must interpose no obstacle to success at the pass exami-
nation for certain much-coveted appointments in the Government
service; and my Lord Malmesbury is reported to have affirmed
that bad spelling, although ungraceful and unbecoming, is not a
proof of ignorance. It is, therefore, possible that the pigeon-
holes of the Foreign Office, if they could be ransacked by pro-
fane inquirers, might furnish curiosities before which our humble
illustrations of the hetero-graphic art would lose their piquancy
and interest?specimens of hardy and exuberant cacography, now,
alas ! for ever hidden from the light of day?
" Full many a gem of purest ray serene

The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear.
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air."
In spite, however, of the high authority of my Lord Malmesbury,
we see no reason to doubt that incorrect spelling is clearly a proof
a Studying Euclid. b Reigns. 0 Shooting.
d This blank was filled, in the original, by the name of a distinguished educa- l
tional establishment: one that we should fear to mention, save with bated breath. Lti ' ?: > i?
0 Geography. f A little Latin. s Drawing. h Composition.
1 Arithmetic. The letters in Italics show the primary conception, and were
erased by the author.

j Assemble. k 7, understood. 1 Or doing.
m A walk. n Service?i. e. Divine Service.
of ignorance?ignorance of books, that is, in the manner we have
already pointed out. There may possibly be exceptions. There
may possibly?we will not say certainly or probably?be persons
so organized that the forms of familiar words make no impression
upon their consciousness; but all ordinary individuals, who are
accustomed to read, learn to know words by sight, and would
see an error in spelling, just as they would see errors in a picture
inaccurately copied from an original that was well known to
them. If boys or men are accustomed to read, they will, we
repeat, be able to spell; and, vice versa, if they cannot spell, it
will be a fair inference that they are not accustomed to read.
Moreover, there is a love of knowledge, inherent in all minds,
that will induce the vast majority of people to read, to the very
extent of their opportunities, upon subjects congenial to their
respective tastes?unless the task of mere deciphering be so irk-
some and laborious as to outweigh the pleasure obtainable from
the passages deciphered, or unless the inherent love of knowledge
has been quenched at its source. We apprehend that both these
contingencies are constantly occurring results of existing methods
of teaching?methods opposed to the physiological laws which
govern the action of the mind and nervous centres, and not less
absurd, in relation to the ends proposed for attainment, than the
attempts that have been made, from time to time, to act in
defiance of the physical laws that control the universe. Even
these physical laws, long as they have formed part of the stock
of human knowledge, are often forgotten, or disregarded, until
they vindicate their supremacy; and speculators will doubtless
again be found, as they have been found aforetime, ready to
expend their thoughts and capital upon cumbrous machines for
aerial navigation, or to support impostors who profess to walk
upon water by the aid of buoyant shoes. It cannot, there-
fore, be made matter of wonder, either that would-be educators
are frequently ignorant of the principles upon which repose
their chances of success, or that they often fail ignominiouslv in
the task that with so much presumption they attempt. We
think, however, that for the future such failures should be exhi-
bited in a constantly decreasing ratio. We think it is the
bounden duty of the medical profession to bring the principles
which should regulate mental training prominently before the
notice of the public, and to strive for their embodiment in pre-
cepts that may be rendered familiar to the humblest instructor.
As a single effort in this direction, we purpose to inquire
what physiological functions are involved in the reception of
elementary teaching ; how far the methods commonly prevalent
are in harmony with those functions ; and, where the harmony
is wanting, by what means it can be ensured.

It may be stated, in limine, tliat the act of reading is of a
somewhat complex character. It is performed by means of visual
sensations, excited by certain symbols or words, which sensations
may be the subjects either of volitional or of automatic atten-
tion, and may be associated either sensationally with the sounds,
or intellectually with the ideas, that commonly belong to them.
The first impression, however, is not necessarily visual, but may,
as in the blind, be communicated through the organ of touch;
-and the association of the symbols with perceived or remembered
sound, although general, is not essential, being absent in cases
of deaf mutism, and in the many instances of persons who have
acquired by the eye a book knowledge of some foreign language.
It is commonly supposed that the visual organ must analyze
each word into its component parts 01* letters, and that adult
readers are constantly deciphering the page in this way, although
habit may render them unconscious of the operation, and able to
perform it with great rapidity. With this view we can by no
means coincide, believing that all words, not of extraordinary
length, are perceived as distinct objects, without anv necessity
for analysis, just as a friend is recognised at a distance, not by
any observed combination of several peculiarities, but by the
?tout ensemble with which we are acquainted. Indeed, to those
who read daily, common words are more familiar objects than
detached letters ; and it is a well-known fact that persons, who
are doubtful about a question of spelling, will often write down
both the alternatives that suggest themselves, so as to see,
by comparison, what arrangement will produce the accustomed
appearance of the desiderated word. Here, instead of the letters
leading to the word, the word leads to the letters ; and it would
not be difficult to adduce many other illustrations of the same
general principle.

We may regard every word, then, as being an object of visual
sensation, associated either with a sound or with an idea, or with
both. There is, probably, nothing to prevent the action of the
cerebrum from taking place simultaneously with that of the sen-
sorium, in immediate response to the impression; but it is impos-
sible not to perceive that, in many kinds of reading, the cerebrum
.remains entirely quiescent, and the visual sensation is associated
with a sound only. Physiologically speaking, the impression
.does not pass on to the cerebrum, but is reflected through the
sensorium, and is exhausted in the production of articulate lan-
guage. Such was the case in the school described by Dr Nott,
-where, when the children saiv a long word, they said Nebuchad-
nezzar ; and such is the case, probably, in many much more
pretentious establishments. We were once shown a copy of a
sermon, printed, towards the end of the last century, in a country
town in the west of England, and containing a very curious
error. The frequently-recurring word Almighty had been abbre-
viated in the MS. thus?Alty; the abbreviation was mistaken for
Atty, and the word was set up and printed, page after page, Attorney.
It is clear that the compositor had not employed his mind about
his work, and that his actions were consensual only.

The physiological causes which determine the reflection of the
visual impression through the sensorium may be sought either in
that organ itself, or in the cerebrum, and may be stated some-
what as follows :?

The sensorium may be unusually active, from:
a. Natural vigour and acuteness.
j3. Artificial excitation.
The cerebrum may be torpid, from:
a. Natural hebetude.
/3. Neglect, or want of stimulation.
y. Temporary exhaustion, by exercise, of the power of
volitional attention.
8. Preoccupation by a train of thought.

With reference to these several conditions it may be observed
that, while all impressions received by any of the senses appear
to act as natural stimulants to the sensorium, and to call it into
spontaneous or instinctive activity, they have not all the same
tendency to pass on to the cerebrum. The proper excitants of
the latter are probably the perceptions which, although of course
communicated through the senses, have their origin in the dis-
tinctly intellectual operations of another individual; so that the
mere visible symbols on a page, or the mechanical teaching of a
master whose mind is not in his work, are sights or sounds
addressed to the sensational instrument, and hardly at all to the
intelligence. The frequent repetition of such sights and sounds,
in obedience to the ordinary law of nutrition, must increase the
energy of the organ they excite; and must depress, or relatively
diminish, that of the organ they leave quiescent: from whence it
follows that the brain of a child may soon grow into a settled
habit of sensational action. The cerebrum, too, like every other
apparatus that is subservient to the will, becomes fatigued, espe-
cially in its immature condition, much more speedily than the
centres of automatic action ; and hence it may frequently happen
that the first portion of a lesson is understood; while the rest,
failing to excite the wearied brain, is remembered through the
sensorium as a matter of sights and sounds :?that is to say, of
mere symbols, as distinguished from the ideas that the symbols
were intended to convey. Pre-occupation by a train of thought,,
or what is called " absence of mind," is a condition not at all un-
common in connexion with the emotions of childhood ; and it
may exist, in a degree sufficient to impair the receptivity of the
intellect, without at all diminishing the keenness of the senses.
Such abstraction, as a result of volitional mental effort, is only
witnessed in adult age ; hut a child may be intently thinking
about the expected pleasure, or the dreaded discovery, of the
morrow, without in any way losing his power to " learn" a lesson,
and to repeat its sounds correctly.

From such considerations it would appear not difficult to frame
the principles that should regulate all endeavours to instruct the
young. The use of the sensorium is indispensable; but its abuse
lias to be guarded against: while the cerebrum requires to be
trained to the gradual exercise of its powers. In order to fulfil
these indications it is manifest that mere symbols should not be
multiplied unnecessarily ; and that time and attention should not
be given to the attainment of proficiency in repeating sounds, or
copying signs, to which no meaning can be attached. As soon
as a written symbol is pointed out, and associated with a sound,
the greatest care should be taken to connect the combined sensa-
tional impression with an idea, and to make the idea the leading
feature in the combination : so that the sensorium may be used
throughout as a feeder of the intelligence, but never encouraged
to act as an independent organ. Lastly, if only one word had
been learned, the first sign of weariness should conclude the
lesson. The only healthful stimulus to application, in the case of
a young child, is the pleasure that attends on the exercise of a
new power; and this pleasure cannot strive against weariness, by
whatever cause it may be induced.

Let us now take a common primer, and see how these prin-
ciples are reduced to practice. A child is first taught to know,
by sight and sound, the twenty-six letters of the alphabet, in
their forms as capitals ; these forms being generally obscured and
complicated by pictorial illustrations. A highly coloured ox
occupies the middle of O ; and a flock of zebras form a pleasing
background to Z. The next step is to connect the same sounds
with the visible forms of small letters ; and, when this task is
accomplished to the satisfaction of the teacher, the pupil may
expect to be advanced to such combinations as the following :

ab. ba. ad. da.
eb. be. ed. de.
ib. bi. id. di.
ob. bo. od. do.
ub. bu. ud. du.

Before reaching za, ze, zi, zo, zu, it is obvious that many pages
have to be wearily conned, that much time and patience must be
expended, that frequent rewards or punishments will be required
as antidotes to lethargy. In process of time, the learner is con-
sidered to he perfect in this portion of his training, is allowed to
enter another circle, and finds there,?let us say :

And so on, through many similar arrangements, before he is
brought face to face with real words of one syllable.
The whole course of the proceedings here faintly shadowed
forth is, it need hardly be said, in direct opposition to the physio-
logical principles we have endeavoured to lay down. From great
A to zuz (if that combination be found in primers), the per-
formance must be purely sensational (there being no ideas in any
way related to the sights and sounds concerned) ; and a source
of utter weariness to the pupil, as it is, unquestionably, to the
teacher. In the first place the names of the letters have no rela-
tion to the sounds which these letters represent when joined;
and, therefore, the power to repeat the alphabet, and to recognise
the symbols composing it, are not in any degree steps towards
the acquirement of the power of reading. The names of A and D
being given, it would be impossible to excogitate from them the
pronunciation of "ad;" so that the great and small alphabets
consist simply of twenty-six aural and fifty-two visual sensations,
with which no intellectual ideas can, during childhood, be asso-
ciated, and in the " learning" of which no intellectual activity can
ever be displayed. Pretty pictures make the matter ten times
worse; first, by complicating the visible symbol; secondly, by
.giving rise to ideas that have 110 proper connexion with the
matter in hand. In the mind of a child who is still learning the
alphabet, there can be no right conception of the value of the
initial letter of a word; and, consequently, no conception of the
relation which the sign A bears, either to the sound of " archer,"
or to the picture of a gentleman in green, having a bow in his
hand. Either the child accepts the connexion as a matter of
fact, and remembers, without reflection, the three sensations pre-
sented to him; or else he forms some erroneous idea of the
reason why they should be associated together. Furthermore, it
is unquestionably true, as a general principle, that a butcher will
often be the possessor of a " great dog; but there is no sufficient
reason why this fact in social science should be impressed upon
the mind of young England in immediate sequence to the name
and outline of the letter B. The reason of the case, indeed, is
entirely opposed to such a procedure; because the proper aim of
the teacher would be to avoid placing before the child any sight
ban.
ben.
bin.
bon.
bun.
nab.
neb.
nib.
nob.
nub.

or sound which cannot be immediately connected with an intelli-
gible idea: that is to say, any which is devoid of meaning, or any
of which the meaning is above the grasp of infantile 'comprehen-
sion. The primer, so far as we have followed it, departs from this
aim systematically; and presents to the learner page after page
of vocal and visual combinations which exercise the sensorium
alone, and exercise it the more actively, the more they are coloured,
illustrated, and multiplied. During the whole process of hearing,
seeing, imitating, and recognising them, the cerebrum cannot, in
the nature of things, ever be brought into play; and'hence, so far
as we have gone, we find provision made to produce sensational
activity, and to insure intellectual torpor.

When the reading lesson, properly so called, does at last begin,
and the pupil is allowed to attempt real words of one syllable
instead of sham ones, there are two points especially worthy of
remark. In the first place much of what has been already learned.
must be forgotten or neglected; and, in the second, the methods
in common use yield a prodigious number of merely aural im-
pressions, without any corresponding ideas to be associated with
them. For example, when the young reader meets with the verb
do, he must blot out of his recollection that he has been taught,
on a former page, to pronounce do as it is pronounced in the
gamut; and a similar difficulty will meet him at almost every
turn. In the ba, be, bi, bo, bu, combinations it is usual to give each
vowel its natural or nominal sound ; while, in actual words, the ?
five vowels have, between them, as many as twenty-nine sounds,
all of frequent occurrence. The supplementary or mute letters,
too, of many words, will be sources of confusion to the learner;
the y, for instance, in bay, or dav, not changing the sound already
given to ba and da: while an early lesson will be sure to contain
something about a sheep, and to spell its bleat by the letters Ba.
From all this it follows that a knowledge of the names of the
letters, and a knowledge of ba, be, &c., are not only useless, but
pos ively hurtful and misleading, and continual sources of errors
tha, require to be rectified by precept.

The multiplication of sensational impressions, without ideas to
counterbalance them, depends chiefly upon the custom of making
children spell words before they utter them. In saying d, o, g,
dog, the pupil has to reproduce four sensations for one intellectual
idea; while the sounds d, o, g, do not in any way lead to, or
produce, the sound dog; so that the right order of succession
amono- the four has to be remembered by the aid of the sensorium.
We have now, we think, succeeded in showing that the method
of teaching a child to read, as usually practised, might not un-
fairly be described as a series of contrivances for promoting sen-
sational, at the expense of intellectual, activity; or, in other
words, for leading tlie pupil to neglect everything that he ought
to do, and to do everything that he ought to avoid. As far as
the art itself is concerned, there can he little question that the
results obtained are as bad as bad can be. Most persons could
count upon their fingers all the good readers among their ac-
quaintance; and the performance of children is seldom other
than a torture, to any one capable of understanding the meaning
of written composition. It is trite to remark that ministers of
religion fail, not unfrequently, in giving expression to the dignity
and pathos of Holy Scripture; and it may be feared that they
fail occasionally, even in giving expression to the evident mean-
ing. It has been justly observed that an explanation of these
familiar facts must be to be found, either in the surpassing diffi-
culty of the art of reading, or in the exceeding faultiness of the
principles on which it is taught; and it is hardly necessary for
us to point out that there is a vast preponderance of evidence in
favour of the latter solution of the difficulty. Our purpose is
rather to maintain that the mischief done by bad methods of
teaching is not limited to the production of bad readers; but
extends, more or less, to every mental operation of the persons
influenced. We think that such methods give a distinct impulse
to sensational action at a period of life when the encephalon is
being moulded to the manner of activity which will become
habitual to it; and that the powers of the cerebrum will be pas-
sively diminished, in proportion as those of the sensorium are
actively increased. In the present state of knowledge, we have
no measure of the extent to which the natural balance between
the various functions of the encephalon may be disturbed by
educational influences; but we have reason to suppose that this
extent is very considerable. Such influences are, in fact, or at
least soon become, habits of mind in the children subjected to
them; and it is impossible to doubt that a habit of attending to
mere sights and sounds, and a habit of neglecting meaning, would
have the strongest tendency to weaken the volition and the
judgment, and to place them under the control of the centres of
automatic action.

Our readers are entitled to ask, in what way these evils can be
obviated; and, as far as method is concerned, the reply is easy.
Mr. Baker, of Doncaster, has written, and Mr. Herbert, of
Nottingham, has lectured, on the facility with which children
learn to read, when the alphabet, and the unmeaning combina-
tions of two letters, are altogether omitted from the scheme of
instruction. The last named gentleman advises that the pupil
should be shown printed words, in ordinary type, should be made
to look attentively at each word as a whole, and to repeat it cor-
rectly after the teacher. He advises, also, that the daily lesson
should not exceed ten minutes in duration; and he has found
that, in this way, a child may he taught to read well, that is to
say, with comprehension, good pronunciation, and proper em-
phasis, in a period varying from live to sixty hours; and, there-
fore, at the rate of ten minutes per diem, spread over the same
number of weeks. The time most commonly required is from
eight to ten weeks ; and the sixty were occupied in a solitary
instance. Mr. Herbert speaks of some of his pupils who, at the
age of ten or twelve years, reading and writing well, and having
acquired considerable proficiency in various branches of know-
ledge, had never learned the alphabet, and were unable to repeat
it; and, as a practical question, he adduces evidence that is quite
conclusive with regard to the excellence of the method that he
recommends. The point of view, however, from which we are
desirous to regard all methods of elementary teaching, has refer-
ence to their probable effect upon the mind and the nervous
centres. It is evident, we apprehend, that the plan described
by Mr. Herbert?the plan of making a word, instead of a letter,
the unit of the system of reading, may be employed in such a
manner as to remove all tendency to undue sensorial exaltation.
In the first place, the words selected for the lesson should be
those which represent ideas to the mind of the individual pupil,
and should therefore be varied, in order to suit local or personal
circumstances. There is, probably, no child, young enough to
be learning to read, who attaches any distinct idea to " archer "
or "zebra;" but any child, from five years old and upwards, will
have distinct ideas of the meaning of the names of many domestic
animals, many articles of dress, furniture, and household use,
many trees, plants, and flowers, and also of the meaning of many
verbs, adjectives, pronouns, and conjunctions. This knowledge,
we conceive, should be utilized in the early reading lesions ; and
every word pointed out as an object of visual attention should
already, by virtue of its sound, be an exponent of positive
knowledge. When this is the case, the sensorial impression
will pass on, and excite cerebral activity; or, if it should fail
to do so spontaneously, the teacher may produce the desired
effect by the aid of suggestion. In a farm-house, for instance, if
the sentence " I see a cow," were taken for the first lesson, each
word would strike home to the mind, would call up familiar
ideas and would initiate a source of pleasure in the power to
recognise the symbols by which these ideas are suggested on a
printed page. The pupil would pass at once from the sound
" cow " to the thing itself?the mental conception of the living
and familiar animal; and the printed word would at once become
a representative of the animal, and not merely of the sound. But
if the sentence were, " I see a zebra," no such process could take
place ; and the recollection of the sound " zebra," in connexion
with the visual symbol, would be all that the child could pos-
sibly accomplish. In the latter case, there would be a mere sen-
sational action?a linking together 'of two sensations in the
memory; but, in the former, the sensations would not only be
linked "together, but would, moreover, be crowned or completed
by a distinct conception of the thing signified. It follows that
this completion of the act of consciousness will soon become
habitual to the learner; and that when, after a time, words repre-
senting unknown ideas are introduced into the lesson, these
ideas will be sought for by the mind, and an intelligent curiosity
will be excited with regard to them. The early word-lessons
having always appealed to actual knowledge, the pupil will feel
that there is something to be known in connexion with any word
that may be strange to him ; and hence the sensational impres-
sion will always pass on, and excite cerebral activity, either for
the contemplation of old ideas, or for the search after new ones.
On the contrary, when the first words taught are not understood,
it is perfectly natural for the growing brain to remember them
without any curiosity, and to fall into the mode of action which
it is thus permitted to commence.

As far as very early efforts at learning are concerned, we do
not place much confidence in any endeavours, on the part of the
teacher, to explain that which the child does not already under-
stand. Such explanations are prone to miss the precise point of
difficulty to the pupil, or they are diffuse, or tedious, or in some
way wearisome ; and, in either case, they fail to arrest the atten-
tion, or to rouse the intelligence. For a time varying with
differences in respect of natural capacity, we think that occasions
for explanation should be avoided, and that the pupil should
read only about what he does understand, until the habit of
understanding what he reads is established. Then, here and
there, but at first sparsely, words and sentences, conveying new
ideas, may be introduced. The names of unfamiliar objects will
serve this purpose; and the more thoroughly, the more resem-
blance there is between the objects and others with which the
child is acquainted; or, in other words, the smaller the effort of
attention and comprehension that is at first required to be made.
While the process is still going on, the child's circle of knowledge
may constantly be enlarged by means of oral teaching, and by
guiding his powers of observation; and that which is gained on
one day in this manner, may be made the subject of a reading
lesson on the next. The error to be avoided is making the
reading lesson itself the vehicle of novelty ; for whereas, in oral
teaching, only the double association between sound and meaning
has to be formed, in reading about new matter the association
should be triple in order to be of value. But the exigency of the
teacher always demands that two elements out of the three, viz.,
the appearance, and the sound of the words, should be remem-
bered with more or less of accuracy; and it often happens that
this demand monopolizes the available nervous force to provide
for sensorial activity, and leaves the most important element of the
three, the meaning, wholly unattended to. It is manifest, we
think, that the appreciation of a new idea must be less easy than
the recollection of an old one; and also that the more difficult
the third element in the association is made, the more likely it is
to be neglected.

We have already referred, incidentally, to the pleasure which
attends the exercise of a new faculty, and to the propriety of
making this pleasure a stimulus to exertion. No period of human
life displays a more exultant happiness than that in which the
infant first discovers his power to walk ; and it is impossible to
doubt that the early functional activity of the cerebrum is in itself
a source of no small gratification. But precisely as the infant
becomes wearied, seeks support after a few tottering steps, and
would fall if the support were withheld, so the first mental exer-
tion must be adapted to the limits of his strength, and will cease
to be pleasurable when those limits are exceeded. On this
account we are disposed to consider that Mr. Herbert's rule con-
cerning the duration of each lesson is most valuable and
important. In many instances, perhaps, the cerebrum would bear
a longer period of application ; but in all, whenever its freshness
"was impaired, sensational learning would take the place of intel-
lectual ; and it might often happen that a teacher would fail to
recognise the change. In order to avoid all risk, it is certainly
the best plan to fix upon a time that shall never be exceeded ;
and to make this time so short that the learners may practise, in
reading, the old-fashioned rule in dietetics, and rise from table
with an appetite for more.

Before leaving the subject of the connexion that should exist
between instruction and pleasure, we must refer, as briefly as
possible, to the practice of those who strive to combine instruction
with amusement, in order to point out that, in most cases, the
amusement is afforded by a variety and multiplication of sensory
impressions, surrounding the idea sought to be conveyed. The
picture alphabet may be taken as a type of this class of teaching;
and the objections which we have urged against the picture
alphabet, apply with increased force to further developments of
the system from which it sprung. The object of the teacher
should be to produce concentration of mind in the pupil; and
amusement, as the etymology of the word implies, tends only to
scatter and disturb the thoughts. The two tilings are, in fact,
diametrically opposed to each other; and, as the result of endea-
vours to combine them, the attention must he given to each by
turns. Where, however, the demand made by the lesson upon the
faculties of the pupil is neither too great nor too protracted, the
need for amusement does not arise ; and, under less favourable
circumstances, no amount of sensational distraction will restore
the tired brain so effectually as a period of complete repose.
We have not left ourselves space to refer to the writing lessons,
other than in the most cursory manner. We think they should
be governed by the same physiological principles which we have
endeavoured to enunciate, and that the pupils should commence
by trying to copy words, the meaning of which they understand.
We are acquainted with two children whose lessons have yet to
begin, but who can write on a slate, in a clear, legible hand, the
name and address of every member of the family to which they
belong. They have acquired this power simply by having old
envelopes given to them as playthings ; and either of them, the
eldest being under six years old, can tell at a glance to whom any
letter left at the house is addressed, and can also recognise the
handwriting of any correspondent from whom letters arrive
frequently. They have therefore learned to write a limited num-
ber of words, but each of those words, instead of being merely a
hieroglyphic to be copied, is equivalent to an idea; and the
children feel an intelligent pleasure in being able to write down
something that represents, to themselves and others, actual and
definite knowledge. Moreover, they cannot write these words
without cerebration; without recalling their knowledge; and, as
long as their copies are enlarged on the same principle, the same
result will follow, and purely sensational action will be avoided.
A child, however, may fill reams of paper with great a, or with
" pot-hooks and hangers," or even with sentences, such as
" Governments exercise authority," without his mind being
exercised, even in the smallest degree, upon his work.

There can, perhaps, be no greater absurdity than the common
practice of causing children to commence their writing lessons in
large text, and with capital letters: the cramped position of the
tiny'hand not allowing sufficient play for the distance which the
pen ought to traverse; so that the down-strokes are shaky and
feeble, the fingers are tired almost immediately, and the task is
rendered unnecessarily irksome. This, however, is a matter of
detail that affects only the quality of the performance as a work
of art; and that is, therefore, somewhat beyond the limits of our
present subject. We desire only to show in what way elementary
teaching may be made to develop, rather than to repress, the
higher faculties of the intelligence.

It is, perhaps, desirable that we should guard ourselves, in so
many words, against the supposition that the foregoing observa-
tions are intended to apply to children, however young, who have
once mastered the mechanical difficulties of reading, and are
able to peruse books with interest and pleasure. We have been
speaking solely with reference to the very commencement of the
task of instruction; and under an assured belief that the manner
in which such commencement is made, will often determine the
predominant character of the mental operations through the
whole of life. When a child has made sufficient progress to
read by himself, the manner in which he has been taught will be
conspicuous among the circumstances that determine the degree
of pleasure he feels in reading, and the nature of the encephalic
action that written symbols excite; and hence, we conceive, the
mode of teaching increases in importance, in proportion as other
stimulants to mental activity are absent. Among the educated
classes, such stimulants are supplied by various circumstances ;
and teaching, being only one influence among many, modifies the
intellectual character in a degree that, while still highly im-
portant, may be called comparatively slight. It is among the-
poor, or rather among the children of the unintelligent and un-
taught, that the first systematic instruction is the absolute com- -
mencement of mental education either for good or evil, and that .
the choice between sensational and intellectual activity in the pupil
rests, almost solely, with the teacher. We need not point out
the responsibility which such a power of choice imposes, not so
much, perhaps, upon the individual master of any particular
school, as upon those in high authority, whose humble instru-
ment he is, and under whose guidance his work in life is carried
out. We wish we could hope that our professional brethren
generally would regard this work from the point of view that
they are able and privileged to reach, and would do justice to the
wisdom of the system that combines nine subjects in a scheme of
elementary instruction, but makes no provision to secure the
intellectual receptivity of those who are fated to be taught. As
far as secular knowledge is concerned, such justice would induce
us to mourn over wasted energies, and to calculate useless cost; but
would permit us the consolation of believing that the losses sus-
tained would be felt only during Time. It is our national duty,
however, to teach our children a higher and a better learning;
and, in order that we may do so, first to cultivate their minds for
its reception. If this cultivation be neglected, while sectarian
bigots profanely wrangle; or if it be omitted, in order to facili-
tate a sensational acquaintance with creeds and formularies, the
resulting losses may indeed be felt during Time, but they will
only be fully realized in Eternity.
NO. XV.?NEW SERIES. C C
