ON General Paralysis
=====================

Aet> v.

The appearance of some recent memoirs, and the conclusion of a
long-continued and interesting discussion on this important sub
jeot before the Medico-Psychological Society in Paris, occupying
three entire sittings, seem to present a favourable opportunity
for bringing before our readers the present state of our knowledge
and our prospects as regards a disease which has only of late years
been recognised as a distinct nosological entity, and upon which
we are still far from absolute certainty in reference to any point
connected with its history, except its extreme gravity and its
almost certainly fatal result.

A preliminary idea of the nature of the affection of which we
speak may be obtained by a glance over the various names by
which it has been known. It has been called General Paralysis
of the Insane, Paralytic Insanity, Incomplete and Progressive
Paralysis, from its symptoms and its connexion with mental
disorder; from its usual pathological characteristics it has been
termed Slow or Chronic Meningitis, General Cortical Cerebritis,
Diffuse Chronic Peri-encephalic Meningitis, and Meningo-Cere-
britis. It is a disease which may be briefly said to be charac-
terised by disorder of the intellectual and volitional powers, not
always, or even generally, in strict proportion one to the other.
The mental affection is usually of the expansive character,
attended by exaggerated notions of the wealth, position, or per-
sonal qualifications of the subject, terminating in dementia. The
physical disorder consists in a progressive weakness and uncer-
tainty of action of the voluntary muscular system generally, in
the majority of cases beginning with the muscles of the tongue
and those connected with articulation, so that stammering is very
often the first symptom of the invasion of this affection. In a
patient who has evinced any tendency to mental derangement,
there can be few symptoms of more serious import than this?a
tendency to stammer, or a difficulty of pronunciation of certain
Words ; it may be apprehended with a great amount of certainty
that general paralysis is imminent, and that death, soon or late,
Will follow as the almost necessary result, let the physical health
have been up to that time ever so good.

It may be expected that very soon the tongue and the muscles
of the face will act irregularly and tremulously; and that this
feebleness and uncertainty of function will extend to the entire
locomotive system, sometimes attacking first the inferior and
sometimes the superior extremities. The term "general para-
lysis" is, however, in some measure deceptive, as not indicative
of the absolute phenomena of the disease in its progress. It is
not until the latest stages that the paralysis becomes truly
general, and no voluntary power is left, nor any action even of
the sphincters. But it is in so far "general" as that it is not
hemiplegia, nor paraplegia, nor local paralysis, differing from all
these essentially, inasmuch as all the muscles of the body are in-
discriminately liable to be attacked, and sooner or later are so
affected. ,

t It is rather singular that a disease so well marked in its
ON general paralysis.

phenomena, and, so serious in its results, should only have
attracted attention in so comparatively late a period of medical
history. It is also more remarkable that although it was an
English physician who first noticed it (John Haslam, in 1798),
yet its systematic and scientific investigation has been left almost
exclusively to our French brethren. Esquirol briefly commented
upon it in 1816; Bayle first brought out a complete history of
it as a meningitis in 1822; followed in 182G by the admirable
treatise on The Paralysis of the Insane, by Calmeil, a work
which must always take classical rank amongst scientific investi-
gations. Since this period many elaborate and excellent mono-
graphs have appeared in France, as well as countless shorter
papers, making the natural history of this affection almost as com-
plete as that of any well-known disease. This contrasts strongly
with our own contributions to its literature: so far as we are
aware, we have no separate work on the subject; and in syste-
matic treatises on insanity, for the most part this is only men-
tioned in a passing way. Many of our hospitals for the insane
simply refuse admission to patients affected with paralysis, as
being incurable !

We have spoken of this as a highly important subject; and
why ? It is not numerically very prominent in the causes
of death affecting our bills of mortality, although, perhaps,
much more so than has hitherto been suspected; and yet there
are reasons, and forcible ones, why it is deserving of much
more attention than has as yet been accorded to it by English
writers.

The physical causes of insanity are hitherto involved in great
uncertainty. Some pathologists go so far as to assert that in a
majority of cases of simple derangement of intellect, no morbid
changes of the nervous centres can be detected, and that in a
majority of the remainder such changes are too slight, too unim-
portant, and too undefined and unspeeific to be considered as
causes. Others aver that they have never examined the brain of
a patient who has died insane, without detecting some morbid
alteration of the brain or its membranes; and these authorities
are certainly amongst those who have had opportunities, not by
units or tens, but by hundreds of cases.* Again, others affirm
* Thus M. Ferrus, whose authority is unimpeachable, observes :?"I would say,
without any reserve, that every time that I have opened the cranium of an insane
person, I have never found the brain healthy, as compared with that of a man who
had died without signs of intellectual disorder. I have always found thickening or
adhesion of the membranes, hyperemia, softening or induration of the grey or the
white matter; just as I should say that I have never found in the normal condition
the lungs and heart of a person who has been for a long time asthmatic. ...
Science is not yet sufficiently advanced for us to say, as regards the brain, that
each alteration corresponds always to one and the same pathological phenomenon;
that the visible and palpable changes are certainly in many cases
deficient, hut would, doubtless, he revealed were our means of inves-
tigation hy the microscope and by chemical analysis more perfect.
And, in addition to all this variety of opinion, it has to he taken
into account that whatever may have heen the proximate cause of
the mental affection, certain additional physical changes must
have taken place in order to cause death; and there is the super-
added difficulty of deciding what has dethroned reason, and what
has destroyed life. In short, we are still ignorant of what may
cause mental aberration, and what is its essential material element;
nor have we as yet obtained any certain starting-point, any irre-
fragable data whereon to found a clearly inductive system of
research.

Such data, if we are not mistaken, may be ultimately afforded us
by the disease to which we purpose to devote a few pages. For,
although general paralysis* appears clearly proved to occur fre-
quently as an isolated disease, and apart from all mental derange-
ment, yet it seems also to be the normal termination of a certain
form of insanity, and to be otherwise closely allied to it, as will
appear hereafter. Now, in examining the nervous centres of
those dead from general paralysis we often, or at least occasionally,
observe on a superficial inspection the same absence of morbid
changes as in insanity in its least complicated forms and yet a
more minute and careful investigation almost invariably detects
morbid appearances, as uniform in their essential nature and
distribution, as defined and specific in their significance, and as
correspondent with the foregone physiological phenomena, as any
observed in pericarditis, peritonitis, or any of the recognised
inflammatory affections. They certainly require special methods
of research for their detection in many of the less marked cases;
but when found they are such as only occur in this and allied
affections, and as occur all but invariably in these. There being
then a tolerably uniform connexion between one phase of mental
disorder and a certain form of physical derangement, manifested
hy paralysis of a most marked and distinctive kind?one, in fact,
which cannot well be confounded with any other,?and this
paralysis being dependent upon, or at least almost inseparably
connected with, a clearly-defined pathological process and morbid .
change,?we may, by an analysis of such considerations, obtain a
glimpse of some possible point of departure for attaining a
knowledge of the material changes which accompany (if not
but the case is the same as regards all the complex apparatus of organs, unless we
reject the evidence of pathological anatomy. I do not think that the brain ought
to be considered as placed in exceptional circumstances under these views."
* We adopt this designation only as the most convenient, and not from any con-
viction of its scientific merits; were it practicable in the present state of our
knowledge, a pathological term would be preferable.

cause) psychical troubles. On these grounds we propose to
investigate, carefully, the nature and phenomena of general
paralysis; and in so doing we shall draw largely, where it
seems expedient so to do, from the discussion above mentioned,
in which MM. Parchappe, Pinel, Baillarger, Delasiauve, Ferrus,
Belhomme, and Falret took a prominent part.

One of the principally contested points concerning this affec-
tion is, whether it is essentially connected or not with mental
disorder, and what place it is entitled to occupy in a nosological
classification. For it appears to occur sometimes entirely inde-
pendent of mental affection; sometimes to supervene upon it;
and sometimes to precede it by months, or perhaps years. In
examining this question we shall follow the plan of M. Parcliappe,
and inquire into the causes, symptoms, seat, nature, and progress
of the malady; as by so doing we shall attain a fuller compre-
hension of the subject than by any less systematic treatment.
We consider it first as studied exclusively in connexion with
mental disorder.

1. The causes of general paralysis are immediate and predis-
posing. The former are such in general as produce a prolonged
over-excitement of the brain,?sensual excesses, especially the
abuse of intoxicating drinks, over-feeding, sexual indulgence,
and intellectual excesses accompanied by prolonged vigil. The
predisposing causes may be considered to be such as belong to
insanity and brain affections generally; the disease, moreover,
attacks men much more frequently than women, and both chiefly
between the ages of thirty and forty-five years.

2. The symptoms of general paralysis (of the insane) consist of
an apyretic or non-febrile lesion of the intelligence, the sensibility,
and voluntary motion. The intelligence is constantly affected
from the commencement of the malady; sometimes only observed
as a feebleness of memory or judgment; sometimes, and most
frequently, as mania with the delirium of grandeur and power;
sometimes as melancholia; and sometimes, again, as simple
dementia from the outset, a condition into which all the previous
forms have a tendency to merge as the disease makes progress.
Whatever may be the original specific type of the mental affection,
the faculties are observed to be enfeebled progressively, even
during the excitement of the opening delirium; and this goes on
until the last phase is characterised by the utter extinction of all
intelligence.

The alteration of motility consists in progressive weakness of
the voluntary movements, commencing by trembling of the
muscles of the tongue and mouth, by a more or less marked
difficulty in the pronunciation of words, and afterwards by hesita-
tion in walking and uncertainty in standing, with trembling and
weakness of tlie liands and arms. The loss of muscular power
extends often, and especially in the latter stages, to the sphincters
of the bladder and the anus. When arrived at the extreme, the
loss of power condemns the sufferer to absolute immobility and
mutism.

The loss of sensibility has not been studied with the same
amount of care and attention as has been bestowed on that of
motion and intelligence. Yet it is ascertained that the general
sensibility is notably diminished, and the special tact or touch
greatly deteriorated. The sight and hearing partake, in some
measure, in the general dulness of sense.

3. The seat of the malady is in the cortical layer of the cerebral
hemispheres. (We here give M. Parchappe's opinion and words.)
Pathological anatomy furnishes a positive proof of this, by the
constancy of the existence, in this layer, of alterations charac-
teristic of an inflammatory condition, amongst which is prominent
a softening of the cortical substance; and a negative proof by the
absence, in some cases, of every other alteration, and particularly
of all alteration in the meninges.

! The anatomical proof is confirmed by the physiological con-
siderations which place the seat of the affected functions, the
intelligence, the voluntary motion, and the sensibility in the
cortical layer of the cerebrum.

" I feel it necessary (says M. Parchappe) to meet beforehand some
objections that may be made to this opinion. It is necessary in the
first place to remark, that an error of diagnosis during life is not very
difficult. There are cases of mania with volubility and stammering,
which may be confounded with general paralysis, and which may be
mistaken by the most skilful observers. There are cases of simple
dementia, arrived at the extreme, with mutism and immobility ; and
cases of various maladies of the encephalon, with feebleness or abolition
of the intelligence, difficulty of articulation and progression and im-
possibility of standing, which may simulate the general paralysis of
the insane. In such cases, we must abstain from pi'onouncing, during
life, upon the existence of the disease in question, if we wish to avoid
deceiving ourselves, and compromising science by facts which are only
apparently contradictory. ... In all the cases of true 'paralytic insanity
(folic paralytique vraie) in which I have been able to pronounce an
accurate diagnosis during life (and these have amounted to 322), I
have constantly and without exception satisfied myself of the existence
of inflammatory softening to a greater or less extent of the cortical
matter of the cerebral hemispheres.... Had I always confined myself to
the ordinary methods of investigation, I should often have ? overlooked
the existence of this characteristic alteration. The meninges were
healthy, and detached themselves freely from the surface of the hemi-
spheres. The cerebral surface was not altered in colour; in consistence
it appeared even increased. The brain cut in slices appeared perfectly
sound. But the handle of the scalpel lightly inserted into the grey
matter would often indicate tlie existence of softening of the internal
layer, by permitting that easy detachment or decortication which in
the greater number of cases of softening is determined by simple
traction of the membranes.... I believe that the cases of integrity of the
cortical layer which have been brought forward are all explicable either
by error of diagnosis during life, or by insufficiency in the methods of
exploration after death."

The nature of these alterations, according to the same
authority, is inflammatory. They have for their special cha-
racters, a tendency to extend simultaneously to the two hemi-
spheres, especially to the anterior and middle lobes?to be asso-
ciated almost constantly with inflammation of the meninges, and
frequently with that of the grey matter of the cerebral ganglia, of
the cerebellum and the spinal cord, with a granular alteration of
the ventricular parietes and an induration of the white matter,?
and finally, very frequently with atrophy of the convolutions.
M. Belliomme considers that the central ganglia of the brain
are as much concerned in the pathological changes, as the cortical
layer of the hemispheres. In seventeen observations, certain
changes were constant,?viz., those involving the cortical layer,
the tuber annulare, the cerebral peduncles, the walls of the third
and fourth ventricles, and the medulla oblongata; all of which
were either softened, or in some way pathologically altered: the
membranes also were in all cases injected, thickened, and opaque.
The other changes were :?
Adhesion of membranes to cerebrum .... 14 times.
Softening of medullary matter 12 ?
Induration 5 ?
Softening of the corpus callosum and septum
lucidum   ? ... 14 ?
Softening of tubercula quadrigemina .... 13 ?
From which observations it would appear to result that the
degeneration of the brain in this disease is indeed general, and
by no means confined to one part.
4. The progress of the development of this affection has certain
characters which are special to it, as relating to the succession
and connexion of the symptoms, and the termination of the
disease.

Impairment of the memory and judgment is evident from the
first, and continues always increasing until their entire abolition.
The alteration of motility only appears very sensibly after
that of the intelligence. It may be absent at first, and continue
so for some time, so as to cause doubts in the mind of even the
most practised observers as to the nature of the malady for even
some weeks. Most frequently it is manifested at first and chiefly
in the articulation, and afterwards extends to the other voluntary
movements, especially those concerned in walking and standing :
though it does sometimes happen that these latter functions are
seriously affected, whilst the speech is but little altered. It is
not infrequent for the paralysis to appear simultaneously in the
speech and the locomotive apparatus. Occasionally it is more
pronounced on one side, so as to simulate hemiplegia.
A very important point to notice is the effect upon the mus-
cular strife of the iris, which share in the general feebleness, and
act unequally, so as to produce want of accordance between the
pupils.

The alteration of the sensibility, at first not very marked,
follows in its development the impairment of the intellectual
faculties ; and it is only absolutely extinguished during the state
of temporary congestion, or the state of permanent coma that
precedes death.

In general, except in the congestive state, general paralysis is
not accompanied by febrile symptoms. But this congestive state
is one of the most characteristic symptoms of this malady; very
frequently a cerebral congestion marks its outbreak, and thus the
subsequent mental and physical phenomena are attributed too
hastily to apoplexy. Habitually this congestion reappears many
times in the course of the disease; and each time it leaves the
patient with symptoms much aggravated.

These cerebral congestions are connected intimately with one
of the most remarkable phenomena observed in general paralysis,
i. e., the almost complete remission of all the symptoms which
occasionally is noticed. When these congestions do not reappear
or are a long time between, the brain seems to become ac-
customed to its partially impaired condition, and to resume its
functions almost normally?a state which continues until a new
attack of congestion supervenes.

The softening of the cortical layer, and the other alterations of
this substance and of the membranes, present during the first
period, which may be called acute, all the characters assigned to
the inflammatory condition, such as the rosy tint, hyperemia,
pointed injection, extravasations, morbid adhesions of the pia
mater to the brain, and sometimes effusion between this membrane
and the cerebral surface.

At a more advanced epoch, if death lias not ensued during the
congestive stage, we do not observe any hypenemia. The cor-
tical layer is then not only softened, but the convolutions are
atrophied, and present a pale dirtyisli grey or yellow colour ; the
membranes are thickened and opaque, and serum is effused,
occupying the space left by the receding convolutions.
In the general paralysis of the insane there is a profoundly
interesting connexion between the symptoms and the organic
alterations, which deserves much and careful attention.
The disorder of the intelligence, under the form of mania or
melancholia, coincides with the period during which the altera-
tions of the cortical layer are only superficial or of small extent.
The diminution of the intellectual faculties, as well as the para-
lysis of voluntary motion, seems connected most intimately with
the depth and extent of the softening. The imperfection of
articulation (Parchappe) is generally in relation with the extent
and intensity to which the anterior lobes are affected.

Although this is a general affection of the cortical substance,
it is not always and necessarily of the same intensity on both
sides; and when there appears any hemiplegic tendency, it
is generally observed that there is a greater amount of soften-
ing on the side of the brain opposite to that of the most affected
limb.
One of the most special and distinctive, as well as most serious,
characters of general paralysis is, that it terminates constantly by
death. As we proceed, we may find some exceptions to this in
the general paralysis occurring independent of mental disease;
but most observers agree that when once general paralysis has
appeared, even slightly, in an insane person, there may possibly be
a remission of symptoms even for a considerable period, but
there can be (or rather has hitherto been) no cure?death is im-
minent and certain, although at a very uncertain period. Per-
haps the average duration may be from two to three years. It is
very common before the close of life to observe gangrenous
sloughs on all parts of the body that are exposed to pressure;
the phenomena of life are merely vegetative for some time before
dissolution.

M. Parchappe gives a very unhesitating opinion as to the
nosological situation of this affection. He considers it essentially
a species of mental unsoundness, and denominates it "folic
jmralytique," for the following reasons:?

" It does not appear possible to ignore or break the strong bonds of
connexion between this disease and simple insanity.
" The determining and predisposing causes are analogous.
"The disease frequently commences by intellectual disturbance,
without any trace of paralysis; and for days or weeks, the patient who
is about to be affected by general paralysis presents no symptoms
but those of insanity. The paralytic phenomena are sometimes only
developed after the insanity has lasted a long time. The disease has
the same seat as insanity, viz., the cortical _ layer of the cerebral
hemispheres. And although simple insanity is not characterised by
any well-defined morbid appearances, yet such alterations as are
frequently met with, and wliich some observers* even state to be
always present, have the strongest analogy with those met with in
general paralysis.

" Simple insanity may be considered to consist in a dynamic altera-
tion of the nervous action merely. But this dynamic change becomes
plastic in the last stage of dementia, by atrophy of the convolutions.
And in my opinion, simple insanity, from being dynamic, becomes
plastic, at the period when it becomes complicated with general
paralysis.

" On the other hand, it does not appear easy to bring this disease
under the head of inflammatory affections of the encephalon. It is
apyretic: it is not marked at its outset by bilious vomitings, so
habitual in meningitis, so frequent in encephalitis. It does not present
the febrile and acute symptoms which characterise inflammations of
the meninges, or the cerebral substance. True encephalitis is habitually
partial, and occupies only one hemisphere; the paralysis is usually
therefore of an liemiplegic order, and is often preceded and accom-
panied by contractions of the muscles. The inflammation also usually
involves both grey and white matter.

" The progress, finally, of true encephalitis is essentially acute and
rapid?it lasts only one or a few weeks, whilst general paralysis lasts
months or years.

" Such are the reasons which have induced me to place general
paralysis as to its nosological classification under the head of' alienatio
mentis"
Such is a resume of the opinions of M. Parcliappe, one of tho
most constant and laborious investigators of this subject. There
are, however, many points of controversy which, we think, will be
brought forward most prominently and clearly by taking up the
thread of the discussion above mentioned.

M. Delasiauve recognises the existence of the morbid changes
above mentioned, but dissents from the conclusions. He views
them as consequences of the progress of the disease, not as its
cause. The disease gives rise to congestions, and the repeated
congestions 'produce the softenings above described. In this he
is equally opposed to the views of M. Parchappe, and to those of
liis mucli-regretted friend M. Bayle, who considered the essential
nature of the disease to be chronic meningitis. He places the
seat of the pathological process, whatever this may be, in the cere-
bral hemispheres, but does not consider it primarily inflammatory,
but rather " un de ces vices cle nutrition dont le mystere, jusqu'a
X>resent, n'a pas ete eclairci.' Acknowledging the congestions,
he denies altogether their primitive casual influence, and con-
siders them as produced by or subordinate to a secret pre-existing
alteration (qy. dynamic ?) in the brain, of which the specific in-
fluence is to trouble the circulation, and to produce stasis of the
blood in the encephalic vessels. He also considers that the
remarkable intermissions so common in this disease are more
easily explicable on this hypothesis than on that of a necessarily
progressive organic change. He objects to the designation of
"folie paralytiqne," as involving an hypothesis, and inclines more
strongly to that of " paralysie generate." On the whole, his
learned and thoughtful address was destructive rather than con-
structive.

M. Baillarger is of opinion that, under one general denomina-
tion, we have combined facts which are, at least apparently, very
dissimilar. There are two principal groups which may be men-
tioned.

1. It is very common to see patients who have gradually fallen
into dementia without presenting any of the symptoms of re-
action or delirium, or in whom these have been extremely slight
and subordinate. As this decay of the intelligence is established,
we notice at first slight, and then more marked signs of paralysis;
and shortly we have developed a paralytic dementia so marked,
that none can mistake the phenomena.

2. By the side of this numerous group there is another which
is yet more so, especially amongst men.

The patient begins by presenting the signs of an excitement
more or less lively; he moves about perpetually, and cannot re-
main still for a moment. At the same time, he forms large pro-
jects, buys all manner of objects, gets angry when opposed, and
cannot sleep. To this state succeeds a complete maniacal de-
lirium, with predominance of ambitious ideas, and a special
muscular agitation quite distinct from that of ordinary mania.
At the same time, if we are in the habit of attentively observing
such patients, we shall detect a little hesitation in the pronuncia-
tion of certain ivords.

Such are the two principal groups which are at present desig-
nated under one name, that of insane paralytics.

These symptoms are assuredly very much opposed. In the one
case we see debility, inertia, and the slow extinction of the cere-
bral functions ; in the other, force, violence, and an increase of
physical and intellectual activity.

But, to reconcile these, it is said that one is the acute, the other
the chronic state of the disease; that simple primitive dementia
is rare, and, when it does occur, that the proper, legitimate, first,
or excited stage is wanting ; and thus the ambitious mania is but a
period or a form of the general paralysis.

M. Baillarger doubts this interpretation and theory. The
acute and chronic stages of a disease must present analogous
symptoms and anatomical lesions:?only in .the one case the
progress will be rapid and acute, with phenomena of reaction;
in the other it will be slow, and the reaction wanting. Thus
in acute and chronic pleurisy we find these conditions united.
But is it so with the ambitious mania and paralytic dementia ?
Is the one the chronic form of the other ? We have seen how
different are the symptoms?muscular and intellectual excitement
contrasted with dementia and incomplete paralysis.

In regard to the anatomical lesions, these are not less con-
trasted. In patients who have died during acute ambitious mania,
there is almost constantly congestion of the hemispheres, with
increase of weight; whilst in paralytic dementia there is always
diminution of volume and weight of the hemispheres, and serous
effusion, which every one now admits to be not a cause of com-
pression of the brain, but as merely poured out to fill up the void
left by the retreating atrophied convolutions. Thus the average
weight of the brains of patients who had died in the acute form
of ambitious mania was about one-eighth more than the average
of healthy brains; whilst those of patients who had suffered
from paralytic dementia were about one-sixth beloiv the average
weight. This is strictly analogous to the results of the observa-
tions of M. Parchappe on the brains of those who have died dur-
ing simple mania and dementia. In the former he always found
hyperemia, turgescence, and augmentation of weight of the brain;
and in the latter, atrophy, with diminution of weight. In the
present case, however, the contrast is still more marked: there
is a greater increase of weight in ambitious than in simple mania;
there is a greater diminution of weight in general paralysis than
in simple dementia.

From all this M. Baillarger concludes, that in ambitious mania
there ie as yet but a congestive and strongly hypersemic condition of
the brain; whilst in paralytic dementia there is atrophy, accompanied
by lesions of the cerebral substance of a very grave character, of
which the principal are a granular condition of the grey matter,
a special induration of the white matter of the convolutions (sic),
and a tendency to isolation of tlie two substances of the brain.
Reasoning by symptoms and anatomical lesions, we ought to
separate these two affections; and yet there is a reason why one
might appear to be a phase or stage of the other, that is, that in
a great majority of cases the paralytic dementia does succeed
fatally to the ambitious mania. Some writers give this as the
invariable termination. M. Esquirol states that in mania and
monomania, if any symptoms, however slight, of paralysis be
observed, we may predict with certainty that dementia will suc-
ceed, and that "death will speedily terminate the disease. M.
Baillarger admits that, without doubt, the ambitious maniacs who
fall into dementia with paralysis are much more numerous than
those of simple mania so terminating ; but he believes that this
is not the absolutely necessary termination. He adds that
authors have related a few cases of recovery even after the
patients had presented the gravest symptoms of paralysis; and
that although these facts may be considered exceptional, they are
doubtless of the highest significance. We must be content with
the briefest abstract of a few of these cases.

" Observation 1st.?Mania for some months, with predominance of
ambitious delirium ; very marked symptoms of paralysis, with difficulty
of walking and standing. Stammering not present, but some hesitation
occasionally before a word. Formation of gangrenous sloughs, followed
by recovery, which lasted twenty-five years.?(Related by M. Ferrus.)
" Observation 2nd.?M aged 41, had some insane relations, and
became melancholic himself after some domestic trouble. He had
some epileptic attacks; the speech became imperfect, and one arm weak.
After his entry into the asylum, he was in continual agitation, and
had the delirium of grandeur and riches fully developed. Pupils
unequal, tongue furred, pulse accelerated. The sensibility became
very much diminished, and the paralysis extended to the sphincters.
He could not walk nor write his name: there appeared a great number
of sloughs on the body, some apparently without cause, some where
liis agitation had bruised the skin. After attaining almost the lowest
state of paralysis, he began to recover?as it is stated, not by means
of therapeutic agency?and both his reason and his bodily powers
returned. He was alive and well when this account was written, ten
years afterwards.?(From the American Journal of Medical Science.)
" Observation 3rd.?General paralysis, apparently of the worst kind;
symptoms of the last period. Acute cedema of one leg, with gangrene.
Rapid recovery, which is known to have lasted six years.?(By M.
Renaudin.)
" Observation 4?th.?Acute mania, with tendency to ambitious ideas;
feebleness of the memory ; uncertain walk. Eruption of boils, with
abundant suppuration. Embarrassment of speech; recovery. Duration
of the malady, one year. Duration of the recovery, five years. Sudden
death from cerebral haemorrhage.

" The 5th case recovered after an abscess of the liver; the 6th after
a purulent discharge from the ears; and the 8th after an amputation,
followed by profuse suppuration."

In all these cases the paralysis was so far advanced as to bo
unmistakeable?the authorities from whom they are quoted are
irrefragable. We must therefore admit the possibility of paralytic
ambitious mania being cured, and therefore that it does not of
necessity lapse into dementia. Death also sometimes takes place
without the supervention of dementia. It is interesting to
remark in how many of these cases of recovery the amendment
seemed to date from the establishment of a suppurating surface,
either spontaneous or artificial. Although the cases of true
recovery are certainly rare, yet those of apparent restoration to a
state of health, for a time more or less prolonged, are very
frequent; and these remissions are amongst the most surprising
of the phenomena of this affection.

M. Baillarger concludes, that ambitious mania presents dif-
ferent symptoms and different anatomical lesions to those of
general paralysis with dementia; that these two maladies have
an existence isolated the one from the other; that we cannot
regard them as acute and chronic forms of one and the same
affection; and that they ought to he considered apart, as are
mania and dementia in their simple forms ; being still more con-
trasted than these, both symptomatically and pathologically.
From the very important part assigned to cerebral congestion
in this disease, he proposes that it should be known as mania
congestive.

It appears also not impossible, nor altogether improbable, that
inasmuch as a considerable proportion of these cases of remission
are discharged from the hospitals, and otherwise lost sight of,
some of them, at least, may be instances of permanent recovery,
similar to those above related; especially in those cases of
amendment which have dated from critical discharges, or purulent
evacuations, natural or artificial. With this possibility, and with
the certainty that in some cases of ambitious mania with paralysis
recoveries have taken place, we may indulge still the hope that
further progress in our knowledge of the treatment may be at-
tained ; and at all events, we should never cease our efforts 011
the hypothesis that these cases are irremediable. It must, how-
ever, be acknowledged, that all authors are agreed on one point,
viz., that they have never met with a case of paralytic dementia
that has terminated otherwise than fatally.

Dr Archambault,however, states that when he became attached
to the " Charenton, he found there twelve or fifteen patients who
had been in the establishment more than ten years, and who were
stated, on their entry, to be affected with general paralysis ; yet
they only now presented very slight signs of the disorder. These
and similar considerations would seem to indicate the necessity
for a more guarded prognosis than is usually given in such cases.
We have hitherto considered general paralysis only as found
united with mental disorder, and as inseparable from it, at some
period of its history. There is, however, another aspect in which
it may be viewed, of which the following is an outline drawn in
great measure from an elaborate portrait by M. Pinel.

General paralysis is a special malady, characterised by lesion
of motility, more or less extended, with a progressive tendency
to become universal.

It exists either simply or complicated: in the first case, it is
independent of every other affection, and there is no disorder of
ON GENERAL PARALYSIS. 267
tlie intelligence; in the second, it is frequently united with some
form of mental derangement.
The malady designated " general paralysis of the insane," or
folic paralytique, is only a complication of general paralysis with
insanity.

General paralysis may continue sometimes, although rarely,
until death, with this complication with mental disorder. It is
accompanied often with a loss of memory, especially for recent
events, which is different from dementia.
Ordinarily, insanity supervenes, after a period more or less
extended, to complicate the motor lesions. Most frequently the
motor lesion first appears; sometimes the two classes of phe-
nomena are simultaneous in their outbreak ; less frequently, the
paralysis is secondary.

Simple or uncomplicated general paralysis is not seen in
asylums for the insane, for obvious reasons. Hence has arisen
the idea that it is always connected with mental affection.
It may precede, accompany, or follow mania, monomania,
melancholia, and especially dementia. The expansive (ambitious)
delirium, often considered as a constant sign of general paralysis,
is not infrequently altogether absent. With regard to the symp-
toms, progress, remissions and causes, nothing further need be
advanced than what has been above stated.

" Moderate local bleedings, at the outset only, and when there are
signs of congestion?issues at the base of the brain?repeated vesica-
tions over the scalp?general affusions, and revulsives from the intes-
tines and extremities, are the principal means to be used. The
prognosis is most unfavourable; yet there are well-authenticated
instances of recovery."

" I am convinced that general paralysis is not a disease essentially
appertaining to the insane?that it is not a form of insanity?that it
does not necessarily and fatally induce it?that it is an affection
entirely independent of this latter, so long as the alteration which
produces it does not extend to that portion of the molecular structure
of the brain which presides over intelligence ; and I believe that this
portion of the brain may escape lesion during the whole period of life."
?(Pinel.)

It appears that although most cases are complicated with
insanity at some period of the affection, and a considerable pro-
portion of the remainder present a partial decay of the faculties,
especially memory and judgment, still far short of dementia ; yet
certain of the authorities, amongst whom we find Rostan, Guis-
lain, and Pinel, are convinced that there are cases of general
paralysis of the most marked kind which from first to last show
no affection whatever of the mind. M. Rostan even states that
five out of six of the cases of general paralysis which he has
attended were not insane patients; and MM. Guislain and Pinel
both agree that they have seen patients die of general paralysis
who had never evinced the least disturbance or enfeebloment of
the intellect. These authorities all agree, for the most part, that
general paralysis most frequently induces ultimately some mental
disturbance; but are of opinion that it does so, not from any
original and essential connexion with insanity, but just as
epilepsy, apoplexy, chorea, and convulsions act, without ever
having been considered special forms of insanity.

The question of the essential nature of general paralysis has
perhaps been complicated, more than by any other consideration,
by that of the variety of manners in which it makes its first
appearance. We will briefly sketch these on the plan of M.
Falret, before attempting to give a concise statement of our own
views on the whole subject.

General paralysis presents itself originally in four forms, two
of which are marked by predominance of somatic disorder, and
two by that of the mental phenomena. It is important to note
this, because it has been perhaps too generally considered that
the expansive delirium was essential to its diagnosis in the first
instance. This is, in reality, its most frequent form, but by no
means the only one. There is a fortuitous reason why this form
has been stated to be the essential characteristic ; and that is,
that in the other modes of development, the appearance of the
disease is so insidious, that its eai-ly periods have passed before
the patient comes under special notice, or is placed in an asylum ;
but the ambitious or expansive delirium is so marked in its cha-
racters, that the subject is placed under surveillance at once;
and so it happens that almost all the cases of general paralysis
which are seen early bear this type.

I. The 'paralytic variety.?This is the most insidious of all
the forms in which this fearful disease appears, and has perhaps
given rise to more contest as to its nature than any other. For
some time the only disorder appears, to the ordinary observer, to
be one of the motor functions exclusively. The patient him-
self perceives that his actions become irregular, trembling, and
wanting in precision. He lets fall objects which he holds in his
hands, and cannot perform any acts which require delicacy of
manipulation ; writing, drawing, or playing on any instrument,
becomes difficult. He stumbles against the slightest obstacle,
and walks with a jerk : he is more readily fatigued than formerly,
and all his motions lack co-ordination. All this, which comes
on very slowly and almost imperceptibly, is accompanied from
the outset by a peculiar hesitation and embarrassment of the
articulation, or stammering. Ordinarily there is slight pain in
the head, and dizziness?an unequal dilatation of the pupils, and
not unfrequently genital impotence, with occasional incontinence
of urine.

During this period the patient is conscious of his failing
strength, and troubles himself about it. He appears at first tc
enjoy the full exercise of his faculties; but although in some
rare cases it is not possible to detect any intellectual weakness,
in general the practised observer will recognise some indication of
this. There is an undefined alteration of character or disposition
?a mobility of temperament that scarcely admits of description
?the performance of odd, bizarre acts that pass for eccentricity?
a tendency to make mistakes in his usual employment?a slight
weakness of memory for recent events?and, what is the most
serious symptom of all, a combination of a marked hypochondriac
tendency, with a general feeling and expression of satisfaction
and pleasure, the sure forerunner to an outbreak of the expansive
or ambitious maniacal delirium, which is not then long delayed.
2. The congestive variety.?In this form the physical symptoms
again predominate over the psychical. The predominant character
is one of transient and recurrent congestion of the brain, with or
without loss of consciousness; ordinarily slight, though some-
times very severe, simulating apoplexy or epilepsy; and giving
rise to the opinion that the subsequent paralysis has been caused
by one of these affections. This form of congestion is dis-
tinguished from the ordinary apoplectic form, by leaving more
serious and persistent traces in the moral and physical nature.
The speech remains for a long time disordered, the movements of
the limbs become difficult, and sometimes there is even incomplete
hemiplegia, which diminishes and disappears slowly, to return
perhaps after the next congestion. The intelligence is affected
after each attack, as well as the motor powers; but if there be
any considerable interval, both orders of phenomena partially dis-
appear, and the patient is restored to a comparatively healthy con-
dition?apparently. Immediately after the attack we may detect
a considerable feebleness of memory and the other faculties; but
in time the intellect appears to resume its activity. After, several
attacks, however, both the physical and intellectual nature is
found to be uninistakeably deteriorated, and dementia, accom-
panied by various forms of delirium, supervenes. In short, like
the last form, the malady assumes the ordinary aspect of
" general paralysis of the insane."
3. Melancholic variety.?In this form the psychical disorder
first attracts 'attention. It is only in comparatively rare instances
that the physician sees the first stage of the malady; but in
inquiring into the history of paralytics, he will not unfrequently
find that the first phenomenon that attracted attention was a
state of marked moral and physical feebleness or depression, with
270 ON GENERAL PARALYSIS.
lowness of spirits, and incapacity, real or supposed, for any form
of action; presenting every appearance of hypochondriacal melan-
cholia. Even at this period, there may sometimes be detected
slight disorders of motility, as stammering or hesitation in speech,
or feebleness and trembling of the limbs. But these symptoms
are overlooked, the melancholia absorbing the whole attention.
This melancholic period may be very short, or it may have
lasted some time; but in all cases that are paralytic it disappears
gradually, to give place to the normal condition. But this is
very transitory; almost as soon as the signs of melancholia begin
to disappear, the attentive observer may detect frequently the
symptoms of an opposed condition. The patient experiences a
sensation of exaggerated comfort?he was never so well in his
life, body or mind; he begins to be unnaturally active, moving
incessantly; he forms projects of which he would never have
thought before?perhaps not absurd, not altogether out of accord-
ance with his fortune or profession, but still quite opposed to his
previous habits and tastes. He then either passes gradually into
the true expansive delirium, or a fierce mania with predominance
of ambitious ideas breaks out suddenly, after which his history is
the same as that of the next variety.
4. Expansive variety.?This is the most frequent form of the
debut of general paralysis ; and from the marked character of the
symptoms clearly requiring immediate attention, it is more
frequently observed in its earlier stages than any of the others;
and on this account has been erroneously supposed absolutely
essential to the character of general paralysis. Those paralytics
who present themselves from the outset with the expansive form
of delirium, have been ordinarily men of active minds and
habits, enterprising, rash, and generally of irritable, violent
character, with much generosity. The expansive delirium is
an exaggeration of this character ; and so gradually does it some-
times sweep on, that the moment of actual outbreak is difficult of
detection. The patient appears at first to be simply viore active,
more rash, more irritable, and by fits and starts more generous
and lavish in his expenditure than before. By and bye all this
passes clearly beyond the normal state. The subject is in per-
petual motion, takes no rest, cannot sleep, feels an exaggerated
sense of power and general bien-etre, and conceives projects of
the most stupendous character, that must be at once carried out,
all of which, if not quite irrational, are opposed utterly to his
previous habits and tastes. He adopts excesses which are not
habitual to him, passes an irregular and disorderly life, and com-
mits acts which greatly astonish his friends, such as undressing
in society, sleeping in the fields and out of his own house, and
perhaps committing petty thefts without any motive; He is
possessed of boundless wealth or power, with which he will per-
form the most unlieard-of deeds. He will give away his property;
and if he has none, he will profess to do so. He is endowed with
supernatural attributes, he is God's vicegerent upon earth?he is
some mighty potentate. Acting upon some of these convictions,
he commits an offence against society, himself, or property,
which demands his seclusion, when the true nature of the case is
readily recognised.

These four forms in which the disease manifests itself are so
diverse as to lead many to demand its separation into two or more
distinct affections. But the diversity does not end here; the
progress of the paralysis is marked by many varieties, the most
obvious of which is the acute and the chronic form, the latter
being by much the most frequent. Some subjects remain in a
state of calm dementia for many years, or even until death ; whilst
others are in a constant state of maniacal agitation to the end.
Some progress from bad to Avorse constantly; others present
remarkable intermissions, and apparent temporary restorations to
health. In some the special symptoms of paralysis are strongly
marked during the whole course of the disease ; whilst in others
they are so slight during most of the period, as to lead to much
doubt on the nature of the affection. The state of the intelligence
is equally variable; in some presenting merely enfeeblement
of the faculties, scarcely amounting to insanity?in others mani-
festing the most grotesque and violent delirious conceptions. In
many cases the delirium is of the expansive order, treating of
riches, grandeur, and power?in others this form is entirely
wanting, and its place is assumed by a low melancholic or hypo-
chondriacal derangement. Yet, with all these differences, the
various forms of the affection present so many points of relation
or identity, and all have so marked a tendency to pass into one
well-defined condition, characterised by physical and moral
feebleness and vacillation?symptoms a and b give place so
promptly and frequently to symptoms c and d, and vice versa, that
we can easily perceive the unity of the pathological process
through all the diversities of external manifestation. Nor is this
the only disease which is recognised as one, in spite of the greatest
varieties in its progress. We need enter into no prolonged illus-
tration, but merely mention phthisis jpulmonalis; the most cursory
glance over the phenomena and relations of which affection will
show us greater diversities even than those met with in our
present investigation, with an almost equally uniform termination
in death.

We may now attempt to indicate what appears to ourselves to
be the order of the phenomena and the relations of this interest-
ing affection. Under the influence of certain causes, of such
a nature as to produce prolonged over-excitement of the brain,
amongst which stand out in bold relief the abuse of intoxi-
cating drinks and sexual excesses, acting especially upon consti-
tutions hereditarily or otherwise predisposed to degenerative
affections?under the influence (we say) of such determining and
predisposing causes, the nervous energy is deteriorated and
exhausted ; and this result, at first dynamic merely, is succeeded,
in accordance with the general law of all organs long f unctionally
affected, by a change in the tissue itself. This change is anatomi-
cally betrayed in the earlier stages of the disease by signs of con-
siderable congestion, attended by increased weight of the cere-
brum ; and in the later stages, by atrophy of the convolutions,
with comparative anaemia and loss of weight. On both these we
have a few remarks to offer.

We conceive that the first development of the congestion is
chiefly statical, and is a result of the want of that peculiar organic
nervous energy which exerts so remarkable an influence over the
capillary circulation in all parts of the body ; aided by the con-
tinual distension of the vessels during the functional excitement
of the organ. At times this becomes active, owing to the effort
made by the arterial system to relieve itself of the oppressive
weight in front. This effort seems to be occasionally successful,
and to be followed by relief; at other times it only aggravates
the mischief. This congestion appears, though not primitively
inflammatory, (and here we venture to differ from Bayle, Par-
cliappe, and other great authorities,) to assume from time to time
the form of a low chronic inflammatory action, which leaves its
traces in thickening and opacity of the membranes, and certain
other changes in the brain-substance itself, above described.
With regard to the atrophy and softening of the convolutions,
and the effusion of serum on the surface of the brain and within
the ventricles, we are not inclined to attribute them to inflam-
matory action in any degree, but rather to a defect of nutrition
of the organ, sometimes primitive, and sometimes secondary to
the obstruction to the circulation, coincident with the congestion
previously mentioned?a degeneration of tissue which is met
with very frequently in other organs without any evidence of pre-
vious inflammation. The serum seems by general consent to be
recognised as merely poured out to supply the place of the re-
treating organ. It must be remarked that this degeneration
chiefly affects the grey matter in which the dynamic force of the
organ is generally supposed to reside.
Now it is necessary to inquire how far these views coincide
with the symptoms during life, and what are the marks by which
these pathological changes betray themselves in the course of
their development.

The data both of physiology and pathology lead us to the con-
clusion, that although we are not yet able to point out the precise
seat of the various functions of the brain, we must recognise a
different seat for intelligence, volition, sensation, and voluntary
motion. (We designedly separate between volition and voluntary
motion, the functions being essentially distinct; it is not here
the place to discuss this matter; but the fact as here stated is
abundantly demonstrable, from the frequent phenomena of the
contrast of the earnestness of the will, with the imperfection of
muscular performance.) Although, then, the special character of
this peculiar degeneration is to spread and attack indiscriminately
the whole of the organ, but especially the grey matter; yet, judg-
ing from the phenomena of the disease, it appears not to expend
its violence upon all parts equally at first; and according as the
mal-nutrition or congestion affects first those layers or sections
of the brain which preside over the different functions above men-
tioned, so the order of the phenomena is either somato-psycliical,
or psycho-somatic?either the intellectual disturbance precedes
and predominates over that of the muscular system, or the symp-
toms of paralysis precede those of insanity; and thus also we
have two distinct orders of symptoms, one connected with the
physical, and the other with the moral nature?a somatic and a
psychical general paralysis.

We believe that an attentive consideration of the phenomena of
drunkenness will tend to throw much light upon the symptoms
attendant upon the early or congestive stage, and likewise to
illustrate and explain the striking varieties observed in the out-
break of this affection. There is the most accurate resemblance
between these two, only that the one is transitory, whilst the
other is progressive, and permanent. There is probably the same
congestion?there is the same characteristic stammering or diffi-
culty in articulating certain words?the same weakness, uncer-
tainty or trembling of the arms and legs, and general muscular
system,?the same mental disturbance.

Now, according to the varying constitution of the subject, the
excitement of intoxicating liquors appears first in various forms.
One man will betray bis intoxication merely by increased senten-
tiousness, moroseness, pomposity, or irritability?in another the
first symptom will be an expansive gaiety, and a manifestation
of exaggerated universal philanthropy?another will be merely
affected in his speech, the intelligence remaining intact?and again
another will have his ideas so confused, and yet his consciousness
so perfect, that he will not attempt conversation which he knows
he cannot accomplish. In other cases it will be the locomotive
system that is affected; the legs are unable to support the body,
or to perform co-ordinate movements?or the hands are not com-
petent to accomplish those delicate manipulations to which they
are accustomed.

Strictly analogous are the phenomena of the debut of general
^paralysis?all probably due to one and the same cause, congestion
affecting some portion or portions of the nervous tissue. In the
majority of cases, the congestive stage corresponds with the
expansive form of delirium, just as in intoxication the first result
is most frequently excitement of mind and body; but in other
cases it produces depression and melancholia, and in others
again it affects primarily the muscular system only. In most
instances all the phenomena, both of mind and body, occur at
some period or other; but the order in which they occur is sus-
ceptible of every possible variation.

By these considerations it appears that we may explain all the
varieties of the disease on rational principles, and also reconcile
all the conflicting views which have been advanced as to its
nature.

The degeneration of tissue may attack first that part of the
nervous tissue which presides over voluntary motion; and the
symptoms of paralysis will then be predominant, or even exclu-
sively present. We shall then have the simple, uncomplicated
general paralysis mentioned by Rostan, Pinel, and others.
It may first attack that part which is the seat of the intellect,
whichever that may be; and only affecting very lightly and in a
secondary manner the locomotive part, we shall have insanity in
which paralysis only appears late as a complication.

When the disease attacks simultaneously the whole of the
dynamic apparatus of the brain, the somatic and psychical phe-
nomena appear at once, and we have the "general paralysis of the
insane"?the form of disease which has been most studied, and to
which attention was first directed, and through which the whole
subject has been submitted to investigation.

Taking this view of the matter, we shall now proceed briefly to
sketch the phenomena of the disease in its commencement, pro-
gress, and termination; and as it seems a matter of uncertainty
whether it is most frequent for the paralysis or the insanity to
appear earliest, we shall review the two orders of symptoms
separately.

The phenomena of uncomplicated general paralysis are somatic :
the tongue, the lips, the limbs, present the first signs of the
malady. These signs are a hesitation or embarrassment in the
pronunciation of certain words or letters, and sometimes an im-
possibility of articulation?a spasmodic trembling of the lips and
tongue, and a kind of vermicular action of the latter'?a feeble-
ness and trembling of the hands?an uncertain gait, lacking co-
ordination of movement in the legs; and a difficulty in preserving
the equilibrium?trailing of one or both feet?curvature of direc-
tion in walking, and involuntary flexion of the femoro-tibial
articulation.

" When these symptoms (says Pinel) supervene after a cerebral
congestion, with or without loss of consciousness; or when they
manifest themselves slowly and gradually; when they are very per-
ceptible one day, and disappear to recur the next; when to these
phenomena are added augmentation of volume and clamminess of the
tongue, roughness or feebleness of voice, amounting sometimes to
aphonia, heaviness of the features, dulness of eye, insomnia, continual
movement, dilatation of one pupil, flickering of the eyelids, and partial
anaesthesia of the, skin, &c. &c., we may affirm almost positively the
existence of general paralysis."

It is customary with authors to describe three stages in the
progress of general paralysis; but there does not appear to be
any practical benefit derivable from this course, and it is not by
any means clearly ascertainable that there are three defined
periods in the natural history of the affection, nor any marks by
which one can be positively distinguished from the other. For
instance, the loss of power in the sphincters and the formation
of gangrenous sloughs may occur in what is considered the first
stage; whilst retention of urine and most obstinate constipation
may extend to the third or last stage. The second stage, as
described, is sometimes marked by transitory excitement, by
grinding of the teeth, strabismus, difficulty of swallowing and
mastication, with enormous gluttony and general increase of the
paralytic affection. The third stage is marked by ptosis, and
dilated immoveable pupils; the eyes are fixed, the patient appears
to hear nothing, and emits vague, confused sounds?sensibility is
almost completely abolished. The fatal termination is frequently
heralded by intractable diarrhoea, infiltration of the extremities,
and gangrenous eschars upon the parts subjected to pressure.
The bones necrose; and gangrene of the lungs and bloody
tumours in the ears have been often noticed. Finally, the ex-
ternal surface becomes cadaverous, there is progressive emaciation,
the mouth is loaded with sordes, the breath is foetid, the respira-
tion slow, the pulse feeble and intermittent, and death closes
the scene.

After the full details that have been given above, it seems
scarcely necessary to enter again into any history of the mental
phenomena which accompany or supervene upon those of the
physical order. The loss of memory for recent events is certainly
the most characteristic symptom, and is almost invariably present,
to some extent at least, even in those cases which are considered
to be simple or uncomplicated. There is also very generally
remarked an enfeeblement of the affective faculties?a growing
indifference to the claims of friendship or relationship. Whatever
may be the form of mental derangement that first presents itself,
there is one general tendency, which is to resolve itself into
dementia, which sooner or later almost always supervenes, unless
death takes place early in the course of the disease, which may
occur from apoplexy, or other apparently accidental causes.
The diagnosis may he doubtful in the outset; but very soon the
hesitation of speech, the uncertain gait, and the loss of memory
will make the nature of the disease certain. Delirium tremens
may at first be occasionally mistaken for approaching general
paralysis, but a few days will inevitably rectify this judgment.
From all the varieties of spinal paralysis, this affection is dis-
tinguished by the embarrassment of speech and the lesion of intel-
ligence, both which are entirely wanting in spinal disorders. The
distinction from cerebral hajmmorrliage is obvious. Two other
points connected with diagnosis merit a very brief attention. It has
been said that there are many patients presenting the delirium of
riches and grandeur in asylums who never become paralytic.

And this is true; but an attentive observation will detect an im-
portant difference in the nature of the aberration. The true ex-
pansive delirium is coherent, granting the fundamental position ;
and this is almost invariably connected with general paralysis;
whilst the mere maniac who calls himself a king, or emperor, or
general, has nothing plausible in word or idea whereby to support
his claims. This has been pointed out by M. Falret.

The second point is more interesting. M. Brierre de Boismont
has shown that'there are two divisions of general paralysis?one
connected with, the other independent of, insanity. In the former
class the muscular tissue preserves its irritability, as shown by
local galvanism ; in the scond class this is entirely lost, when the
paralysis is perfect.

It is to be regretted that, whilst the natural history of this
affection is so complete, nothing satisfactory can be said con-
cerning its treatment. It is true that there are records of reco-
veries from the earlier or congestive stages, and even from condi-
tions where the paralysis was so far advanced as to appear utterly
hopeless. But in nearly all, if not all, of these cases, treatment
seemed to be but little concerned in the result; the efforts of
nature alone appeared to be effective. A hint for future investi-
gation seems to be afforded by the almost uniform occurrence of
a copious purulent discharge from some part of the system pre-
vious to amendment; but hitherto any attempts to imitate this
process artificially have been unattended by success. One thing,
however, these recoveries teach us, and that is, not to be in too
great liaste to relinquish our endeavours after a cure, nor to view
as absolutely hopeless even the most unpromising cases.

We have given but few illustrative cases in this sketch, as from
time to time many have appeared in this journal, and especially
during the past year. The completion of this part, and the dis-
cussion of many other interesting points connected with general
paralysis, must be deferred to some future opportunity.
