Pauper Lunacy
==============

Art. II.?'

According to returns contained in the "Further Report" of the
Commissioners in Lunacy, published in 1847, and in their
Eleventh Report, the number of Lunatics and Idiots chargeable
to parishes, throughout England and Wales, amounted on the 1st
of January 1847 to Eighteen Thousand and Sixty-Eive, and
on the 1st of January 1857 to Twenty-Seven Thousand Six
Hundred and Ninety-Three.

Moreover, according to returns contained in the 12th Report of
the Commissioners, itwould appear that on the 1st of January, 1857,
the number of pauper lunatics (idiots being also included under
the term) cared for in public and private asylums amounted to
16,G57; and on the 1st of January 1858, to 17,572. At the latter
date there was accommodation for 1 G,231 lunatics in public asylums;
and new asylums and additions to existing asylums, since com-
pleted or now in progress, will raise tbe accommodation to 21,048.
Eurther, from a recently published supplement to the 12th
Reportwe learn that the number of lunatics in workhouses amounted
on the 1st of January 1857 to 6800; on the 1st of January 1858
to 7555 ; and on the 1st of July in the same year to 70G6.
These figures merit considerable attention, for tliey show a very-
great and even startling increase in the amount of pauper lunacy
in the decennial period 1847-57; a persistence of that increase
since 1857; and an amount of asylum accommodation, existing
and prospective, barely sufficient to meet pressing wants, and totally
inadequate for future wants, or, indeed, for the present proper care
and treatment (in the most restricted sense) of our pauper lunatics.
The returns for 1847-57 represent solely an increase in amount
of pauper lunatics, and it does not follow that there has been a
proportionate increase of lunacy, or, indeed, any increase at all,
among those classes of the population from which pauper lunatics
are principally derived. For, since 1847, avast impetus has been
given to the care and treatment of lunatics, by the efforts of the
Lunacy Commission, which at the date mentioned had barely got
into effective operation; by the erection of public asylums for the
reception of lunatics ; and by the compulsory activity of parochial
authorities in searching for and bringing to light cases of lunacy
which ought to be under care. Hence we may infer that one
cause of the increase of pauper lunatics has been the greater care
devoted to lunatics, in consequence of which many cases hitherto
unheeded have been brought to our knowledge; and that, in so
far as this cause is operative, the increase does not represent an
absolute increase of lunacy among the impoverished classes. The
Chairman of the Lunacy Commission, the Eight Honourable the
Earl of Shaftesbury, in his examination before the recent Parlia-
mentary Commission on Lunatics, seemed to imply that th& entire
increase of pauper lunatics might be attributed to the cause
mentioned. In answer to a question respecting the great ap-
parent increase in the number of lunatics generally, he answered?
" I am satisfied that it was not a positive increase in the actual
number of lunatics in proportion to the population. Of course, as the
population increases, there must be a certain increase in the number of
lunatics, but the lunatics did not, in that time, increase in the ratio
of population, but the appearance was owing to the provision having
been made for them, and the greater activity of all the authorities to
look them up in all directions, and to bring them to the face of day
and place them in the receptacles prepared for them; and, I think, I
cannot give a better proof of that than this, that when the activity
began and all these cases were brought to light, they were found to be
not recent cases but thejr were old-established chronic cases, of very
long standing indeed; and it was a very sad thing when Hanwell was
extended, and also when Colney Hatch was opened, which we had
hoped would be for the reception of recent and curable cases, it was
almost instantly filled with old and chronic cases, to tjie exclusion of
the recent and curable cases that might have been brought there, and
many of them returned in a state of health to the duties of life."?
(Query 49, Report of the Select Committee on Lunatics, p. 7.)

In reply to a question if it were liis opinion that tliere had not
been an increase of lunacy in the country, his Lordship said,
after stating that there was a great difference of opinion upon the
point, on account of the imperfection of the data previous to the
year 1845 :?

" I will state my opinion, which is pretty well borne out by my
brother Commissioners and a good many others, that the increase of
lunacy is certainly unquestionable, but it is not by any means in the
ratio of the increase of the population. If the population is increasing,
it would be certainly supposed that the number of lunatics would be
increased; and if it has increased, say, for example, at the rate of 20
per cent., there has not been the same ratio of increase, that is, of 20
per cent."?(Query 51, p. 7.)

Again in his answer to a subsequent query, his Lordship said:?
" With regard to the progress of insanity among the pauper classes,
I repeat that I do not believe that it is by any means in proportion to
the increase of population."?(Query 59, p. 9.)
Mr. Gaskell, one of the medical Commissioners in Lunacy, in
his evidence before the Select Committee, stated, in answer to the
question?

" In your opinion does insanity increase; you say that you have
brought many cases to light, but does insanity increase more than in.
proportion to the population ??It increases more than in proportion
to the population ; but I am inclined to think that that increase is
not attributable to an increase in the number of cases of insanity so
much as to the increase in their longevity. There is no doubt that,
in many of our asylums where the annual mortality was perhaps 12,
14, or 15 per cent, formerly, it is now reduced 10 per cent., but that
in a population of 500, 600, or 1000 in a very few years causes an
enormous increase to the actual number."?(Query 1435, p. 138.)
If we assume that the increase of pauper lunacy has depended
mainly upon the greater care and provision for lunatics, we must
also assume that, notwithstanding the period over which that
care has prevailed, we have not yet exhausted the number of
hitherto unrecognised cases requiring care among the classes of the
population from which pauper lunatics are chiefly derived, since the
increase of pauper lunatics, between the 1st of January 1857 and
the 1st January 1858, in public and private asylums and work-
houses amounted to 1070. This being the case it is certainly of
considerable importance that we should have some more definite
knowledge, than we as yet possess, of the unexhausted sub-
stratum of lunacy which these figures indicate. Moreover, if we
assume with Mr. Gaskell that a greater duration of life among
lunatics in asylums has been operative in swelling the amount of
pauper lunacy, we have still no measure of the degree in which
this cause has affected the increase. A more prolonged life, and
the greater care given to the welfare of lunatics have doubt-
less contributed in no small degree, and it may be altogether, to
occasion the augmentation of pauper lunatics during the ten years
1847-57; but the influence of both these causes can be accurately
determined, and we submit that the question is much too im-
portant to be left in its present vague and unsatisfactory state.
Again, the Earl of Shaftesbury's opinion that although there is
an increase of lunacy among the pauper classes, still that increase
is not by any means in proportion to that of the population, ^
cannot be received without considerable hesitation, gratifying
though the opinion may be. Until the influence of those causes K .
to which we have referred as affecting the apparent increase of
lunacy is determined, we are not in a position to estimate the ah- ?
solute increase or not from the returns on which such an estimate
must at present be based.

The published returns of the Commissioners in Lunacy show
that the number of pauper lunatics and idiots, during the ten
years 18-17-57, increased at the rate of four per cent per annum
?the increase of idiots being at the rate of three per cent; that
of lunatics at five per cent. The rate of increase of population is
1"220 per cent per annum. These figures show, at the least, an
absolute increase of pauperism from lunacy and idiocy (the chief
immediate practical question) at a rate that would double the ex-
isting amount of pauper lunacy and idiocy in tiventy-five years.
If we need any other evidence of the importance of obtaining some (
positive knowledge as to the cause or causes of this great rate of
increase, we need but turn to the figures showing the present and
prospective public asyluin accommodation. This is sufficient for
21,018 lunatics, and on the 1st of January 1858, the number of
pauper lunatics detained in both public and private asylums
amounted to 17,572, being an increase on the previous year of 915
cases. If this rate of increase were to continue, and if the whole
of the remaining public asylum accommodation were devoted
entirely to pauper lunatics, in about five years every asylum would
be filled, and we should still lack space for our lunatics. The
amount of accommodation in private asylums for pauper lunatics
may be regarded as having reached its maximum, for the ten-
dency of legislation is to provide for all pauper lunatics in public
asylums, while the number of private asylums is slightly de-
creasing {Report of Select Committee, Qs. 108 and 113) ; and
if it be conceded, as is maintained by many, that the 2467 pauper
lunatics contained in private asylums (1st January 1858), and the
7666 lunatics housed in workhouses should be transferred to
asylums (and the need which exists for the transference of lunatics
in workhouses can scarcely be doubted, as will be presently seen)
it will be perceived that with regard to our asylum accommodation
we are pretty nigh at a dead-lock.

With these facts staring us in the face the necessity for an
accurate knowledge of the amount of insanity in England can
hardly be doubted, and the nigh approach of another census year
at once points to the best means by which this knowledge can be
attained.

In the Census of 1851, inquiry was directed, so far as Insanity
was concerned, only to the number of lunatics in asylums and
workhouses. The rapidly increasing magnitude of the subject of
lunacy will, we trust, induce the Government in 18G1 to direct that
means shall be taken to ascertain the total number of lunatics,
idiots, and imbeciles existing in the kingdom ; as well as the
circumstances under which they are placed as regards comfort or
? indigence : and we must earnestly urge the consideration of this
important and, we think, indispensable investigation upon all
persons who are interested in obtaining effective provision for
the care and treatment of lunatics (and who is not ?)
The data which would be derived from a systematic authori-
tative inquiry into the amount of insanity would form the basis
for a true knowledge of the progression of mental unsoundness in
the kingdom. The same data would, also, serve as a measure by
which we might estimate the probable asylum accommodation
required, and thus enable us to set a limit to the vast expenditure
which is being undergone for the care of lunatics, as well as to
judge more clearly of the means most requisite, in addition to
existing means, for that purpose.

But we conceive that a specific inquiry is required, not only
into the amount of insanity in the kingdom and the circumstances
under which it is placed, but also into the causes which foster
lunacy among the pauper classes. Little is known positively on
this subject. We know tolerably well the efficient causes, phy-
sical and moral, productive of lunacy in different classes of the
population, but of the modes in which those causes are main-
tained in activity among the impoverished classes our knowledge
is comparatively slight. The nature of the cases chiefly present in
our public asylums would, apart from any other consideration,
point to the propriety of an inquiry such as we speak of.
These institutions, in consequence of the great and increasing
accumulation of chronic cases of lunacy in them, answer but very
imperfectly the principal object for which they were originally
designed. Indeed, several of the largest asylums have become,
from this cause, little better than houses of detention for the
chronic and incurably insane. Sir Alexander Spearman, one of
the visitors of the Hanwell Asylum, in his evidence before the
Select Committee on Lunatics, said, respecting that asylum?
"There are numerous epileptic and paralytic patients, run-away-
patients, elderly and infirm patients, refractory patients, others in
the infirmary, and quiet patients spread throughout the wards. . . .
Of acute cases there are few; of those requiring active medical treat-
ment not many. . . . There are few curable patients. I asked Dr.
Begley, yesterday,1 How many patients have you now under your charge
who, you think, are in a state to be cured?' His answer was, 'I
make a distinction always between the "possible" and the "probable."
I think there may be 30 out of the 400 who may "possibly" be
cured; but I do not think that there are more than 15 or 18 who will
" probably" be cured.' Mr. Tite. Those are males F?Yes. The
female patients are very much of the same character as those I have
described; the epileptic and the paralytic, the refractory and some
few run-away; many elderly and infirm, and some in the infirmary.
I asked Dr Sankey, the medical officer on the female side, the same
question, and he told me he did not think that there were 10. I then
said, ' If I am asked the question by the Committee to-morrow shall
I be within bounds if I say that probably there are not more than
20 ?' He said, ' I think that there will not be more than 10, and you
will be perfectly safe in saying that there are not more than 20 [that
is, in about 600 patients].' "?(Queries 2858, 2859, pp. 237, 238.)
Mr. Cottrell, the Chairman of the Committee of Visitors to the
Colney Hatch Asylum, said, respecting the patients in that
asylum, in his evidence before the Select Committee:?

" (. . . As at Hanwell the proportion at Colney Hatch sup-
posed to be susceptible of cure is very much the same) it must be
remembered that we are an asylum rather than a hospital. We are a
hospital only in occasional instances; an asylum always."?(Query
2946, p. 245.)

This state of things which is more or less common to all public
asylums, is mainly due to the fact that the cases sent to them
either are chronic when at first received, or they have at least
passed beyond the stage which is most amenable to treatment.
Two causes of delay in sending patients to asylums are patent:
(1) a prior detention of the patient for a longer or shorter period
in a workhouse; (2) the active dislike of sending friends or relatives
to a madhouse, which is still prevalent among a large section of the
population?a relic, in no small degree, of the just fear once
entertained regarding institutions for the insane.

By the operation of these causes, the flood of chronic cases
which inundated our public asylums when first opened, is kept up,
and they are rapidly becoming more and more inoperative as cura-
tive establishments; and thus it happens that our best conceived
plans hitherto have not touched the core of the evil to remedy
which they were devised, and that at the best they are merely
palliative.

Thanks to a recent inquiry, by the Commissioners in Lunacy,
into the condition of lunatics in workhouses, the results of which
inquiry have been made known in a Supplement to the Commis-
sioners' Twelfth Beport, we are enabled to judge with tolerable
accuracy of the influence exerted by the detention of lunatics in
these institutions, not only in clogging our asylums with chronic
and incurable cases, but also in fostering pauper lunacy ; and no
better illustration could be given than the facts elicited by this
inquiry of the practical importance of a full examination into the
causes chiefly concerned in the maintenance of lunacy among the
poor.

Let it be remembered, however, that pauperism is only one,
and that the most immediately perceived, result of the prevalence
of insanity among the impoverished classes of a population.
Another, and more remote, but not less important consequence
of insanity among these classes (as in all classes), is the influence
?which it exercises as a source of physical and moral deterio-
ration. The transmission of special forms of insanity in their
entirety from parents to children may be the chief, but it is not
the sole fact of moment in the heritage of unsound mind; for in
the offspring of the insane there is frequently recognised a devia-
tion from healthy mental action, which, while it would not be
denominated insanity, differs from it, perhaps, only in degree,
and is not less important from its bearing upon the moral in-
tegrity of the subject. There maybe a slight degree of imbecility,
unusual susceptibility to emotions, impaired volition, or a per-
verted condition of the moral faculties. Just, indeed, as a child
mav inherit one or more lineaments of a parent, and these be
more or less distinctly characteristic, so he may also inherit one
or more phases of mental unsoundness, and these be manifested
in a greater or less degree. Nor is this all; for it is found that
the slighter derived deviations from a sound mental condition
are apt in succeeding generations to be transformed into unmiti-
gated insanity?exactly as in the hereditary transmission of
physical defects it not uncommonly happens that they are but
slightly manifested or not at all in one generation, while they re-
appear in full in a succeeding one. Of the physical degeneration
connected with idiocy and imbecility we need say nothing.
When we find a combination of circumstances existing which
give rise to a constant reproduction, by hereditary transmission,
of unsoundness of mind, we may rest assured that we have there
an important source of the physical and moral degradation of a
people. We can mark clearly the beginning of the evil, but we
cannot point out where it terminates.

Certain facts recorded by the Commissioners in Lunacy, in the
Supplementary Keport referred to, show that circumstances do
exist which lead to the perpetuation of lunacy among the poorer
classes of our population by hereditary transmission; which thus
give rise to pauperism on the one hand, and to deterioration of
the population both physically and morally on the other; and
which point most clearly to tlie necessity for further inquiry into
the fostering causes of lunncy among the poor.

We are told that cases like the following, in connexion with
our workhouses, are not of unfrequent occurrence:?

" In the Newark Workhouse, among other instances, two females
were met with during the past year, who, although classed as of weak
mind, were in the habit of discharging themselves, and after a short
absence returning in the family way. Each of them had three ille-
gitimate children in the house; and it became the duty of the Visiting
Commissioner strongly to urge upon the guardians the necessity of ex-
ercising the powers vested in them of absolutely refusing to allow these
women again to quit the house. This, however, the guardians did not
feel themselves justified in doing; and at a subsequent visit, in Novem-
ber last, one of these females bad again been permitted to leave. In
the Walsall workhouse we found an idiotic female who had had four
illegitimate children; and in the Monmouth workhouse, two imbecile
paupers, each of whom had had three illegitimate children, and one of
whom was again pregnant. In the Tamworth workhouse there were
two idiotic females, of whom each had a child.

11 In addition to these cases, moreover, it is right to state that a far
more painful instance of the evil of allowing inmates of weak mind to
leave the house, and go out into the world unprotected, lately came
under our notice in the Martley workhouse in Worcestershire. A
female who had for some time been classed as of weak mind, was struck
off the list in 1856, and was allowed to leave the house for the purpose
of saving expense to the parish by earning something by hop-picking.
This woman bad previously had two illegitimate children by paupers
in the bouse, one of whom bad died; the other (a girl about 10 years
of age), she took with her, on quitting the house, to her mother's
home. When there, she and her daughter slept in the same room with
her father-in-law and her mother, and in the same bed with two of her
brothers. The result of this indecency was, that she returned to the
workhouse in the family way, and was delivered of a child, the father
of which she distinctly stated to be one of her brothers, but which of
them she was unable to specify. This woman, though able to perform
some useful work, was decidedly of weak mind; and there can be no
doubt that, under the circumstances, the guardians were justified in
detaining her in the workhouse, and that they ought not to have sanc-
tioned her quitting it. Assuredly it would have been right to place
her in the class of persons of weak mind on her return to the work-
house ; but this was not done; and she only accidentally came under
the notice of a member of this Board, to whom the foregoing parti-
culars of her case were communicated. When it is remembered that
the offspring of these weakminded females but too frequently inherit and
communicate to their own children the imbecility of their mothers, the
importance of more stringent regulations will at once be apparent. At
a visit to the Calne workhouse, a few years ago, a member of this
Commission saw three paupers, the grandmother, the mother, and the
daughter, all imbecile, one or two, indeed, verging on idiotcy; and we
have been assured that the same transmitted defect of intellect has been
observed in the fourth generation."?(,Supplement to Twelfth Report,
pp. 15,1G.)

If the occasional inmates of workhouses furnish examples of
this character, what may we expect to find among out-door pauper
and indigent imbeciles ? The question may be answered, in part,
in regard to Scotland, for the Scotch Commissioners in Lunacy
have instituted a special inquiry into the condition of out-door
pauper and of indigent imbeciles and lunatics in that country ; and
they report of one county alone, that, of 349 single patients
visited?

" One hundred and thirteen were lemales above seventeen years of
age. Of these, 22 were in circumstances affording adequate protec-
tion to their chastity. Of the remaining 91, 15 were known to
have given birth to illegitimate children, and 5 to have borne more
than one child. Of the 15 mothers, 3 are known to have been ille-
gitimate, and 12 are at present paupers ; of their children, G are
known to be idiots. There are, besides, in the county, 3 other idiots
who are known to be the offspring of insane or imbecile mothers, who
are dead or have disappeared."?(JFirst Report of the General Board
of Commissioners in Lunacy for Scotland, p. xi.)
In the Appendix to the same Report, the following, among
other examples, are recorded :?

" (1.) M. H., a female ; cannot tell her age. Congenital imbecility,
a beggar, cottage, bedding, &c. dirty and squalid. Lives with two
daughters and one granddaughter, all of whom are illegitimate, and,
with the exception of the last, of weak mind. Is. a week, rent paid,
and a cart of coals.

" (2.) L. II., a female, daughter of the above, aged 30. Congenital
idiot; ineducable. A beggar; condition wretched; lives with her
mother in a miserable room. Has an illegitimate child, aged 5. No
allowance from parish
" H. R., a male, aged 12. Imbecility; but of what degree could
not be accurately ascertained, as the boy was not at home when
sought, and bis grandfather could not give the necessary information.
Cottage small, squalid, and miserable, with two beds for six occu-
pants. II. Ii. has two cousins in a state of imbecility. His mother
was idiotic, wandered about the country, and bore three illegitimate
children. R. R. receives Is. Gd. per week.

"(1.) A. F., a female, aged 51. Imbecile; speaks; walks; de-
formed ; affectionate, though at times she is cross and needs liumour-
ino- ? industrious ; knits. In average bodily health. Tolerably well
clothed. Had an illegitimate child, who is alive, and is said to help
her a little. Sleeps alone, and has a good bed.
" (2.) R. F., a male, aged 38. Said to be idiotic; to speak imper-
fectly ; to be much weaker in the mind than his sister (the case pre-
ceding) ; to be honest and sober; to be able to go messages; to be
noisy and troublesome at times; not to sleep well to have a ropulsiy?
look, causing terror to those who do not know him ; to he unsettled ;
to gain little ; to be strong and able-bodied ; to be cleanly in habits ;
to need help in dressing. Sleeps alone in a bed close to that of his
imbecile sister, and no one else being in the room with them. Both
live with their mother, a widow. There are seven inmates and four
beds. Allowance, 39s. quarterly for the two.

" (3.) M. F., a female, aged 16. Idiot, squints, slavers ; oscillates;
does not speak ; does not walk ; needs help in dressing; harmless ; not
in robust health. Tolerably well clothed. Lives with grand-parents.
Said to have been practically deserted by her father, who was reported
to me as a drunkard. I do not believe that her grand-parents, who
are paupers, have anything to live on but the parochial allowance, so
that she, too, is virtually a pauper ; but, as she is not reported as such,
the Board have no jurisdiction in the case.

" This girl is a niece of the two preceding lunatics. In this family
we find an imbecile daughter, with an illegitimate child; an idiot
son ; a married son, who is a drunkard, and has an idiot daughter; a
sane daughter, with an illegitimate child; and a sane son with the
same?illustrating the close connexion between intellectual and moral
insanity."?(p. 195-196.)

Tlint an inquiry into the condition of indigent and out-door
pauper imbeciles and lunatics in England would make known a
condition of things in reference to illegitimacy similar to that
ascertained to exist in Scotland, the examples already quoted from
the Supplementary Report of the English Commissioners in
Lunacy renders only too probable ; and in regard to Scotland it
may be safely averred, that the insufficient protection of indigent
and pauper female imbeciles and lunatics, and the illegitimacy
arising therefrom, constitute a most formidable source of evil,
active alike in the perpetuation of pauper lunacy, and in deterio-
rating both physically and morally a large section of the population.
To what extent like circumstances may bring about similar re-
sults in England has still to be ascertained, and we insist upon
the necessity of inquiry to determine this; for if we have here a
powerful source of lunacy and its train of evils, we have likewise
at our command, in so far as paupers are concerned, the means by
which this source may he stopped almost altogether.

" Heretofore, in Scotland," saitli Hect. Boetliius [who wrote
three hundred years ago, he it borne in mind], " if any were
visited with the falling sickness, madness, gout, leprosie, or any
such dangerous disease, which teas likely to be propagated from
the father to the son, he teas instantly gelded; a woman kept
from all company of men ; and if by chance, having some such
disease, she were found to be zvith child, she, icitli her brood,
were buried alive ; and this was done for the common good, lest
the whole nation should he injured or corrupted. A severe
doom, you will say, and not to be used amongst Christians, yet
more to be looked into than it is. For now, by our too much
facility in this kind, in giving way for all to marry that will, too
much liberty and indulgence in tolerating all sorts,there is avast
confusion of hereditary diseases, no family secure, no man almost
free from some grievous infirmity or other. When no choice is.
had, but still the eldest must marry, as so many stallions of the
race; or, if rich, be they fools or dizzards, lame 01* maimed, un-
able, intemperate, dissolute, exhaust through riot, (as he said)
^ jure luercclitario sapere jubentur ; they must be wise and able by
inheritance ; it comes to pass that our generation is corrupt; wo
have many weak persons, both in body and mind; many feral
diseases raging amongst us, crazed families, parentes peremp-
tores ; our fathers bad ; and we are like to be worse."?(Burton's
Anatomy of Melancholy, Pt. I., Sec. II., Mem, 1. Subs. 0.)
We, fortunately, lost long ago the barbarism which character-
ized the remedies devised by the ancient Scots, but at the same
time we well nigh lost all active regard of the principle which
prompted the remedies attributed to them. They acted according
to the light which they had; we have not acted according to the
light which we have. Both humanity and policy point to the neces-
sity for adopting such precautions, in regard to pauper lunatics and
imbeciles, that they should neither beget, nor have begotten upon
them, children; and we have the means justly at our disposal, by
the exercise of a proper restraint and care, to ensure this. The
Commissioners in Lunacy remark :?

" The absolute necessity of extending greater protection to idiotic
and weak-minded women has uniformly been recommended by us.
But although our efforts to inculcate the importance of due care in
this respect has produced a certain amount of benefit, we find, from
repeated examples, that the subject has not received the full consider-
ation it deserves."?('Supplementary Report, p. 15.)
The condition of the insane in workhouses is a subject almost
as grave as that we have just noticed; for from the Report of the
Commissioners in Lunacy it would appear that our workhouses,
in so far as lunatics are concerned, are little better than hot-beds
in which pauper lunacy is fostered and matured. This is a
serious charge, but it is supported by weighty evidence. In the
course of 1857-1858, the Commissioners visited and inspected
the whole of the workhouses (655 in number) in England and
Wales, and this visitation has disclosed that, in the majority of in-
stances, the lunatics detained in them are confined in unsuitable
apartments ; that tliey are deprived of all exorcise ; that they are
badly fed and badly clothed; that they have no proper attendance
either medical or general; that they are subjected to harsh meclni-
j. nical restraint when violent; and that, as a consequence of this entire
absence of necessary care and treatment, recent cases of lunacy
(which are frequently confined in workhouses in defiance of the law)
are matured and confirmed, this being, as the Commissioners
state, " one of the most fertile causes of the increase of lunatic
paupers throughout the country. It is this that mainly tends to
fill our county asylums with hopeless chronic cases, and is most
directly responsible for the heavy and permanent burdens upon
the parish rates."?(p. 3-1.)
The cases chiefly met with in workhouses consist of persons
suffering from chronic dementia, and from melancholia, of epi-
leptics, idiots, and imbeciles. But during late years cases of
acute insanity have been frequently met with, especially in the
larger houses.

Both the management and the internal economy of workhouses
are, however, inconsistent with a due care of almost every grade
of lunatics; and even when the lunatics are confined in special
wards, the evils are rather augmented than diminished. A re-
duced diet, task labour, and confinement within the narrow
limits of the workhouse are thought to be necessary, as well to
test the actual wants of those applying for admission as to check
abuse and imposition as far as possible; but a scanty diet and
restricted exercise not only tend to increase the mortality of the
insane, but to prolong and confirm the disease. The rules in
force for the government of workhouses are devised to check
disorderly conduct among ordinary paupers, but they are too
commonly applied to the imbecile and those of unsound mind :?
" Any increase of excitement, or outbreak of violence, occurring in
the cases of sucli patients, instead of being regarded as a manifestation
of diseased action requiring medical or soothing treatment, has sub-
jected the individual to punishment, and in several instances led to his
imprisonment in a gaol."?(p. 7.)
Of separate lunatic wards connected with workhouses, the
Commissioners say:?

" Some have existed for a considerable time, and others are of recent
construction. In some of the wards attached to the old workhouses,
the rooms are crowded, the ventilation imperfect, the yards small and
surrounded by high walls ; and in the majority of instances the bed-
rooms are used also as day-rooms. In these rooms the patients are
indiscriminately mixed together; and there is no opportunity for clas-
sification. There is no separation where the association is injurious ;
and no association where such would be beneficial. In fact, patients
of all varieties of character, the weak, the infirm, the quiet, the agi-
tated, the violent and vociferous, the dirty and epileptic, are all min-
gled together, and the excitement or noise of one or more injures and
disturbs the others. The restless are often confined to bed to prevent
annoyance to the other patients, and the infirm are thus disposed of
for the want of suitable seats, Their condition when visited in the
daytime is obviously bad, and at night must bo infinitely worse,
Even in workhouses where the wards are so constructed as to provide
day-rooms, these are often gloomy, much too small in size, and destitute
of ordinary comforts ; while the furniture is so poor and insufficient,
that in some instances, there being no tables whatever, the patients are
compelled to take their meals upon their knees. Other cases to be
hereafter mentioned will indeed show that it is reserved for lunatic
wards of this description, and now happily for them only, to continue
to exhibit some portion of that disregard of humanity and decency
which at one time was a prevailing characteristic in the treatment of
insanity.

" Occasionally, indeed, in those workhouses where lunatic wards are
of recent construction, the accommodation for patients is better; but
they all want the continued superintendence of a resident medical
officer and the assistance of a sufficient staff of properly qualified at-
tendants, and they are greatly deficient in reference to diet, exercise,
occupation, and general arrangements. For the most part, the rooms
are gloomy and prison-like, and considerable expense has been repeat-
edly incurred in formidable contrivances to prevent escape or accident,
which any proper system of nursing and attendance would have ren-
dered quite unnecessary."

There is 110 proper supervision medical or otherwise, neither is
there any record kept of treatment or restraint; and there is no
efficient or authoritative visitation of the lunatic wards by the
visiting justices, and the visits of the Commissioners in Lunacy
are almost useless, except as enabling them to detect the evil that
exists at the time of the visit, and which, after all, they have no
power to remove.

The detention of a lunatic in a workhouse rests entirely upon
the caprice of the parochial authorities, for he is confined without
either medical certificate or magistrate's order, and consequently
without that protection which is extended to the lunatic in public
and private asylums. Certainly his detention in a workhouse at
all is in a great measure illegal, but the law is inoperative, from
various causes, as we shall see presently.

In sending a lunatic from a workhouse to an asylum, unma-
nageableness would appear to be the principal criterion adopted
by the parochial authorities as to its advisability. The Com-
missioners state that:?

" An impression frequently prevails that if a patient be quiet there
is no necessity for his removal to an asylum; and, urged by consider-
ations of economy, guardians constantly act upon this impression. It
is an error pregnant with the most serious evils. Those who suffer
most are often the least complaining. In a very recent case of semi-
starvation at the Bath Union, when the frauds and thefts of some of
the attendants had, for a considerable time, systematically deprived
the patients of a full half of their ordinary allowance of food, the onlv
complaint made was by the wan and wasted looks of the inmates.

The melancholic and taciturn especially, when (as is often the case)
tlieir physical condition is enfeebled by long privation, remain quietly
suffering until their malady becomes confirmed and incurable. Placed
in gloomy and comfortless rooms, deprived of free exercise in the open
air, and wanting substantial nutriment sufficient to promote restora-
tion, they pass their lives in a moody, listless, unhealthy, inactive
state, which is fatal to their chance of ultimate recovery.
" For cases like these a workhouse is the most unfit, and the asylum
the most proper place; and the error of considering manifestations of
violence, excitement, or dangerous propensities, as the only or principal q
reasons for removing a patient from a workhouse to an asylum, cannot
be too widely denounced. 

" The chronic and less hopeful patients, in like manner, who have
become insensible to their ordinary wants, and inattentive to the calls
of nature, are most unfortunately situated when detained in a work-
house. Little or nothing being done to revive a sense of decency by
vigilant attention and judicious care, they sink into deplorable discom-
fort, and exhibit the lowest state of mental and bodily degradation."
To illustrate some of the foregoing points more particularly?
The importance of a good nutritious diet in the treatment of
the insane need not be insisted on. The Commissioners speak of
the evil consequences which have resulted from the scanty diet of
workhouses when it has been necessary, on account of over-
crowding, to remove chronic cases to workhouses from asylums, a
marked deterioration in their condition following, and at times
harmless patients have been rendered so irritable and violent as to
render it necessary to replace them in an asylum. As examples
of the character and variations of workhouse dietaries, the Com-
missioners state that

" While the diet of the insane in the Brighton workhouse is very
substantial and liberal, the diet given to the same class in the Hailsham
Workhouse (in the same county) contains but one spare meat dinner
during each week, the proportion of meat allowed being only 4 oz. for
men and oz. for women; while bread and cheese, without beer,
constitutes the dinners on four other days, and pudding on the re-
maining two. At the Freebridge Lynn workhouse, Norfolk, meat is
allowed only once a week, bacon once, and bread and cheese consti-
tutes the dinner for the remaining five days : yet, in the King's Lynn
workhouse, in the same county, meat is allowed for dinner during
three days, suet pudding twice, and good soup or rice milk twice. In
many other workhouses, meat is only given to the insane once a week,
and even then in a very small and insufficient quantity. In the West
Firle workhouse, within a few miles of Brighton, the allowance is
only three ounces of meat dui'ing the whole week for each inmate.
In the Amesbury workhouse, the inmates are restricted to bacon twice
a week (four ounces for men, and three ounces for women), pudding
twice, and a very weak soup twice. It is at the same time right to
add that in some workhouses the diet is on a more liberal scale, meat
being allowed three or four days a week, and soup of fair quality on
otlier days. In a very small number of houses a meat dinner is given
every day."

As to medical treatment we are told, as an example of its total
inadequacy, that at the Leicester Union the medical officer visits
the lunatic wards once a quarter.
The attendants are paupers, not unfrequently old and feeble
people, to whom are entrusted means of restraint, and who in
return for their labour receive occasionally some trifling gratuity,
such as an allowance of beer or spirituous liquors, or an increase
of diet.

" 1. In the Stepney Union, at Wapping, the nurse is a pauper re-
ceiving no pay, but having extra food, and two pints of beer daily.
The matron said that she was kind towards the patients (30 in number);
but her manner certainly did not indicate kindness. Inquiries being
made as to the diet, she could not (although she asserted she knew
' all about it') tell the amount of food at any meal. After repeated
mistakes in giving the names of the patients, she insisted that she went
' entirely by her list.' On the list being produced, it was found that
she could not read (November, 1857).

"2. In the St. Alban's workhouse, the nurse having the care of the
insane females was herself decidedly of unsound mind. She was allowed
half a pint of beer daily, and no other remuneration for her services.
As she was of weak intellect and very excitable, the Visiting Commis-
sioner strongly urged the necessity of the guardians engaging a com-
petent paid attendant (30th December, 1857). This suggestion, how-
ever, it was found at the last visit, had not been attended to.
" 3. In the St. Martin's workhouse, a violent lunatic was entrusted
to the supervision of an old pauper, 70 years of age ('the keeper of
Ward F.') The patient appears to have been placed in a room, in
which were a poker and other dangerous articles ; and on being relieved
from some restraint which had been imposed upon him, he struck the
feeble old pauper on his head until he died (July, 1857).
" Without giving further instances, we may confidently state, that,
as a general rule, the attendance and nursing in workhouses are totally
inadequate."

Concerning the accommodation for lunatics the Commissioners
state that?

" In many instances the crowding is excessive; the ventilation of the
rooms imperfect; and the furniture, even of the poorest description,
scanty and insufficient. The deficiency of tables, and of seats for the
helpless and feeble, is almost constantly observed; and the want of
such suitable seats frequently renders it necessary to keep patients ah
ways in bed. Even articles of furniture indispensable to order, decency,
and cleanly habits, are often most sparingly supplied, or altogether
wanting. In the Blackburn workhouse, we found the small day-rooms
on the male side incumbered with large iron guards and heavy restraint
chairs; and in one room on the women's side, used both as a bed and
day-room, the beds were until recently so close as almost to touch each other, and a large portion of one apartment containing beds was boarded
off as a privy. In addition to similar discreditable arrangements, the
patients have frequently no means of bathing, and very scanty means
are provided for washing their persons. A tub frequently supplies the
place of chamber utensils in the dormitories; and we have ascertained
that in some cases the vessels which are used as urinals in the night
time serve for the patients to wash, or be washed in, in the morning.
It rarely happens, indeed, that patients in workhouses have any proper
means of washing themselves near their bedrooms; a trough or sink, ^
common to all, being for the most part substituted for basins. Occa-
sionalty, the patients wash out of doors at the pump, or in tubs or ^
bowls placed, whatever the season, in an outhouse, or an open shed."
The clothing is wanting in warmth, and the betiding is too
often dirty and insufficient, while in some workhouses the most
objectionable practices exist with regard to the night arrangements
for the lunatics. At the Huddersfield workhouse, for instance?
" The evils arising from the detention of insane patients in a work-
house have been made manifest to a frightful extent, owing to the
shamefully defective accommodation provided in that Union. It will
be seen from the subjoined reports that no less than one-third of the
inmates are insane or idiotic; that many of them are dirty in their
habits, arid placed to sleep together sometimes even in a perfect state
of nudity. The bedding is stated to be both scanty and filthy, and the ^
iloors of the dormitories to be saturated with urine.
" There being no bath-room, lavatory, washhouse, or laundry on the
premises, a small room on the ground lloor is used for these purposes,
and also as a kitchen, a brewhouse, and a bakehouse. Over the room
serving these seven distinct objects, are the dormitories appropriated
to the sick ; the atmosphere of which is both over-heated and contami-
nated by noxious emanations escaping from below; and also from the
wet clothing occasionally hung up to dry around the bed-ridden
patients.

" Those idiotic or insane inmates not bodily disabled are crowded to-
gether and confined in a very limited space, they are associated with
most abandoned characters, secluded in the dead-house, and are so cir-
cumstanced in other respects, both during day and night, as to aggra-
vate their mental infirmities, and lead to a deplorable state of degra-
dation."*

Restraint chairs, chains, handciiffs, leg locks, muffs, straps, and
strait-waistcoats are in frequent use, and are applied by the
attendants without the sanction, and probably without the know-
ledge of the medical officer or master of the workhouse. We read
of lunatics chained to benches, and strapped to their beds at night
* Mr. Farnall, the Inspector of the Poor in the Metropolitan district, in his
evidence before the recent Parliamentary Committee on Lunatics, stated that he
had heard that the Huddersfield guardians had "come to a vote to build a new
workhouse, but not a sufficient one; ive have no power to order them to do it."?(See
Report. Query 1609.)
in the Dewsbury workhouse, "and the only reason assigned for
this treatment was, that some would run away, and others get out
of bed." In the Bury workhouse the Visiting Commissioner
found two lunatics strapped to the bedsteads, and one with his
hands secured in a leather muff, while iron staples, shackles,
chains, and cord were found in one of the men's wards, " all evi-
dently intended to be employed for the purpose of fastening down
violent patients." At the Llanelly workhouse a female lunatic
was found most ingeniously, but most cruelly, fastened to a bed-
stead, upon which it was customary to restrain her for periods
varying from a few days to a week.

" The patient was undoubtedly a dangerous lunatic, and the Visit-
ing- Commissioner recommended that she should be at once removed
to an asylum. The guardians, however, persisted in an attempt to
justify their proceedings, and to prove her harmless; and they obsti-
nately refused to remove her according to recommendation."?(p. 26.)
Three females were found in bed, restrained by strait-jackets,
in the workhouse of St. George the Martyr, Southwark. These
unfortunates were thus restrained day and night, and had been so
for some time previously.

Several examples are given of the insufficiency of the space
connected with workhouses for the proper exercise of patients.
Thus?

" In the Clerkenvvell workhouse the lunatic wards are nearly at the
top of the house, rendering it impracticable for infirm patients to gain
the small yard below, which is long and narrow, and bounded on each
side of its length by high buildings. This small yard is nevertheless
the only place allotted for exercise to the 511 paupers in the house
(November, 1857) In the Bolton workhouse the greater por-
tion of the paupers (3-13 in number) are crowded together in such a
way as to deprive them of all comfort. The yard for the two lunatic
wards is quite useless for the purpose of exercise, being scarcely larger
than a good-sized room (March, 1855)."?(p. 28.)
We need not comment on the irritating and injurious influence,
or on the misery inflicted upon lunatics, by confining them within
doors or within a limited area; but an example of one of the paro-
chial methods of dealing with irritated and irritable lunatics
deserves quotation.?

" At a visit to the Downham workhouse, the case of a male pri-
soner then in Swaffham Graol was brought under notice. He had
been recently an inmate of the workhouse, and was classed as of un-
sound mind, yet had been permitted repeatedly to discharge himself.
Upon his last quitting the workhouse, he was soon afterwards sent to
gaol for six months for an indecent assault upon a female. He had
previously been three times in the County Lunatic Asylum, and was
there described as dangerous to others. AVlulst in the workhouse he
was thought scarcely responsible for his actions, yet had been com-
mitted to gaol 011 fourteen occasions for refractory conduct. The
Governor thought he was not a proper subject for punishment in
prison, in which opinion the Visiting Commissioner concurred. The
attention of the Visiting Justices being drawn to the case, they agreed
that it was not right to subject the man to punishment; but as the
surgeon declined to certify his insanity, they suggested that the matter
should be referred to the Secretary of State, which was done. On
the ground, however, of the medical officer of the gaol still declining
to certify, the Secretary of State did not feel justified in interfering in 4
the case."

Tlie congregation and detention of lunatics in workhouses is,
doubtless, due in part to tlie insufficiency of asylum accommoda-
tion ; but the chief evil arising out of the detention, tlie impe-
diment cast in the way of an early and proper treatment of many
cases of insanity in asylums, arises mainly from an evasion of the
law.

In providing for the erection of county and borough asylums,
the law directed that all pauper lunatics should be placed there
at the outset of their malady ; and it imposed certain duties, re-
quisite for the effective carrying out of this wise provision, upon
parochial authorities. These duties are, however, continually
neglected or evaded, particularly in the more populous districts;
and the principal object of the asylum as a curative establish-
ment, and the welfare of tlio patient are, in consequence,
sacrificed.

"The law directs that every pauper deemed to be lunatic, and
proper to be sent to an asylum, shall be taken before a justice, who,
upon being satisfied that he is a fit person to be taken charge of and
detained, shall order his removal to the County Asylum. But instead
of this course being adopted, it is now almost universally the custom
to remove the patient in the first instance to the Union Workhouse ;
where, if he appears to be quiet and harmless, he is suffered to remain.
" Instead of causing the patient to be dealt with as directed by the
67tli and 68tli sections of the Lunatic Asylums Act, 1853, and imme-
diate steps to be taken for his direct removal to the asylum, work-
houses have been to a great extent made use of primarily as places for
the reception, and (in many instances) for the detention, of recent
cases of insanity.

" The workhouse is thus illegally made to supply the place of a
lunatic establishment, and the asylum, with its attendant comforts and
means of cure, which the law lias provided for the insane poor, is
altogether disregarded; or it comes into operation only when the pa-
tient, by long neglect, has become almost hopelessly incurable."
The phraseology of tlie Acts relative to the detention of
lunatics in workhouses admits, however, of ready evasion of their
provisions, and do not, indeed, apply to a large and most impor-
tant class of lunatics; and until this defectiveness of the Acts be
removed, we see little hope of escape from many of tlie troubles
connected with the removal of patients to asylums. The 45th
section of the Act 4 and 5 Will. IY. c. 76, provides that " every
person wilfully detaining in any workhouse any dangerous lunatic,
insane person, or idiot, for more than fourteen days, shall he
deemed guilty of misdemeanour;" and Article 101 of the General
Consolidation Order of the Poor-Law Board directs "that no
pauper of unsound mind who may he dangerous, or who may
have been reported as such by the medical officer, or who may
require habitual or frequent restraint," shall be retained in a
workhouse for more than fourteen days. These provisions, it is
clear, are not applicable in the slightest degree to unsoundness
of the mind unaccompanied by violence.

We have already pointed out the influence exercised by the de-
tention of lunatics in workhouses in fostering pauper lunacy, and
in filling our asylums with chronic cases; and, on the other
hand, it may be understood how the diminution of the curative
power of the asylums from this cause reacts upon the work-
houses, and tends to keep up and increase the accumulation of
lunatics there. This reaction of the one class of institutions upon
the other; the consequent impairment of the most beneficial
effects of the asylums; and the augmentation both in workhouses
and asylums of matured and confirmed lunatics, might he supposd
to be a sufficient argument against the folly of those parochial
authorities, who conceive that they practise a true economy by
detaining their insane in workhouses. But, in addition, the
Commissioners express the opinion that the difference of cost be-
tween the maintenance of a lunatic in an asylum and in a work-
house is not so great as is ordinarily conceived, for?
" In the mode of apportioning the cost of a pauper in a workhouse,
several items are excluded from the maintenance account which, in
asylums, appear to render that account considerable. In the former
case, food and clothing are generally the main items of outlay ; whilst
in the other all salaries, and many articles entitled ' necessaries,' are
included. These latter expenses in parishes are passed over to the
Union fund, and paid from a different source. The ostensible cost,
therefore, of the patient's ' maintenance' in a workhouse does not re-
present the same expenses as his maintenance account in an asylum.
" In addition to this, it is also to be observed that the inmates of
workhouses consist, in a great measure, of children and aged persons,
who are maintained at a small cost. Therefore, when an average of
the entire outlay is struck, and an equal charge made for every occu-
pant, whether expensive or otherwise/the actual cost of the insane
patient (which far exceeds that of the rest) does not appear."

To remove the evils connected with the detention of lunatics in
workhouses the Commissioners offer certain suggestions. Tlie
first of these is based upon an opinion of the entire unfitness of
workhouses, from their character and management, for the proper
care of lunatics?an opinion concerning which little doubt can
be entertained. They suggest that inexpensive buildings should
be erected in connexion with, or at a convenient distance from
existing asylums, for the reception of chronic, idiotic, and harm-
less cases. These auxiliary asylums need not cost half the
expense in building and management of our ordinary asylums, E
and they would serve the purpose of relieving workhouses
entirely, and asylums mainly, of their chronic cases, and leave the
latter free to develope fully their capacities as hospitals.
Some such plan must ultimately become necessary, as it
is very evident that our present system of asylum accommoda-
tion cannot continue much longer without comirig to a dead-
lock. But we insist upon the importance of ascertaining
fully the amount and character of the evil we have to contend
with before any plan of additional asylum accommodation is
carried out on a large scale; because, from what we have
already said, it is evident that it is not sufficient to base future
modifications of our plans for the care and treatment of lunatics
on the existing pauper lunacy in our workhouses and private
asylums (for the Commissioners have pointed out the fitness of
removing the pauper inmates of private asylums as well as the
lunatics in workhouses). There can be little doubt that as full
an inquiry into the condition of pauper and indigent lunatics,
idiots, and imbeciles outside the walls of asylums and workhouses,
as that which lias taken place into the condition of lunatics
within workhouses, would lead to as valuable results.
The further suggestions of the Commissioners are well cal-
culated to improve the state of lunatics in workhouses, so far as
that is susceptible of improvement, until such a period as a
scheme may be devised and carried out which will close those
buildings altogether to lunatics except for very temporary
purposes. They say :?

"We think it essential that Visiting Justices of Asylums should be
invested with full power, by themselves or their medical officers, to
visit workhouses, and to order the removal of insane inmates there-
from to asylums at their discretion. They should also be empowered,
upon the report of the Commissioners, to order the removal into the
asylum of pauper patients boarded with strangers.
" No lunatic or alleged lunatic to be received into or detained in a
workhouse, unless he shall have been duly taken before a justice or offi-
ciating clergyman, and adjudged by him as not proper to be sent to an
asylum.
" In any case, however, wherein an order for a lunatic's reception
into an asylum shall be made by a justice or officiating clergyman, it
shall be competent to him, if, for special reasons to be set forth in his
order, he shall deem it expedient, to direct that such lunatic be taken,
pro tempore, to the workhouse, and there detained for such limited
period, not exceeding' two clear days, as may be necessary, pending
arrangements for his removal to the asylum.

" A list of all inmates of unsound mind to be kept by the medical
officer of a workhouse, and left accessible to the Visiting Commis*
sioner.

" The medical officer to specify, in such list, the forms of mental
disorder, and to indicate the patients whom he may deem curable, or
otherwise likely to benefit by, or in other respects proper for, removal
to an asylum.

" The Visiting Commissioner, and the Poor-Law Inspector, to be
empowered to order and direct the relieving officer to take any insane
inmate before a justice, under the provisions of the 67th Section of the
Lunatic Asylums Act, 1853.

" In all cases of inmates of unsound mind temporarily detained in
workhouses, the medical officer to be invested with full powers as re-
spects classification, diet, employment, and medical and moral treat-
ment, and otherwise."

In the preceding article we have endeavoured to show from
the statistics of pauper lunacy, and the Report of the Commis-
sioners in Lunacy on the condition, character, and treatment of
lunatics in workhouses, the necessity which exists for a full
inquiry into the amount and fostering causes of lunacy among the
poor and indigent classes of the population, and while doing
this we have examined the Report at a sufficient length we trust
to aid in the immediate object at which it aims. The approaching
Census, we have pointed out, would be the best, perhaps the only
means, of ascertaining accurately the amount of lunacy among the
poor and indigent classes, this inquiry constituting a portion of
an inquiry into the entire amount of insanity in the kingdom?a
desideratum in social as well as medical science; while a specific
inquiry would be needed into the fostering causes of insanity
among the poor. Whether this latter inquiry would be consistent
with the onerous duties of the Commissioners in Lunacy, or would
require for its carrying out a special Commission we cannot say;
but we would again urge the importance and necessity of both thy
investigations we have indicated.
