Proposed Amendment of The Law of Lunacy
========================================

It was our intention to have discussed at a considerable length this
important subject, but as the matter in all its details is at this moment
under the consideration of a committee of the House of Commons, and
witnesses are in the course of examination, we have thought it would
be in better taste, and more consistent with the public good, to defer
the publication of our remarks until the committee have completed
their labours, and drawn up their report for the legislative consideration
of Parliament. We cannot, however, refrain from directing the atten-
tion of our body to several valuable pamphlets that have appeared on
this subject within the last few weeks. They should all be attentively
read and diligently studied by every person interested in a right
solution of the many difficult and important medical and social
questions discussed in their pages. We would particularly refer our
readers to the able essay of Dr Seymour. Nothing can proceed from
this accomplished physician's pen that is not entitled to the most
* (1), "A Letter to the Earl of Shaftesbury on the Laws which regulate Private
Lunatic Asylums," by Ed. J. Seymour, M.D., E.R.S., &c. pp. 59. Long-
man : 1859.

(2). "Plea for the Insane Poor," by John Millar. H. Eenshaw ? 1859.
(3). " Suggestions for the Amendment of the Laws relating to Private Lunatic
Asylums," by Gr. Ed. T. Conolly, Barrister-at-law. Shaw and Sons : 1859.
(4). "What shall we do with our Lunatics ?" by Edward Eccles, F.R.C.S. J.
Churchill: 1859.
(5). " On some Points in the Legal Provisions for the Poor," by J. T. Arlidge,
M,B. and A.B. London : 1859.

careful and respectful attention. Dr Seymour was for many years
one of the Metropolitan Commissioners in Lunacy, and, therefore, lie
speaks as an authority on all subjects connected with the medical and
domestic treatment of the insane. Many of his suggestions, as em-
bodied in the pamphlet before us, are worthy of earnest attention. The
pamphlet is written with great care, and embraces a full consideration
of nearly all the points of interest connected with the subject of
Lunacy Law. We beg our readers to procure the essay, and to read its
interesting pages, and judge for themselves of their great merits.
We again repeat that it would be ill-judged for us to quote passages
from Dr Seymour's Essay, or from any of the pamphlets alluded to,
whilst the matter is still subjudice. We would, however, particularly
call attention to the remarks of Mr. Conolly, who has evidently devoted
much time and attention to the subject, as well as to the three remain-
ing pamphlets referred to at the bottom of the page. The Committee
appointed by the House of Commons has commenced its labours, and
several witnesses have already been examined. The whole subject at
the conclusion of the inquiry will be fully discussed in these pages.
