Junior School Projects
=======================

:Author: Joyce Kenwrick, M.A., 
lutorm Education at Edge
Training College, Lanes. With illustrationsUniversity of London Press. 5/-.

Although an interesting account of several
projects, this book does not convey much that
is new in the type of project described.
Its purpose, as stated by the author, is to
help the young teacher fresh from college, who
still needs guidance and help when experiment'
ing with work on project lines. To some extend
the book will fulfil this purpose, but it is essential that the reader should bear in mind the
words quoted in the introduction: " You can'
not tell people how to carry out projects. Yo11
can only tell them what has been done i11
Elementary Schools and show the kind of thing
that is possible." This, Miss Kenwrick proceeds
to do and in describing definite projects carried
out under her supervision, attempts to give the
inexperienced teacher the help and suggestions
she considers necessary.

The young teacher of to-day, however, who>
as a student, has taken a course of modern
psychology, together with lectures on mode#1
methods, will probably find it possible to work
on much freer lines than those set out in th1?
book,

Although essentially interesting to the children who took part in them, several of these
activities are frequently carried out in the Junior
School, and others?such as the Magazine,
Harvest Festival, Flags of the Nations, Stamp
Collecting?hardly seem to warrant the title of
' project."

Nevertheless, the book should prove useful to
those to whom such suggestions are new.
F.E.R.
