The Range of Human Capacities
==============================

:Type: Book Reviews
:Author: David
Wechsler, Ph.D. Bailliere, Tmdall and Cox,
London, 1935. 11/6.

I find this to be a stimulating, if not an important piece of work, and propose to give it a
fairly exhaustive review. It is concerned, as
the title states, with the range of human
capacities. " When we compare the mathematical ability of an Einstein, or the scientific
intuition of a Pasteur or the poetic gifts of a
Shakespeare, with the correlative abilities of
average men, let alone those of a moron or
idiot, the range of human abilities appears well
nigh limitless." Wechsler begins with these
words, and then proceeds to ask how extensive
these differences are. How much do the least
and the most able individual differ?

Some few years ago Wechsler startled some of
us by suggesting that the differences between
individuals at most amounted to the important
figure 2.7182..., namely, an amount equal to
the logarithmic constant. This would seem to
betray Wechsler's own ability?some of us can
see Wechsler searching unconsciously for perfection, here in a perfect, and yet also imperfect,
constant. But this minor aberration on his part
must not prevent us from paying serious attention to the present study, which indeed is a
model of its kind, a valuable and almost exhaustive scientific study.

Wechsler's method is to search all the literature available to him for satisfactory data upon
which to apply his measurement of range. Some
ninety major studies are investigated, with
populations of 200 or so up to nearly 100,000
persons. He has many sound things to say
about the paucity of published data; few of us
now emulate the great Galton and work with
thousands of persons as population. Fewer still
report all the necessary data in their papers.

Wechsler, nevertheless, is able to draw upon
measurements for such capacities as stature
(96,239 American soldiers), span of arms (1,241
English females), body temperature, duration
of pregnancy, platelats in the blood, neck circumferences, respiratory rate, pulse rate, weight
of brain, heart, hair, and kidney, and similar
physical and physiological measurements, as
well as upon abilities of the kind tapping,
stringing discs, running 60 metres, card sorting,
memory span, intelligence quotient, and formboard ability.

As his measure of range he uses the ratio
between the ability of the 2nd and the 999th
person in each 1,000 individuals. These extremes of stature in the case of the American
soldiers are 152.6 and 164.9 cm. respectivelyThe range is, therefore, 164.9 divided by 152.6,
an amount 1.28. The following figures give
examples of such ranges, taken from the ninety
or so reported by Wechsler:

Body temperature ... ... 1.04
Calcium in blood ... ... ... 1.26
CO2 production per minute ... 1.54
Neck circumference ... ... 1.53
Pulse rate ... ... ... ... 1.86
Body weight ... ... ... 2.44
High jump   2.02
Card sorting ... ... ... 2.50
Intelligence quotient ... ... 2.30
Hard learning ... ... ... 3.81
(Substitution test)
The most striking thing about such ratios _lS
certainly their smallness, and also the way i11
which they increase with increasing complexity
of the capacity or ability.

Wechsler supports his criterion of range,
the face of current opinion that a measure in
terms of extreme values (such as the 2nd and
999th in a 1,000 population) is likely to be unsound. He points out, and quite rightly, that
very little if any data such as he has examined
is distributed on a normal probability curve, s?
that he is not justified in using sigma as
measure of range. By omitting the 1st and
1,000th case in each 1,000 Wechsler believes that
he takes sufficient account of such errors as the
extremes involve. I am inclined to agree with
Wechsler, that for his purpose his unorthodox*
but simple and apparently efficient, statistical
device is permissible. It results in a remarkable
orderliness in the ratios it supplies. These,
the above samples show, range from about 1-2"
to a little over 3.00. Moreover, the ratios seenj
to be clustered; more ratios than we would
anticipate by chance are of values 1.26, 1-^'
2.00, and 2.52 respectively?and these value5
are successively 1.26, 1.262, 1.263, and 1.26;
Whether this latter geometricity is another oI
Wechsler's unconscious searches for perfection,
now replacing his earlier conjecture 2.7182 . ? '
(e), I am in some doubt. Philpott has sho^11
just such remarkable instances of geometric
ratios in his study on " Fluctuations in Human
Output " (British Journal of Psychology'
Monograph Supplement XVII), and it would W
an extraordinary fact if this same kind 0
geometricity appeared in gross abilities anC
growths of the human being.

Having admitted the validity, to my mind, of
the statistical procedure, it remains to interpret
the results and to examine whether they are
Really exhaustive. Since the ratios are so small,
Wechsler proceeds to infer that individuals do
u?t differ as much one from another as is usually
believed. In this connection, too, he examines
at length the growth of abilities with age, and
jlecides that man is at his maximum ability
between the ages 20 and 35 or so. Here, indeed,
Wechsler waxes extremely pessimistic. He calls
the Chapter " The Burden of Age ", and it
flakes funereal and dismal reading. He shows
that men of genius have usually given their best
^v?rk to the world before they are 40; he repeats
the notion that intelligence ceases to grow at
about 15 years of age. Yet he has to admit
that experience and maturity count for somehing, and that it is stupid to suggest that youth
should be put at the helm because of its superior
Opacities. It may be true that the ideas that
jjvify a nation or a science or an art come for
the main part from the younger individuals
rather than from the old, but it needs the sanity
aud maturity of the older, their judgment and
Perspective, to place these ideas on a charitable
aud reasonably conservative footing.

His discussion of genius leaves much to be
desired. He considers that the genius and the
fuperior person differ very little in capacity,
ut that this slight difference leads to the vast
Qualitative and quantitative differences in outPut that marks the man of genius as a being
aPart from the merely superior person. Genius
ls believed to depend on the " rare ability to
Perceive new relationships " (p. 77). The truth
Seems to be, however, that the ability to perceive
Uew relationships is by no means rare, but is
lristead one of the most common of human
Abilities. In searching for something sui generis
the genius it seems to me that Wechsler conradicts the main thesis of his study. For 1
|v?uld agree with Wechsler that the ranges of
uuman capacities are not as wide as we imagine
hem to be; and that as a consequence we lesser
ut perhaps still superior mortals need not fear
0 attempt the task of becoming great mathematicians, physicists, medical practitioners,
pists, politicians, and what we please, because
^?h levels of attainment in any of these spheres
a^e not beyond the capacities of most persons
. sound training and good intelligence. There
s too much acceptance of superior attainment
s something that is unapproachable except by
e gifted few, and far too little faith in our
?vvu capabilities. The sparks of a genius, the
simple ideas of a Newton of a Freud, or of an
Einstein, are not beyond the range of vast numbers of persons who little believe that they could
have been capable of such flights.

All this, however, does not necessarily follow
from Wechsler's data. I am certain that
Wechsler could have found facts very different
from those he reports, had he looked further
afield for them. Thus, in the case of the University College (London University) Entrance
Examination, an intelligence test given each
year to some 400 students, the range of scores
is nearer 10.0 than 2.0. The 2nd and 999th
individuals have scores 50 and 400 respectively,
and this without any distorting of the crude
facts. Make the range of persons wide enough,
and this ratio can be heightened still further, to
hundreds, and not merely 2.0. All depends on
what one takes to be " units of amount." In
the case I am referring to, the individuals only
have a limited time to solve each question of
the intelligence test; the really stupid person
rarely gets one answer correct because he never
has time enough to complete it; but the clever
person succeeds in the 400 or more he attempts
during the 2 hours of examination. We merely
have to increase the time of the examination,
and the number of test-units, and the difference
between the brilliant and the stupid person becomes greater and greater. Thus, I fancy that
all facts do not have the simplicity that
Wechsler's data displays. The facts hold true
for the physical and physiological capacities,
but the more certain the work becomes on the
purely psychological side of man, the more likely
does it seem that the range will be much greater
than that reported by Wechsler.

Nevertheless, the author has to be complimented on bringing to completion a very sound
piece of work, the result, I am sure, of many
months of labour. It is well worth reading by
all who take an interest in the measurement of
human abilities. Many of his observations on
the need for better measurement, on larger
populations, are welcome reminders to working
psychologists. It is no less necessary that all
the facts of an experiment should be available
for posterity, and not merely an average and a
standard deviation descriptive of such facts. In
this connection it is of interest that the Council
of the British Psychological Society has recently
instituted a Committee on Human Mental
Measurements, which has as one of its objects
the husbanding of just such masses of data as
those so diligently sought for by Wechsler.
Wm. Stephenson.
