The Education of the Ordinary Child
====================================

:Type: Reviews
:Author: John Duncan-
Thos. Nelson & Sons Ltd. 1942. 15s.

Mr. John Duncan has built the Lankhills system upon
the principle that any sound structure needs a firm base*
as essential to the higher as to the lower courses. For
this reason he calls his book The Education of the Ordinary
Child.

It describes how, at Lankhills, a residential special
school in Hampshire, teaching methods are selected
according to the principle that mental activity should
result in further activity both abstract and applied-
The schemes of work not only carry into practice
Spearman's principle of " noegenesis but any work
is rejected if, in spite of superficially satisfactory results,
it fails to satisfy the principle.

The account of how these methods have been evolved
provides not only a testimony to the work and research
of the whole staff, but to their intelligent clarification
of the reciprocal roles of teaching and learning. Mr-
Duncan does not claim the exclusive possession of a
unique staff, but he emphasizes that while other schools
may have equally conscientious teachers, his colleagueS
really understand the difference between instruction
and education.

At Lankhills the inculcation of good mental habits
ensures that each child shall attain his maximum potential
intellectual efficiency, the attainment of which carries
with it increased social development, which, in turn,
results in a degree of happiness and personal stability
unlikely to be gained where, from the child's point of
view, " school learning " has little apparent connection
with practical life.

Continuity of purpose is obviously a strong feature of
life at Lankhills, and its achievement is the more remark-
able since, among the majority of duller children,
persistence of effort, as distinct from mere purpose-
less perseveration, is usually conspicuous by its
absence.

Lankhills methods are essentially eclectic. For some
years Mr. Duncan and his staff have been winnowing
the wheat from the chaff of many other methods. They
have chosen and modified those which encourage a
child to use his practical intelligence and which develop
his ability to plan and work in correct sequence, and
therefore most economically. This partly explains why
at his school the children, though mentally limited,
get through a surprising amount of work, and further,
learn to criticize their efforts.

Throughout the book there is frequent reiteration
of the fact that it is a grasp of relationships in concrete
and practical situations which largely determines our
social efficiency, and is usually one of the weakest
factors in the mental make-up of subnormal persons-
Lankhills training is deliberately planned to develop
this factor.

This admirable book provides a healthy antidote
to much loose thinking about " equality of opportunity,
which so often is in danger of being misinterpreted as
" identical opportunity ", and as such, proves to
anything but " equal". Mr. Duncan could hardly
have chosen a better time to have given us the benefit
of his experience and research and to have presented
us with the results of the sound thinking that has informed
his work.
M.I.D.
