Nursing Life and Discipline
============================

:Author: Sheila M. Bevington,
?_ O- To C.A
Ph.D.(Econ.). H. K. Lewis & Co. 7s. 6d.

This book is the record of an investigation into the
conditions of nursing and of nursing administration
made in a number of hospitals, where we are told about
60 per cent, of nurses of all grades were interviewed,
a total of about 500 in all. Though there were marked
differences in the hospitals, Dr Bevington admits
that the mere fact that she was permitted to make such
an investigation indicates that all of them were to some
extent " progressive ".

Many aspects of the nurse's life are considered, such
as feeding, health, life in the Nurses Home, hours of
work and systems of training both in ward and lecture
room, and although full weight is given to adminis-
trative difficulties, practical measures for reform are
freely advocated. Probationers' difficulties are explored,
particularly those inherent in the double role of employee
and student. " The pressure under which the majority
(of ward sisters) now work " is fully appreciated and
" optional non-residence" as a contribution to its
relief is advocated, while two chapters are devoted to
the need for the nurse's training in dealing with dis-
ciplinary matters and "in the art of constructive
criticism ".

The Lancet Report, 1932 and the Interim Report of
the Inter-Departmental Committee are referred to fully.
Dr Bevington is a well qualified and trained investiga-
tor and has dealt with the problem in an unbiased and
constructive way. Comparisons have been made
between nursing and school and prison discipline.
The cultural and social needs of the nurse in training
are shown to be inadequately met, but the findings
" mainly stress the need for thoroughly reviewing the
basis of staff relations and discipline and for re-
invigorating ward training ".

Such a book, short and to the point, should be read
and considered both by nurses, who may then more
fully understand their own difficulties, and by all those
responsible in any way for nursing life and discipline
since, as the author points out, " at its best, it affords
such an opportunity for all round development as few
other trainings can offer ".
W.J.T.K.
