Diagnosis of our Time
=======================

16 MENTAL HEALTH

:Author: Karl Mannheim. Kegan
Paul. 10s. 6d. Pp. 179.

In this work a distinguished professor of sociology
formerly in Frankfurt, discusses the future reconstruction
of society. He points out that: " We are living in an
age of transition from laisser faire to a planned society,"
and that this planned society will take one of two forms.
Either it will be ruled by a minority in terms of dictator-
ship, or else it will be controlled by a new form of
government, a dynamic type of democracy.

Democracy in Professor Mannheim's opinion, must
abandon its laisser faire liberalism and cease to mistake
neutrality for tolerance. If it is to succeed in defeating
dictatorship, it must organize itself and adopt a more
active policy, giving a lead to the re-organization of
the new world order. And in order that it may do so,
democracy must enlist the help of its youth. The
totalitarian states long ago recognized the importance
of organizing the entire youth of the nation, and demo-
cracies must follow their lead in developing youth
movements. We must not refuse to learn from the
totalitarian states even although our aims may be very
different from theirs.

Dr Mannheim is of the opinion that Britain is
eminently fitted to take the lead in the founding of a new
world order, but if she is to do so, the British must
become more vocal and formulate more clearly their
ideas. He complains that we have a dislike for all
theories and prefer to work silently without speaking
of what we are doing. If democracy is to survive it
must become more militant and proclaim the ideals
for which it is fighting. Dr Mannheim believes that
unless it does so mankind will be enslaved by some
totalitarian system of planning which once it is estab-
lished, it will be difficult to get rid of.

Dr Mannheim's essays deal with issues which cannot
be evaded and they will be read with great interest by
those who are concerned with the future of society.
He is confident that Europe can be saved by careful
planning and re-organization, more confident indeed
than many of his readers are likely to be. He deals
very little with the great fundamental difficulties
dependent on the nature of man.
K.W.
