Fiealph for the People
=======================

:Author: Horace Marshall & Sons Ltd.
n ? uiv a twyic. .nuia.cc iviarsnaii cc sons laq-
XhPP- 80. is.

Sub.p rePort on the Health Services was prepared by a
"^he c?mrn-ttee ^ve aPP?inted by the Liberal Party.
fr0ni wmmittee is a lay one and acknowledges assistance
To th Aleck Bourne for many of the figures quoted.
fmi-tie rev'ewer> as one who has spent many years in
al,0*e Government service, but who has always been
does e privilege of private practice " so long as it
substn?t interfere with official duties the report is in
fr0rtlance an echo of his own views. One quotation
annr?Pa?e 10 will show the sub-committee's general
pproach to its subject:

, ^ is not in the best interests of the nation that the
?cal development of vitally important medical and
her technical services should be left to the initiative
nd direction of lay persons, however enthusiastic
jjd well-meaning, acting without medical expert
^lce, as is at present the case.

Statutory Medical Advisory Committees, charged
th the duty of advising the Local Authorities in e exercise of their functions in respect of public
aShh, should be appointed in each autonomous
Th Interf r^?mmendations are generally on the lines of the
but Report of the Planning Committee of the B.M.A.,
estau,-e,net is cast wider. The Committee approve the
k?mi Miment Health Centres as the pivot of the
Sugg est Lary Medical Services. These Centres, it is
the i0 ,' should be provided, equipped and supplied by
nursin authority in respect of technical, clerical, and
tiye of Personnel- At these Centres all persons irrespec-
choiCe 'p00016 should register. There should be free
f?llow. ?* doctors, and these should be paid on the
Patient1118 basis ' the sum of the capitation fees of
tty0 s registered at the Centres would be divided into
p rts. The amount of one half would be distributed
equally among all the doctors (eight to twelve in number)
attached to the Centre. The remainder would be
divided in a proportionate manner according to the
number of patients opting for each doctor. Patients
unable to visit the doctor at the Health Centre would be
seen at home, and doctors could at their own premises
and on their own terms see those wishing to consult them
in their private consulting rooms or surgeries. The
special difficulties of arrangements in Rural Areas is
discussed. The provision of consultant services is
recommended for the Health Centres as well as hospitals.
The Centre would accommodate or would be the centre
for dental and other special ancillary services. The
Committee hope that all district nursing services would
be associated with the Centre.

Voluntary hospitals would be brought under the scheme
by an allocation of grants from the Local Authority up
to 75 per cent, of their expenses. Hospitals with Medical
Schools attached would receive their grants from the
University Grants Committee. The report closes with
an interesting appendix on " Social Therapy
For those who have not studied the question of Medical
Services after the war the report is well worth reading.
H.C.S.
