Clinical Studies of Failures with the Witmer Formboard
========================================================

The Psychological Clinic
Copyright, 1918, by Lightner Witmer, Editor.
Vol. XI. No. 8
January 15, 1918
:Author:  Adam Perry Kephart, A.M.,
University of Pennsylvania.
Introduction.

In 1915-16 H. H. Young1 made the first extensive study with
the Witmer Formboard and used the results from testing 1474
normal boys and 1375 normal girls of all ages for a preliminary and
basic standardization of normal children.
The object of the following investigation was threefold; (1) to
study the formboard as an educational device; (2) to analyze failures
so as to determine why a subject fails and what his failure means; and
(3) to get one who has failed, to do the test with a minimum amount
of teaching.
No attempt was made to examine a large number of children.
The investigation was not interested in the standardization of results
?r in standard procedure, but in learning what difficulties the formboard presents, what causes failure, and what failure means in relation to diagnosis. Wherever children were tested in a school, the
request was made that the worst in the room be sent. That is,
failures were not selected from a miscellaneous number who were
offered for the test, but were found by examining the youngest and
most backward pupils in the lowest grades and kindergarten of two
public schools and a Montessori school, and the most apparently
backward children who could be found about a small social center.
Some children who failed, as well as some very young children,
were given instruction. This is reported under each case. In general,
failure was determined arbitrarily by the fact that the trial was left
as finished when one or more blocks were left unplaced or incorrectly
placed, or that the child received some assistance, or more than the
standard instructions as given in the method of procedure.

Method of Procedure.
In the initial presentation of the formboard to all the children
but case 1, the standard method of procedure of Young1 was followed
exactly except in two points: (1) the subjects were selected; (2) they
were not required to stand. The different places in which they
were found made it necessary to use the tables and chairs that could
be obtained. In every case, however, the child was seated so that
he could reach the blocks without strain or distraction. The light
was always the best obtainable. In the case of successes, Young's
standard method was not departed from except in the two points
mentioned. All three trials were given and the standard data
collected, with such additions as will be described under the head
of "data collected." In the case of failure, the method was varied
to suit the age or to meet the difficulty encountered. The amount
and kind of assistance and instruction given were standardized and
graduated. In some cases very little was given. In a few cases
so much help was given that it amounted to showing the subject
exactly what to do. The attempt to do exactly the same thing for
every child was for the purpose of making the results comparable.
However, in very few cases were two or more children given exactly
the same amount of instruction. The lists given below consist of
the instruction given, from the minimum amount, up to the actual
placing of the blocks for the child.

The board was laid before the child with all the blocks correctly
placed, and the child was allowed to see the examiner take them
out and put them in the tray. The following steps were taken as
needed, but only as much as needed. In case what was said or done
did not have any effect the next step was taken.

1. "Go ahead, or "All right," or "Ready."
2. The original instructions were repeated or the examiner
simply said, "See how quickly (or fast) you can put them back."
3. If the child picked up a block and began,?tried to place it,
he was allowed to work until he gave up.
4. If the child did not begin after the repetition of the instructions and sufficient urging and encouragement, the following procedure was followed, using only as much of it as was absolutely
necessary, under the condition that the minimum amount of
instruction should be given.

(?) Examiner picked up block 6 and handed it to the child.
(?) Examiner said, "Place it," or "Put it back."
(c) If the subject tried to place the block and persisted without
success indefinitely (beyond ten minutes) and the quality of the
FAILURES WITH THE WITMER FORMBOARD. 231
performance warranted it, the examiner interfered and the next step
was taken.
(d) If the child threw the blocks away or put one in his mouth,
!t was handed to him until it was clearly seen that he would go no
further; or if he simply quit and refused, the examiner took the
block, pointed to the recess and handed the block back to the subject.
This was usually enough. In the case of a few babies and one or
two others it was necessary to do this.
(e) If the blocks were placed in a random fashion over the face
the board, the trial was called a failure and the teaching began as
described in the preceding paragraph. If showing how to place
block 6 was not sufficient, after the examiner was sure the subject
could place that one, he added 1 and taught the two until there was
no doubt about the ability to place them. Then 2 was added, then
4, then 3 and 8 were taught in a similar way; then 7 and 9, 10 and
11; thus taking the two or three that were confused and teaching
them together until there was certainty in placing.
(/) If after correctly placing one or more blocks the child refused
to go on, he was urged by saying, "Go on, finish it," or "Put the
rest back."

(g) If he had trouble with any one block, he was allowed to
Work as long as he would, until it could be called an actual failure.
(h) If he failed and gave up on any block, the trial was counted
^ failure. The examiner then corrected all the errors and without
comment started the next trial.

(i) If on the third trial the child could not place one or more
blocks correctly, the examiner said either, "Look at it carefully," or
Turn it around." If this had no affect the examiner took the
particular block and turned it and then handed it back. If it was
not placed the examiner took the block and placed it, then handed
it back and said, "Now you put it in."

(j) If the child, on the third trial, persisted in trying to place
the block in one place without looking around the examiner said,
"Look all around."

There are other details of teaching which were used with individual cases, and described in the case reports. The general method,
so far as it can be made standard, was as described.
Data Collected.

As far as possible the following record was made: Name, sex,
chronological age, school age, teacher's estimate, whether failure or
not, diagnosis, rating on five point scale, formboard time, nationality,
social class, physical characteristics, and qualitative statement.
In case of failure, further clinical examination was made using
one or more of the following tests: peg-board, color discrimination,
design blocks, Witmer cylinders, hearing, vision, memory span,
Healy completion test, Binet (Terman) scale, reading, writing,
number work. The data collected from these tests was used in
making the diagnosis and summation rating.

Reports of Cases.
As far as possible all of the cases are treated alike, especially in
the order of presentation of the material. Case 1 is an exception to
this, as the study was made as a separate investigation, as noted in
the report. In the case of school children the school rating or
teacher's estimate was given. By the type of failure is meant the type
of performance. When it is recorded that the failure type is one of
"imageability" it means that, judging from the performance, the
failure is due more to lack of imageability than to any other factor
although all the other disabilities may be contributing to the failure.
There is no thought or intention of intimating that failure is due to
any one lack or disability or that an ability can be isolated in function.
In the rating, in the technical diagnosis, every child is compared with
others of his own age. The selected cases are reported to illustrate
the various types of performance and to bring out the abilities which
make success possible and the disabilities which make failure possible.
The two reports selected for presentation are of interest because
of the possible comparisons and contrasts. The first is a normal one
year old baby and the second a twelve year old idio-imbecile. Both
fail for the same reason, and the second is mentally of the same age
as the first child when she first succeeded with the formboard. It is
unfortunate that neither of these can be located on Young's standardization. The other failures, unless they were below all of Young's,
were located thus: shortest of Young's successes, in group IV of
years; shortest of Young's failures, from group I of 4^ years to
group V of 8z/i years.

Case 1.
Girl. Diagnosis: Normal. Age: 13 mo. School age: 0.
Rating: 3.5. Formboard Time: See report. Nationality: American. Social Class: Professional. Physical Characteristics: Normal.
Young's Standardization: Shortest of successes: Below all. Shortest
of failures: Below all. Types of Failure: Lack of understanding and
persistent concentration of attention. Why Selected: To determine
how long it would take the baby to teach herself to do the formboard
test.

This study was made for the purpose of observing the part
Played by the several abilities as they develop in the very young
child. Margaret had had no experience with the formboard and
little experience with other blocks. As will be seen in the description
of the method as applied to this case, the minimum amount of
instruction was given. For six months the child worked with the
test until she was successful. With few exceptions the board was
placed before her on a small table and she sat or stood before it.
The task could not be given to her daily on account of the occasional
absence of the examiner. She was allowed to work or play with the
board only under supervision during the first four months of the
experiment. During the last two weeks it was placed on a low
cabinet where she could have it all the time. No one besides the
investigator was allowed to present the test to her, and she was not
allowed to see anyone else try it. During the first four months, after
each presentation, she was permitted to play with the board as long
as she would. Thirty tests were made during the first four months,
from May 30th to September 28th. After that she did not see the
board for a full month. From November 1st to 12th, when complete
success came, she had the board to play with as she pleased, but
without assistance and never with other children.

Test 1. May 80, 1915. Age 12 mo. 18 da.
(?) Before showing the formboard all the blocks were placed
in the tray. It was then put before her and the examiner said, "Put
the blocks back." This was repeated twice. She did nothing.
(?) The circle was picked from the tray and the examiner said,
"Put this one in." She took it, looked it over, and handled it as
she would any other article, then put it in her mouth. The examiner
insisted, "Put it in." She did not try.

(c) The examiner placed the circle in its recess, handed it to
her and said, "Margaret do it." She took the block and put it in
her mouth.

(d) Without permitting her to see what he was doing, the
examiner placed all the blocks in their recesses with the exception of
the circle. He then put the board before her, handed the circle to
her and said, "Margaret, put it in." She took the block but did
nothing with it. The examiner then took it, put it in its recess and
Pointed to it. He then took it out, handed it to her and said,
'Margaret do it." She quickly put it in.

(e) With all the blocks in their recesses the examiner took the
circle, placed it on the board just beside the recess and pushed it in.
He then placed it again in the same position and said, "Margaret,
do it." She quickly did it.

(/) The examiner placed all the blocks in the tray. Margaret
picked up the circle and tried it in the diamond recess. She then lost
interest and tried to take the examiner's pencil and paper. She threw
the blocks around the room.

The circle was chosen because it is the simplest of the forms.
It requires less information, less coordination, than any of the rest,
and is attractive. In (a) above there were several possibilities. She
may not have understood what was asked. She most likely did not
associate any of the blocks with any of the recesses. In (b) she did
what she needed to do, took the block and examined it and the
mouth was the proper place to put it. She could not associate it
with the recess as there is little resemblance at first presentation.
In (c) one would expect her to follow the lead and at least place the
block on the board somewhere. But she still did not have enough
information or did not understand what was wanted. There were
too many recesses. In (d) the number of choices was cut to one but
she did not understand the command. When the examiner placed
the block for her the command was explained and interpreted and
she quickly responded. Trial (e) was not necessary but it served as
a review of the fact that the block and the recess belonged together.
Trial (/) showed that she had reached the limit of persistence of
attention.

The coordination of hand and eye movements is most important
in this early feat of coordination. An occasional glance might be
sufficient to locate and associate the block and its recess, but the
hand movement would have to be fairly precise to bring success.
The performance shows that the command and the demonstration
were necessary because of the small range of observation and distribution of attention. Attention is forced by the procedure but the
period is very short. The first test did not last longer than three
minutes.

Test 2. May 81, 1915. Age 12 mo. 19 da.
(?) With all the blocks in the trough, the board was placed
before Margaret with the command, "Put the blocks all back."
She pulled at the board and picked up blocks at random, but always
picked up the circle first.

(?) The examiner picked the circle from the tray, handed it to
her and said, "Put this one in." She took it and looked at it as she
turned it over and over.

(c) The examiner then took the circle and said, "See Daddy do
failures with THE WITMER FORMBOARD. 235
it," and placed it. He then handed it to her and said, "Margaret
do it." She quickly placed it.

(d) With all the recesses filled except 6, the board was put
before her. The circle was given her with the command, "Margaret
Put it in." She did it.

(e) With all the other blocks in their recesses, the circle was
placed beside its recess and the command given, "Push it in." She
did it.

Very definite progress is seen in this second presentation. The
amount of teaching is cut down. A decided improvement in analytic
concentration of attention in a very elementary form is shown by the
very certain success when the number of choices is increased.
Test 8. June 1, 1915. Age 12 mo. 20 da.

(a, c, d) Procedure and result the same as on the first two days.
(<b) The examiner took the block from the tray (all recesses being
empty) and handed it to her saying, "Margaret put it in." She
placed it with very little hesitation and without trial and error. She
then took the cross and tried to put it in the circular recess.
Here is shown another definite stage of improvement. She
selected the proper recess from many empty ones. The simplicity of
the task and the first attempt to place another block are to be
floted.

Test 4. June 2, 1915. Age 12 mo. 21 da.
There was no variation from the third day except that she tried
to put the circle in a triangular recess.
Test 5. June 8, 1915. Age 19 mo. 22 da.
Could not get any response.

Test 6. June 4, 1915. Age 12 mo. 23 da.
(a, b, c) Procedure and success as before. She tried to put the
circle in the semicircular recess and in several other places, and then
lost interest.

(e) She picked up the circle and rolled it across the floor. She
then tried to put it in the recesses for cross, triangle, and star; took
the diamond and star, put them on the floor, and then walked away
"with the circle.

In (a) the attempt to put the circle in other recesses and in
(b) her attention to other blocks were significant in that she was
showing interest in other blocks and that her distribution of attention
was increasing. The repeated success of (Jo) shows that the success
was not accidental.

Test 7. June 9, 1915. Age 12 mo. 28 da.
(a) The examiner put all the blocks in the tray and told her to
put them back. She picked the circle and placed it without trial
and eiTor.

(b, d) Procedure and success as before. She then took out a
few blocks, emptied the board, and carried the semicircle away.
This was the first time she took a block from the tray and placed
it; it was also the first time she tried to take the blocks out of the
recesses, showing that she had some idea of the relations.

Test 8. June 14, 1915. Age ISmo. 3 da.

(a) Procedure and success as on the 9th. She tried the ellipse
in the square and circular recesses and then in its own recess.
The other trials were omitted. On the 9th she seemed to see
some of the relations and now she applied this knowledge in correctly
placing the ellipse after two trial errors. There was little analysis yet,
but still it was not entirely trial and error, unless the success on the
third trial was accidental. The procedure was largely confined to
offering her the board with all the blocks in the tray.
Test 9. June 15, 1915. Age 13 mo. 4 da.
(a) Procedure and success as before.
(c) The examiner handed each of the blocks to her in succession.
She threw them down at once with the exception of the circle. She
held it and looked at it for about five seconds and then placed it
correctly.

Test 10. June 16, 1915. Age 13 mo. 5 da.
(a) Procedure and success as before, three times in succession.
She tried to put the circle in the semi-circular recess but then went to
playing and throwing the blocks about.

Test 11. June 18, 1915. Age 13 mo. 7 da.
(?) She took the circle from the tray and placed it correctly.
(?) The examiner put the circle back in the tray with the other
blocks, then took it out, handed it to her and said, "Put it back."
She did it.

(c) The examiner placed all the blocks in the recesses without
permitting her to see the operation, handed her the circle and said,
'Put it back." She did it.

(d) The examiner repeated trial (a). She played a while and
lost interest.

Test 12. June 20, 1915. Age 13 mo. 9 da.
No apparent progress except that she took all the blocks out and
placed them beside her on the chair.
Test 18. June 21, 1915. Age 18 mo. 10 da.
No progress. The time was spent playing with the blocks.
Test 14? July 1, 1915. Age 18 mo. 20 da.
(a) With all the blocks in the tray she picked out and placed
the circle, then passed out the blocks to the examiner, one by one,
threw them around the room and tried to put the circle in the square
and elliptical recesses. When other blocks were handed to her she
threw them away.

Test 15. July 4, 1915. Age 13 mo. 24 da.
No new developments. Trial (a) only was given.
Test 16. July 10, 1915. Age 18 mo. 29 da.

(a) With the board empty she took first the circle and then the
star and placed them correctly without trial error. She then wanted
to throw the blocks. She sat on the board, turned it over and tried
to place the blocks on the under side.

Here we see another definite acquisition. Of her own accord
she picked the star, an attractive form, and placed it correctly.
That she tried to place the blocks on the under side of the board
indicates improvement in understanding.

Test 17. July 15, 1915. Age 14 mo. 8 da.
Performance of the tenth repeated exactly.
Test 18. July 28,1915. Age 14 mo. 16 da.
(a) With all the blocks in the tray she took the circle and placed
it. She then tried it in other recesses, took it out and put it back
four times in succession. She tried the star in its recess but could not
make it go down. She then took the other blocks from the tray and
passed them to the examiner one by one and sat on the board.

Test 19. July 30, 1915. Age 14 mo. 18 da.

(a) She took the circle from the tray, tried it in the semicircular
and square recesses, then on the cross and then in its own recess.
Test 20. August 2, 1915. Age 14 mo. 21 da.

(?) She took the hexagon (10) and tried it in the diamond (11)
recess, the semicircle (5) in the ellipse (4). She then put the ellipse
on the hexagon and tried to put both in the diamond recess.
(?) Without permitting her to observe, the examiner put all the
blocks in their recesses, handed the star to her and said, "Put it back."
She placed it without error after a little fumbling.
Test 21. August 10, 1915. Age 14 mo. 29 da.
This test was a complete failure. She showed no inclination
to try.

Test 22. August 11,1915. Age 14 mo. 30 da.
The examiner presented the board with all the blocks in their
recesses. She took out all and then put the equilateral triangle (9)
back in its recess. She then tried to put the cross in the circular
recess and the circle in the cross recess but lost interest and quit.
Test 23. August 13, 1915. Age 15 mo. 1 da.

When all of the blocks were in the tray the examiner handed
the circle to her and she placed it correctly. He then gave her the
star and she put it on its recess but not down in it.
Test 24. August 20, 1915. Age 15 mo. 8 da.

With all the blocks in the tray she took the circle, placed it,
took it out again, and tried to put the star in the circular recess. She
then took the cross and tried it in the circular recess, and then put
the circle back in its recess.

Test 25. August 24,1915. Age 15 mo. 12 da.
No progress or change to report.
Test 26. August 25, 1915. Age 15 mo. 13 da.
(a) She took the circle and placed it, tried it in the recesses for
semicircle, ellipse, cross, and star, then put it back in its own recess.
She took the semicircle and star and put them on but not down in
their own recesses.

(b) With all the blocks but the star and semicircle placed, the
examiner gave her first the star and then the semicircle saying, "Put
this one back." She refused and ran away.

In these recent tests she seemed to think that if the circle would
fit one recess it should fit all, so she tried it around the board. This
shows poor imageability, but increased association and understanding. On the second of August there was indication that she was
beginning to think of the other blocks in the same way that she did
?f the circle. There was indication of an attempt to use the trial and
error method in working with other blocks than the circle. On the
second she placed the star, and on the eleventh the triangle. She
now reversed the association and tried the other blocks in the circular
recess. On the thirteenth and twenty-fifth, she definitely connected
the star and semicircle with their recesses.

Test 27. September 7,1915. Age 15 mo. 26 da.

"With all the blocks in the tray she took the cross, semicircle, and
circle and tried to place them but failed. This is the first time it was
certain that she understood when told to take the blocks out and put
them back, for she repeated the effort when told to do so. In taking
them out she took them one by one from the board to her chair, and
when only three were left she turned the board over. When she was
told to put the blocks back she tried a few but lost interest and quit.
Here is shown definite interest, increase in understanding,
increase in distribution of attention, and increased persistence of
attention.

Test 28. September 17, 1915. Age 16 mo. 5 da.
The examiner placed the board before her with all the recesses
filled and said, "Take the blocks out and put them here" (indicating
the tray). She put them all there except the cross and the rectangle.
The examiner then said, "Put them back." She began picking up
the blocks, placed the circle and cross, and quit.

Test 29. September 26, 1915. Age 16 mo. 14 da.

The examiner placed the board before her as on the 17th. She
took all the blocks out and placed them in the tray. He then told
her to put them back. She put all on the board but only the circle
m its recess. She worked longer than at any previous test and seemed
to like to take the blocks out and put them back on the board.
Test 80. September 28, 1915. Age 16 mo. 16 da.

With all the blocks in the tray the examiner gave her the circle
and she placed it. He then took away the circle and gave her the
cross. She tried to force it into the circular recess. The examiner
then put the circle in its recess and gave her the cross. She took the
circle out and again tried to force the cross into the circular recess.
She then took the semicircle, star, and cross and tried all in the
circular recess.

The results so far are about what would be obtained from a
low grade imbecile on the first trial with the formboaVd. There
is about the same amount of interest, persistence, and imageability.
This is the first time Margaret took all the blocks out and placed them
all back on the board. This certainly shows increase in understanding
and in persistent concentration of attention.

Test 81. November 12, 1915. Age 18 mo.

During the day it was observed that Margaret had put all the
blocks back in the correct recesses. It was known that they had
been scattered about the room before and that no one else had replaced
them. The examiner immediately placed all the blocks in the tray,
put the board before Margaret and said, "Margaret, put them all
back." She worked for nine minutes with many trial errors, and
placed all without final error. During the nine minutes many things
distracted her. The coordination was poor, the rate of energy
discharge was very slow. Most of the nine minutes were spent in
looking about, handling the blocks, shaking them, and jabbering to
the examiner, but when she made up her mind to place a block she
did it relatively quickly. This same condition persisted throughout
the trials which follow. A large part of the time was spent in playing.
From this time on many unrecorded tests were made.

On December 25th all were placed in three minutes, on April
24th, after she had not seen the board for five weeks, they were all
placed with one trial error in 110 sec. On August 10th the time was
70 sec., on November 10th three times in succession it was 45 sec.,
and on January 15,1917, when she was aged 32 months, it was 35 sec.
Since then the time has not been improved and there is no attempt
to speed up. From the first success, most of the time was spent in
playing between placing the blocks.

Case 15.
Girl. Diagnosis: Idio-imbecile. Formboard Time: F. 196?
F. 436. Age: 12yrs. 4 mo. School Age: Kindergarten. Rating: 1.2.
Nationality: Italian. Social Class: Poor shopkeeper. Physical
Characteristics: Cephalic index, 79.03; head girth, 52.9. Talks
little more than a child of two. Hard palate high; protruding canines and wide frog mouth; leering, wolfish appearance, slant eyes,
and nystagmus in both; extreme knock knees, spraddle legs and
feet, small ears, and awkward, babyish gait. Very thin. Young's
Standard: Shortest of successes: below all. Shortest of failures:
below all. Type of Failure: Lack of understanding and persistent
concentration of attention.

Tests.
F ormboard.
I. Blocks were fingered in monkey fashion. After the directions
were repeated she placed 3, 6 and 8 and put the rest on top of the
board.

II. She again put the blocks on top at random. When 1 was
given to her she placed it over recess 2, but corrected it when the
examiner said, "No." Nos. 2 and 4 were treated similarly. All of
the blocks were then placed with many trial errors, 7 would not
have been placed had not an observer said, "She has it backward."
Time approximately eight minutes, five spent in placing 7.
III. Repetition of trial II. Time 436 sec.
Further examination had to be made a week later when the
formboard was given again.
Formboard {second test).
I. A better performance, but she still persisted in removing
correctly placed blocks. She compared the blocks by fitting them
together. There was improvement in distribution of attention.
No assistance except urging was given. Time 523 sec.
II. Improvement in selecting and rejecting and in memory of
the simpler forms but no persistence. Time 116 sec.
III. Only three trial errors, improved interest evidenced by
singing and more rapid work. Time 99 sec.
F eg-board.
Random pegging with very poor coordination. Qualitatively
a two year old performance. Time 148 sec.
Design Blocks.
Failed on all but a row of red blocks. Could match colors if
attention was held.
242 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
Witmer Cylinders.
I. Random placing with poor coordination. The examiner
placed all but three, one of which she placed correctly. The other
two were interchanged. She was then told which were right and she
corrected the two. In the same way the four largest were placed
with two trial errors, four scattered with no errors, then five with
four errors, then five long cylinders with four trial errors, then five
long ones with small diameters with two trial errors. All were now
taken out and she began again. Her attention wandered. She said
"bang" as she placed each one. When told to correct two that were
wrong she took them out. The examiner then removed five that
were wrong. After very much assistance all were placed in 499 sec.
II. Trial I was repeated. She tried to force large into small,
and left small cylinders in large recesses. Occasionally she leaned
back and laughed and hit the cylinder a hard blow. Time 452 sec.
Binet (Terman revision).

Mental age score, three years. Intelligence quotient, 24.3.
This girl is obviously an idio-imbecile. She plays about with
other children, is imposed upon and cries at nothing, like a two year
old child. Her speech is very incoherent. She has been in the
kindergarten all her school life and she is improving a little. Her
brother of nine years, in the fourth grade, has the appearance of a
mongolian and some of the marks of the high grade imbecile. The
girl is always dirty, scantily dressed, and exhibits herself anywhere.
On the five point scale the following ratings are given: energy 2,
rate of energy discharge 2, resistence to fatigue 2, health 2, control 1.5,
coordination 1.5, initiative 2, complexity of responsiveness 1.3,
vivacity 4, analytic concentration 1.3, persistence 1.5, distribution of
attention 1.3, imageability 1.2, understanding 1.3, memory 1.4, and
intelligence 1.2. This is a good illustration of the fact that control,
coordination, and general vitality may be very low, but may not
produce failure without lack in some other respect.
General Analysis.

It will be seen from table III that there is little, if any, relation
between age, formboard time, diagnostic rating, and diagnosis (in
cases of this investigation) except the direct relation between summation rating and diagnosis. Table II shows the general tendency
for time to decrease with age for 188 subjects. A summation of all
available cases is not possible on account of the incomplete record of
formboard time for the failures who came to the Clinic. Table III is
given to afford a short summary of these studies rather than to
attempt to prove anything.

H. H. Young had a total of 182 failures out of 3031 cases examined, or 6 per cent; 75 out of 1549 boys or 4.2 per cent, and 107 out
of 1422 girls or 7.2 per cent. Of the 122 failures, 72 per cent occurred
on the first trial only, 11 per cent on the first and second trials, 3 per
cent on the third trial, and two children failed on all three trials. In
this investigation all but one failed on the first trial. In some cases
there was only one trial, as the strain of teaching wore the child out.
Ten failed on the first trial only, none on the second only, none on
the third only, six on both first and second, one on the first and third,
and seven on all three trials.

Although this investigation was not undertaken to find the
failure level for the formboard, there are many things in the results
which make it possible to locate that level approximately. In
Young's investigation, in which he tested all children who were sent
to him, taking every child in a school room, he found that out of
fifty children under five years of age, twenty-four succeeded on the
first trial and twenty-six failed. It must be remembered that he
set a time limit, of three minutes and called all failures who did not
succeed in that time. In the present investigation, where the subjects
were selected with the purpose of finding failures as soon as possible,
of the thirty subjects under five years of age, sixteen failed and
fourteen succeeded on the first trial. In Young's investigation, of
the one hundred subjects over five years of age but less than six,
seventy-eight succeeded on the first trial and only twenty-two failed.
In the present investigation, of the twelve subjects over five but less
than six, eight succeeded and four failed. These twelve must be
remembered also as selected for failure. All of this indicates that the
majority of children over five years of age may be expected to succeed with the formboard on the first trial. The fact that the subjects
of this investigation were selected simply emphasizes this point,
since in spite of the selection, twice as many succeeded in the sixth
year.

Of the 1400 cases in the Psychological Clinic of the University
of Pennsylvania who were examined with the Witmer formboard
since it has been in use, 137 failed on one or more trials. This is
roughly 10 per cent. Tables IV and V present an analysis of these
failures. Of the eighteen diagnosed as normal, sixteen were under
five years of age. Of the one hundred diagnosed as definitely feebleniinded, 69 per cent were over five years of age. Young tested very
few children under five years of age, the median of his failures coming
at 6.75 years. However, 80 per cent of his failures were between

Table I.?Young's Shortest Trials.
Age
4.25
4.75
5.25
5.75
6.25
6.75
7.25
7.75
8.25
8.75
9.25
9.75
10.25
10.75
11.25
11.75
12.25
12.75
13.50
14.50
15.50
No.
16
34
44
101
106
145
143
145
140
138
161
123
133
142
148
179
163
281
172
75
34?36
22-36
20-26
16-25
20-26
17-23
18-22
15-20
12-19
13-17
12-17
12-16
11-15
10-15
11-14
10-14
10-13
9-13
8-12
8-12
7-12
42
35-37
27-31
26-28
27-29
24-27
23-25
21-23
20-22
18-20
18-19
17-18
16-17
16-17
15-16
15-16
14-15
14-15
13-14
13-14
13
III
50
39-42
32-36
29-32
30-32
28-31
26-28
24-26
23-24
21-22
20-21
19-20
18-19
18-19
17-18
17-18
16-17
16-17
15-16
15-16
14-15
IV
53
43-47
37-44
33-38
33-38
32-37
29-31
27-30
25-27
23-25
22-24
21-22
20-22
20-22
19-21
19-21
18-19
18-19
17-18
17-18
16-17
60
53-103
46- 67
39- 92
39- 76
39- 86
32- 56
31- 51
28- 42
26- 38
25- 40
23- 54
23- 30
23- 38
22- 27
22- 33
20- 30
20- 29
19- 30
19- 24
18- 27

Table II.?Young's Shortest Trials for Failures.

No.
hi
IV
4.25
4.75
5.25
5.75
6.25
6.75
7.25
7.75
8.25
8.75
9.25
9.75
10.25
10.75
11.25
11.75
12.25
12.75
13.50
14.50
15.50
10
16
18
14
23
22
18
16
10
6
5
3
3
2
29-49
28-35
26-28
26-27
24-29
22-27
20-25
16-20
18-21
23-24
21
17
20
19
21
19
20
28
16
13
13
53-60
42-45
38-41
36-39
30-34
29-31
25-30
25-27
22-23
32
22
65-68
50-61
45-50
49-50
34-37
33-38
32-34
30-34
27-28
36
22
22
23
32
72-75
78-92
56-61
54-69
41-45
40-57
36-40
35-38
29-30
51
25
23
118
105-119
68-202
73-110
48-103
58-102
41- 53
49-131
37- 40
52
25
43
20
43
Table III.?Summary of Cases Reported.
Age
2.25
2.75
3.25
3.75
3.75
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.25
4.75
4.75
4.75
4.75
5.25
5.25
5.75
5.75
6.25
6.25
10.75
12.25
Case No.
4
3
14
7
10
16
13
23
24
17
11
19
22
18
25
20
21
9
8
12
6
5
2
15
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
D.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
D.
D.
M. G. I.
N.
N.
M. G. I.
N.
D.
L. G. I.
I. I.
Rating
3
4
3
3.3.3
3
3.3.3
3
3.2
2.4
3.3.3
3
3.3
3.3.1
3.3
2.3
3.2
1.4
3
3
1.4
3.1
2.3
1.3
1.2
F. B. Time
501
124
183
59
345
276
44
60
94
108
420
50
263
48
111
89
41
105
88
42
63
75
59
436

N.-Normal. D.=Doubtful. L. G.I.=Low Grade Imbecile. I. I.=Idio-imbecile. M.G.I.=Middle Grade Imbecile.
Table IV.?Distribution According to Diagnosis. Clinic Cases.
All
Number Per cent
Under 5
Number Per cent
Over 5
Number Per cent
Normal..
Deferred.
H. G. I..
M. G. I..
L. G. I..
I. I
S. I
Idiot....
18
19
4
11
24
51
13.1
13.9
2.9
8.0
17.6
37.8
5.8
1.5
16
11
2
5
6
2
38.1
26.2
4.8
11.9
14.2
4.8
2
11
19
45
6
2
2.1
8.5
2.1
11.6
20.0
47.3
6.4
2.1
Table V.?Time Types of Failure.
Diagnosis
Complete Under 60 Sec. Over 180 Sec,
Clinic Cases:

Normal
Deferred
H. G. I
M. G. I
L. G. I
L. I
Idiot
Young's. No Diagnosis.
1
7
1
10
23
2
1
5
2
2
4
92
3
1
1
2
2
6
11
the ages of four and eight. In the examination of 3037 subjects
Young found 188 failures, or 6.2 per cent. The difference between
this and the 10 per cent of the Clinic cases is due in part to the fact
that those who come to the Clinic are already selected or suspected
of deficiency, but also in part to the fact that the age groups are not
at all parallel. Young's failures under five years of age are only .8
per cent of the total number examined, while the Clinic failures under
five years of age are 3 per cent of the total number examined. Of all
the failures available the mode comes at 4.75 years, the median at
6.75. However, Young had more under four years old, 26 per cent
are under five years of age and 74 per cent under eight years.
Of the 19 clinic cases in which the diagnosis was deferred, which
means that these cases are at least doubtful, 8 were over five years of
age. The experience of the Clinic is that the tendency is for the
diagnosis to go down rather than up in the cases of deferred diagnosis,
so that the probability is that at least 75 per cent of these 19 cases
are feebleminded, especially those over five years of age.

As table IY shows, 69.1 per cent of the Clinic failures are over
five years of age, 13.1 per cent are definitely normal, 73 per cent are
definitely feebleminded, and 13.9 per cent doubtful, making a probability of 86.9 per cent feebleminded. Of the feebleminded 44.5 per
cent are lower than low grade imbecile, and 28 per cent are in the imbecile group. There is also a probability of 27 per cent normal. Of
these 64.3 per cent are under five years of age. Of the 73 per cent definitely feebleminded 85 per cent are over five years of age. Of the 86.9
per cent probably feebleminded 78 per cent are over five years of age.
Of the 16 per cent definitely normal 70 per cent are under five years
of age. Of the 95 subjects over five years of age who failed, 89.5 per
cent are definitely feebleminded and there is a probability of 97.9 per
cent. The number of cases is small but the indication of the tendency
is supported by the study of the cases which follow. It is very
likely that 98 per cent of those over five years of age, who are brought
to the Clinic already under suspicion, who fail with the formboard,
are feebleminded, and that 89 per cent are definitely so. However, it
must be remembered that these are selected cases, already suspected
of feeblemindedness. Yet the probability is that the examination of
a larger number of apparently normal children over five years of age
would support this to the extent of making the probability greater.
A treatment of the time results of these failures sft the Psychological Clinic is impossible, as in many cases the record indicates no
more than failure. Table Y shows the approximate number of
complete failures, those who failed under one minute, and those who
failed after working more than three minutes. ' Of course all of the
137 cases could not be used in this classification. Only those where
there is good evidence of time record and of complete failure were
used. However, the tendencies are evident from this incomplete
table. Of the 137 cases (so far as can be seen) only 15 persisted more
than three minutes on the first trial; only 13 worked less than a
minute and quit; while 51 failed more or less completely, making it
seem not worth while to record the time. Of those considered complete failures 84 per cent are definitely in the feebleminded class with
a probability of 98 per cent. Of the failures in one minute or less
more than 50 per cent are probably feebleminded. In the three
minute class 27 per cent are probably normal, and 20 per cent
definitely so.

The futility of comparisons based upon the time records of
failures with the formboard is made obvious by a consideration of the
difficulties encountered by the different subjects. If the formboard
presented the same difficulties for each, the time would mean more
33 a measure of general ability. As it is, the time is a measure only of
formboard ability. Young takes the shortest record of three trials
as the index of formboard ability. This is challenged. It is not
an index of the child's resourcefulness and intelligence, but is a
composite result produced by his intelligence and the training received
in his other trials. If all conditions could be equalized for every
trial for every subject; if the attitude of every subject were the
same, allowing for differences in ability to attend, etc.; if the attitude
of the examiner were the same in every trial for every subject, then
the shortest trial might be the index. But it seems as if these factors
are equalized most nearly in the first trial and a careful study of that
trial is most important.

In every examination the subject was told to see how quickly
tie could put the blocks back. The suggestion to hurry or do the
test fast does not have much, if any, effect upon children under six
years of age. Their movements are very deliberate and slow and
there is no indication that the young child has the concepts of time
and speed. With most children it is simply a matter of understanding
the terms and the idea suggested. They are told many times a day
to hurry, but they do not hurry. In the child of two to three years
?f age there is absolutely no response to the command to hurry.
There may be some response from the child from three to six years
?f age, if the command is repeated urgently, but the response will be
a quickening of the movements where the gain is of no advantage.
Case 1, at the age of three years and six months, after much training
"with the formboard, when urged to hurry, will make quick movements of the hands after the block is selected and near the recess by
slapping it down quickly, but she loses just as much time as ever in
picking up the blocks and finding the recesses. Her speed has
improved through practice, but not because of any understanding
of what it means to do the test fast. The older child gets the concept
very slowly, especially before he goes to school where he has experiences of tardiness and its consequences, urging to be prompt in
response to signals, urging to read faster, to hurry up and down
stairs with others who are hurrying, hastening in games, and the
rush home at meal time under the spell of the ravenous appetite of
early school days. In the case of a few children of six or seven years
of age the only response to the suggestion to hurry was the making of
swift movements similar to those described above. This is the first
noticeable element of behavior in fine with the developing concept
of speed; swift movements after there is no longer need for thought,
studied imageability, etc., but no speed in the analytic process.
Children who do try to hurry make slower records. Often the
number of errors is not due to lack of ability to perceive form, but
to blurred and incomplete perception due to rapid work.

To the second part of the first instructions, "Use both hands
if you want to," there is no response of any consequence until from
eight to ten years of age. All of the younger subjects work with the
preferred hand, at best simply making the other hand assist in
removing wrongly placed blocks or in passing blocks to the other
hand. It can be quite definitely concluded that if a child of six,
seven, or eight, uses both hands in selecting and placing the blocks,
he has good initiative, originality, and planfulness, and that in this
case the formboard aids in selecting an individual of more than
average ability.

Two general classes of failures are found, the normal and the
feebleminded, but this classification can hardly be based upon the
fact of failure or success alone. As has already been said, the
child over five years of age who fails with the formboard is very
likely to be feebleminded, the child under five who fails may be
feebleminded, but the failure alone does not prove that, for more
children between the ages of three and five succeed than fail. The
failure may be indicative of the lack of development of an ability
or a complex of abilities. In one child we will have one who lacks
and in another one in whom the ability has not yet developed, and
each may show the same symptoms, so far as formboard performance
is concerned. If thinking and mental ability are dependent upon
the functioning of the nervous system and particularly the brain
centers and medullated fibres, it is possible that in a young child
some of these centers are not yet developed enough to function
adequately or the fibres are not yet medullated because of lack of
the kind of experience necessary to develop them. Thus the disFAILURES WITH THE WITMER FORMBOARD. 249
tinction arises as to whether a subject fails because of a congenital
defect or because his experience has been such that his intellect is too
small. His intelligence is affected by both.

No failures are due to lack of vitality, health, control, coordination, or dexterity, although performance is qualitatively affected by
all. If a child is poor enough in any of these abilities to fail he would
not be submitted to any sort of test. Most failures are due to some
sort of failure of attention and particularly distribution of attention
and persistent concentration of attention. In the cases reported
in this investigation these two kinds of failures include three-fifths
of all. There is a vast difference between concentrated persistence
and simple persistence. Case 15, the idio-imbecile, is a fine example
of this. She persisted but could not concentrate. This is so closely
associated with failure due to lack of analytic concentration of
attention that the two cannot be separated. She could not give
enough attention to analyze the task. The least distraction threw
her off. She recognized the recesses corresponding to the blocks and
associated them very well, but the least impulse was sufficient to
induce her to take out one already correctly placed and try it elsewhere. Yet she stuck to it.
Failure, therefore, means inability to give proper attention.
This raises the old question,?what is attention? It is a state of
consciousness in which some one object, or thought, occupies the
center of consciousness to the relative exclusion of all other objects
or thoughts. It is the focalization of consciousness in which experience is used in judging. If experience is meager, judgment is poor,
and the performance correspondingly poor. Hence distractibility
is a prime cause of failure of attention; but it is not the only cause.
The stolid, dull, lethargic child with low vitality, without vivacity,
not alert enough to have his attention caught by distractions, will
also fail because of inability to attend. Here it may be said that he
cannot give proper attention to the task in hand for exactly the same
reason that he cannot be distracted. He cannot attend to anything.
There may be several reasons for this. First, he may be feebleminded; the cells of the cortex may be undeveloped, the association
pathways may not be made clear, or there may be lesions in the
cortex, in the inner nuclei, or among the fibres leading to the cortex.
Secondly, the subject may be so young that the cells of the cortex
are relatively undeveloped and the association pathways are not
yet established. By the time this has come about there is sufficient
ability in coordination to succeed with the task. This makes possible
a very definite line of distinction between the two general classes of
failures in which the causes are apparently the same. The feebleminded child is very much like the very young normal child.
In many cases failure seems due to lack of imageability or understanding. However, if there is persistence enough, many children
will succeed with poor imageability. Persistence in the trial and
error method will bring success in spite of poor imageability. This
persistence is indicative of some distribution of attention. It is
reasonable that one may fail to understand the task because there is
very poor form perception or imageability. There is a reciprocal
relation between the abilities here. Although imagination is the
most general and comprehensive of the powers of the mind, yet it is
true that with poor power of attention, in any respect, there is poor
imagination, and where there is poor imagination and distribution
of attention, analytic and persistent concentration of attention are
not possible. Distribution of attention may be defined as the ability
to see the possibilities in a given situation; analytic concentration
of attention may also be defined as the ability to select out the important and significant details of the situation. Therefore lack of distribution of attention is much more likely to produce failure, than
lack of analytic concentration of attention or lack of imageability or
associability.

It is apparent, therefore, that failure with the formboard is
primarily a failure in some way of attention. From the standpoint
of attention there are three things most necessary for the satisfactory
and ready completion of this test: distribution of attention, persistent concentration of attention, and analytic concentration of
attention. If the range of attention is too limited, no one can
perform this test. That is, if attention is too fixed there is a tendency
to obsession, the task is not grasped and the possibilities are not seen.
On the other hand, if distribution of attention goes so far as to make
it too widely dispersed, the difficulty is quite similar and the task
cannot be completed. The highly distractible subject is an illustration of this. There is a middle ground, where there is a distribution
of the attention sufficient to cover or grasp the possibilities, and yet
where there is enough concentration upon the immediate part to
complete it as an element of the whole. These things are observed
in the behavior of the very young child. Both difficulties are likely
to occur, the child may be easily attracted to other things and the
next minute may be under the spell of his efforts to place a given
block in the wrong recess. Where this is the case we have an emphasis
on the fact that in the education of the child he must be held to any
educational task by repeated encouragement and command, up to
the point of fatigue or distraction due to misunderstanding of the
command.

A small range of attention may be due to lack of development, to
congenital deficiency, or to injury. The range may be so small that
comparison of forms, or of forms with recesses is impossible. This comparison marks the use of a more intelligent process in the performance of
the formboard test. The child goes beyond the trial and error method,
beyond simple recognition, to a simple reasoning process. But it follows immediately upon attentive observation of two or more objects
with the question in mind as to which two are most alike. This, we
note, depends upon range and distribution of attention and is the thing
which so many young and deficient children lack; hence the dependence
upon trial and error, or the giving up to failure. In every case where
there is such comparison and consequent judgment there is good distribution of attention and analytic concentration of attention. Pillsbury2
calls this 'judgment of evaluation or association.' This judgment of
evaluation or association without actual perception marks a still
higher process and hence signifies greater ability. If the child
selects a block and says to himself, "Oh yes, I know where this goes,
I remember seeing the right recess," he is making a judgment of
evaluation on association. As judgment, then, is dependent upon
the nature of attention, so inference, in its simplest form, may be
said to be an association dependent upon the nature of attention.
Inference is simple judgment, judgment is the selection of the essential
element of a given situation with a comprehension of some of the
possibilities. But such a consciousness of the situation and the
selection are dependent upon sensation, and the consciousness of the
sensation is dependent upon attention. In the performance of the
formboard test there must be some consciousness of the situation
and, of course, there is some selection, and these things depend upon
the ability to give proper attention. This brings us to the point that
while attention is most important in the performance of the test,
attention itself is dependent upon a complex of the other abilities,
the lack of any one of which would not bring about failure. Imageability and associability determine the fixation of attention, attention
then determines what course specific imagination shall take and hence
aids in determining the understanding of the task. Specific imagination in turn depends upon memory, its trainability and retentiveness
and the readiness of recall, in short upon the clarity of the mental
image. It becomes apparent at once that "the conditions of attention
are as widespread as the conditions of consciousness."2
It has already been said that the essence of attention is the
increase of the clearness of one idea or group of ideas at the expense
others. If all forms in the formboard are equally clear, attention
is too dispersed; if none are analyzed, or if only one is observed,
there is no clearness of the mental image and hence no clear idea
dominates consciousness. It is impossible to measure the participation of all of the mental processes in determining a state of attention,
but much depends upon association in perception. Clear perception
is fundamental. Some apperceptional background is also fundamental, but this is dependent, in the first place, upon former clear
perceptions and these upon certain motor adaptations and coordinations, which come about in response to some stimulus. The value of
the formboard as a test of attention is that it gets down to the
fundamentals of attention, for in practically every case the stimulus
of the sharply defined blocks and recesses is so strong that there is
adaptation of the sense organs and correlated movements of the
organism and its parts. Only if there be defect in sense organs, or
motor inability, extreme distractibility or stubbornness, in the
otherwise normal child, will there be failure to respond. After the
response, attention may be measured roughly by the accomplishment
and the amount of stimulus necessary for distraction. If distraction
comes early, there is little persistence of attention. Fluctuation of
attention depends upon the duration of acts of attention, and this is
largely due to the fatigue of the cortical cells.

Again, the response that the examiner gets from the subject
depends upon two sets of conditions. These two include all of what
has already been said. This classification aids in keeping clear the
two sides of the question of attention. Attention depends upon
objective and subjective conditions; upon the nature of the task and
its physical background or setting, and upon the nature of the mind
of the subject at the time of presentation. Under objective conditions
we have the summation effect of successive stimuli, those brought by
the test itself and by the environment. This covers the matter of
repetition of instructions, urging, even starting the performance,
and all possible distractions. Under subjective conditions we include
the mental state of the subject when the task is presented to him, and
this will be determined by the nature of the objective conditions and
by his past experience. The kind of attention given will depend more
upon the latter than upon the former. In the instructions of the
examiner, "I am going to take all these blocks out and put them up
here ," the subject has an opportunity to picture himself doing it.
A child with experience with blocks will do better because he has had
some ideas which were similar to the one aroused. The mood of the
child at the moment of the test, his attitude toward his world, his
health tone, and his immediately preceding experience are determining
factors in the subjective condition. The whole attitude toward the
present task will be a complex determined by his apperceptional
background. To some children it is an opportunity to play a game,
to some it means a command to do hard work which they will be
compelled to do. The child with a lack of manual and digital experience will be sadly handicapped. We are inclined to say that the
performance depends upon the interest the child takes in the task,
but we are only saying again what has already been said. Interest
is only the objective way of looking at the conditions of attention.
Things are interesting because we attend to them. The aroused
sensation, memory image, or imagination gives pleasure and there is
interest in the object.

This brings us to the point that attention goes back fundamentally to the element of consciousness, sensation. Clarity of
perception is due to sense acuity and imageability, the initial ability
to have images. The stimulus which gets attention must be relatively
intense, the conditions of the subject must be such that the proper
motor adaptations and coordinations are made, and the apperceptional background must contribute toward making the sensation
pleasurable. This brings out the fact of the participation of mental
processes other than sensation in perception. Perception is not the
mere entrance of a group of sensations, but an arousal of old experience
by a few newly entering sensations. The perception of the thing to
be done is then the result of present sensation as interpreted in accord
with past experience. Voluntary action is a problem of attention.
This produces a syllogism: action is dependent upon sensation;
attention controls the entrance and course of sensation and its
consequent ideas; therefore attention controls action.

The child who cries, who is shy, nervous, stubborn, excited or
frightened, cannot give proper attention, for attention is very poor
when feeling and emotion are strong. Most attention involves strain,
and emotion involves attention to that which distracts from the task in
hand. Emotion or feeling is attention to sensation. Emotion is not a
matter of inattention but of strained attention, hence the futility of
attempting to secure the solution of a problem, the making of a comparison, or the passing of judgment, during the stress of emotion.
The above as related to the results of this investigation brings
us to the conclusion that "attention has an anatomical basis and
that as a starting point for a nervous explanation of attention we
must accept the hypothesis of psycho-physical parallelism."3 With
this in mind it appears that the conditions of a state of attention at any
given moment deoend most largely upon apperceptional urge.
Bibliography.

1. Young, Herman H. The Witmer Formboard. The Psychol. Clinic,
1916, 10, 93-111.
2. Pjllsbury, W. B. Attention. New York: The Macmillan Co., 1908.
PP- 173-174.
3. Ibid. Pp. 234.
For further reference to reports on investigations with the formboard, see H.
H. \ oung, The Witmer Formboard, The Psychol. Clinic, 1916, 10, Pp. 110?111.
