Clinic Reports. XXIX
=====================

The average teacher who looks at Jonas will anticipate trouble in trying
to have him progress at the usual rate in school. Any person who merely
glances at him is likely to note his head, which is very much enlarged above
the eyebrows and seems to be entirely too large for the rest of his body. It is
not surprising that, when he was taken by his mother to a hospital, they gave a
diagnosis of hydrocephalus and advised that he be taken to the Psychological
Clinic at the University of Pennsylvania for a mental examination. The teacher
who has learned in the past that such a head is most frequently accompanied by
feeblemindedness, will probably suspect in this child some serious mental
deficiencies. Is the suspicion of the experienced teacher supported by findings
of the examiners at the Clinic?

Jonas first came to the Clinic three years ago in October, when he waB only
two years and eight months old. Nothing is given in family history of any
feeblemindedness, insanity, epilepsy, or tubercular tendency; and the child has
had no diseases other than occasional spasms. His first tooth appeared at ten
months; he began walking at eighteen months; was bottle fed; seemed to be
growing normally in infancy, and was not troublesome. His mother reported
that she began to think of him as unlike other children when he was about one
year old, because he was not as active as most children. She did not notice
then that his head was too large. By the time he reached the age of two and a
half she had become especially anxious, for he did not seem to be able to learn
to talk. Then it was that she determined to take him to a hospital to learn the
cause of his backwardness. There, on account of the shape of his head, his occasional spasms and his inability to talk, the diagnosis of hydrocephalus was given
and a question raised as to his mental status.

At the first examination at the Psychological Clinic he passed readily the
Kuhlmann tests for two year old children, but the use of the Binet tests was
difficult because of his language defect. Matching colors with color cubes was
apparently difficult and the formboard was beyond his level of development.
He had no physical stigmata of feeblemindedness except his very large head,
which at that time was 53.3 cm.?the mean girth for a boy of twelve years
according to Hastings's Manual. A diagnosis of "mentality probably normal"
was given, with the recommendation of home training with Montessori materials
and encouragement to talk. Since there are other children in the home older
than Jonas, it ought to have been easy to carry out the latter part of the recommendation made by the examiner. As a result of that first examination one would
expect the child to have a normal mental development if his language deficiency
disappeared.

A second examination was arranged for about a year later when the child
was three years and nine months old, to see if there was very marked improvement in language ability and mentality. The mother reported that his head
seemed smaller to her than it had a year previous. "Actual measurement showed
that the head girth was only one-tenth centimeter greater than it had been at
the time of the first examination. Again certain kinds of tests were inappropriate because he did not articulate clearly or attempt sentence formation.
His memory span for digits was two, though he had a mental age score of three
years plus on the Binet Scale. Reactions to tests not involving language were
not a very great deal better quantitatively than they had been at the time of the
first examination; but again his behavior was not qualitatively that of a feebleminded child. His first trial with the formboard was again a failure, not because
of lack of persistence, but apparently because of inadequate form perception and
failure to comprehend what constituted a satisfactory solution. No real teaching of the formboard was done at that time, since interest was then in the
reaction of the child to the test, rather than in a study of any learning process.
The diagnosis was that he was probably a normal child slow in development.

How big a factor that slowness in development was going to be, was the especially interesting question.
After an absence of two years and four months, Jonas was again brought
to the Clinic by his mother for a final answer to her question whether the boy
with this big head was going to get along satisfactorily in life. He is now six
years old, attended kindergarten last year, and was put into first grade in
February. His teacher is not at all sure that he is going to get along in school.
He is not yet enunciating clearly?pronouncing "a" as a "d"; "ch" as "s";
and such a word as house he says as though spelled oud. During the time
spent at the Clinic he did not use of his own initiative a single complete sentence.
As soon as he saw the formboard he seemed interested in it and started taking
out the blocks without being told to do so. On the first two trials he replaced
the blocks, confusing on both trials the diamond and hexagon, showing very
good co5rdination and an understanding of the test without instruction. On
the third trial he put all the blocks away without difficulty in 31 sec., but gave
no evidence of planfulness in the arrangement of the blocks when taking them
out prior to this trial. His behavior with the Witmer cylinders was especially
interesting. He used both hands, and after working for ten minutes and thirtyseven seconds had all the cylinders placed, but only seven of them right. All
the wrong ones were removed by the examiner and a minimum of instruction
was given by correctly placing two cylinders for him. His total time for completing the test on this first trial was eleven minutes and four seconds. It was a
slow but very intelligent performance for a six year old boy. On a second trial
his time was less than one-half of his first time and the errors made were very
few and rather minor ones. He completed his third trial in 2 min. 17 sec.
Qualitatively his behavior was that of a bright child whom one shou d never
suspect of being feebleminded. He had no difficulty in the matching of colors.
Whatever difficulty there was in saying color names was removed after very
little teaching and effort on the part of the child. Design blocks offered no
difficulty, and he seemed to be interested in them. With the Terman revision
of the Binet-Scale Tests, he has a mental age score of five years and six months,?
a retardation of only six months. Associability is not likely to be inadequate
when he begins learning to read, for he very readily learned and remembered
three words from a primer. This child is now normal mentally. To overcome
his language defect he needs training in the forming of correct speech habits.
If this is done, he will progress through school at normal rate and be the sort of
child who will always have the approval of the teacher, for he likes to work at
school subjects, is persistent, and has better than average control of attention.
It is interesting to note that his head girth in these last two years and four months
has not appreciably increased. Perhaps as his language defect disappears and
as his body grows so that his head will be less conspicuously large, teachers will
not mark him from the beginning of his term in their classes as a child who must
be suspected of stupidity, if not feeblemindedness.

Elsie Bartlett, A.M.,
Oraduate Student.
XXX.
Hilda, 15 years 9 months old, was sent to the Clinic by the Vocational
Guidance Committee, because she had seemed to be unable to adjust herself to
any environment. She is an attractive girl, tall for her age, with a sweet
responsive face.

Her mother died of tuberculosis when she was a baby and her father died
three months later. An intimate friend of her mother took Hilda and has always
treated her like one of her own children. There were two other older children.
The sister is employed in a bank. The brother was brought up at Girard College
and is now living with Hilda in her foster home. He has been taking evening
courses, and is a reliable fellow, earning $20.00 a week as a clerk, although he is
not strong.

The foster parents are of Swedish descent and have had limited education
and opportunity. The father is a pattern maker and the home is a very good
one. His wife was a dressmaker, and her two married daughters are expert
needle-women who are greatly interested in Hilda. She has three sons at home,
all working and doing well.

Hilda seems to have a good mind, but lacks ambition and is extremely
careless both in school and home. She spent two and one-half years in 6-A grade
and her average was as low as 5J^. When her foster mother studied with her,
her average would come up to 8. The principal of the school had Hilda come to
her office each day to recite. This also brought up her average, but the mother
objected because she thought it too much like prison for the child to be confined
with the principal, away from the other children. As soon as she was put back
into the regular grade her average fell. It has been impossible to get an accurate
school report because the principal of the last school which she attended destroyed
the records. He thought that she must have been a good pupil as she was in
the 7-A grade when she left at 14 years of age. Her teachers did not remember
her, so thought that she must have been an average child in school. At home
she was given twenty music lessons, but showed no interest in the music and
refused to practice.

Hilda held six positions in factories from August 1916 to January 1918.
She was discharged from her last position where she was earning $7.00 a week.
During her factory experiences, Hilda had been sent to the home of one of her
foster sisters, because she became such a problem at home. As the change
seemed to benefit her and she was fond of children, the mother secured a position for her as nurse maid. Her employer reported that she played well with
the children but showed no intelligence in caring for them, and was discharged
because she teased one of them until he had hysterics.

At home she is extremely careless about her clothing. She will use
hairpins to pin on her buttons, although an attempt has been made to teach her
sewing. The mother is kind-hearted but not always wise in dealing with her.
She had a hard childhood herself and has wanted Hilda "to have it easy." She
has given her nice clothing and the girl has become extravagant.
It was impossible to find out anything about Hilda's babyhood. She has
had no serious diseases or accidents. Pubescence was established last Summer.
She has always bitten her finger nails, and when she is upset over anything,
bites her nails until they bleed. She is subject to bilious attacks which are apt
to follow over-eating, especially too many sweets. She has severe headaches
over the middle lobe?parietal headaches?and at these times is subject to
dizzy spells.

The mental examination showed good intelligence. Her best time with the
Witmer formboard was 12 sec., which is a little less than the medium time for
an adult. Her performance showed good analytical and distributive attention.
Her best time for the Witmer cylinders was 48 sec. Both the formboard and
cylinder performances were very intelligent. She showed quick observation
and good memory in copying the design blocks and in following the changes
made in the blocks by her instructor. Her memory span was at times 8 digits,
although she failed in 6 and 7 at other times. Her mental age score on the
Binet scale was 12.87 years.

The diagnosis was normal mentality, and it was recommended that she be
taken to a nerve specialist for examination.
Anna B. Pratt, A.M.,
Graduate Student.
