By Oscar J. Johnson
===================

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn.
The following three experiments were made during the school
year 1916-17 in the Department of Psychology at the University of
Idaho with the purpose of finding out as accurately as could be,
certain measurable effects of smoking on college students.1 It was
felt that such a study would be welcomed both by scientific men and
the public at large as offering some light on a problem about which
there has been much agitation and wide diversity of opinion as well
as considerable legislation. There is a good deal of literature on the
subject, the larger part of which is pseudo-scientific or too prejudiced
to be of much value. What seemed to be needed was a scientific
measurement of at least some of the effects in an experiment made
either in an intensive way on a few subjects or more extensively on a
larger group. As it happened, we were able to use both methods
with some degree of success.

Work Done by Other Investigators.

A bibliography of the most important contributions in this field,
will be found at the end of this article. Of the investigations especially worthy of notice in this connection, the ones by C. S. Berry,
A. D. Bush, Edwin Leavitt Clark, George L. Meylan, and Frederick
J. Pack are probably the most valuable.

Dr Bush of the University of Vermont tested fifteen men with
a series of ten mental tests and found an average decrease of 10.5 per
cent in mental efficiency. The greatest decrease was in the field of
mental imagery, 22 per cent, with perception and association coming
next. He also found that the greatest loss in efficiency was caused
by cigarettes and that they were the only ones in whose smoke
nicotine was found. Pyridine seemed to be the principal toxic factor
in all tobacco smoke.

C. S. Berry studied the effects of smoking on himself. Each
day after lunch for twenty days he added a set of typewritten
examples. On alternate days, before adding, he would smoke a
cigar; on the other days he would spend this time in conversation or
in reading light literature. He found that the effects of smoking
1 The author wishes gratefully to acknowledge his deep debt to Dr H. B. Reed of the University of Idaho
whose advice, help, and active participation helped to make the study possible. Thanks are also due to the twenty
one men, who with willingness gave of their time and energy, some of them during a period covering several month
were more pronounced than those of practice, decreasing the time
taken to add by 7.7 per cent. The effects of the smoking were
evident, because each day the time taken to add after smoking was
less than the time taken the next day without smoking.

Dr George L. Meylan of Columbia College made a careful
investigation of the effects of smoking on 223 students. The results
show that the average mark of the 115 smokers was 62 per cent
and that of the 108 non-smokers was 69 per cent. His conclusions
are these: "High School students who acquired the smoking habit
before entering college are about eight months older at entrance
than the non-smokers," one reason being "the depressing influences
of the use of tobacco on the heart and circulation and hence the
retarding effect on growth." Also, "The scholarship standing of
smokers is distinctly lower than that of non-smokers. The intimate
connection existing between the smoking habit and the participation
in social and athletic activities, makes it impossible to determine
how much, if any, direct influence the smoking habit exerts upon
scholarship; but the results of this study and similar studies obtained
at Clarke College indicate very clearly that the smoking habit is very
closely associated with idleness and lack of ambition for scholarly
achievement."

Mr. Clarke of Clarke College found that of 211 students 43.6
per cent smoked, of which only 18.3 per cent won honors as
compared with 68.5 per cent of the non-smokers. The smokers
exceeded the non-smokers in strength and lung capacity.

Dr Pack of Utah, who has made a wide study of the effects of
smoking based on the information received from fourteen colleges
and universities, found among other things that?
Highest Lowxst
Marks. Ma.ru.
101 Non-smokers furnish  11 6
101 Smokers furnish  5 15
And: "Smokers furnish twice as many conditions and failures as do
the non-smokers." And further: "Only half as many smokers as
non-smokers are successful in the 'try-outs' for football squads."
The Methods in General in this Investigation.
The three experiments are radically different as to methods
and number of subjects. In the first, twenty men were used, all
students of the University of Idaho, except one. Ten of these did
not use tobacco in any form; six were habitual smokers; and four
smoked occasionally. Three different series of tests were given
at four o'clock on Friday afternoons, the tests being identical in kind
and as nearly equal in difficulty as possible. Before the first series, no
men smoked. Before the two other series each smoker smoked
8.5 cm. of a mild cigar. In this experiment, the relative improvement, or increase in amount of performance, and in accuracy, was
used as the measure of the effect of tobacco upon both the habitual
and moderate smokers. It happened that the smokers whom we
chanced to pick out were superior to the non-smokers, and this may
have had a decided effect on their rate of improvement.
In the second experiment we used the method of training four
subjects in a smaller number of tests until their limit of improvement had been reached and then have them smoke to see the effects.
Two faculty members and two students served as subjects and
trained themselves in the tests from March until May. In this
experiment all work was individual. When a subject had reached
the maximum amount of efficiency in all the tests used, he was
ready for the first smoking test. After going through the series of
tests, he would smoke a cigar. Immediately after smoking, he
would again take all the tests and repeat this at intervals of an hour
for several hours. In some cases the tests were gone through again
the next morning. To find the effects of smoking, we calculated the
difference in performance before and after smoking for the several
weeks during which the smoking series were repeated.

The third experiment is a survey of the school marks received
by all the men of the "University of Idaho during the school year of
1915-16. All the men were classified by personal inquiry into
four groups: non-smokers; occasional smokers; moderate smokers;
and habitual smokers. The average grades received for these four
were calculated and compared.

Experiment I.
Tests Used.
1. The Genus-Species Test.
2. The Opposites Test
3. Test of "Logical" Memory or Reproduction of Ideas.
4. The Addition Test.
5. Accuracy, or Precision of Movement: Aiming.
6. Strength of Grip.
These tests were done in the usual way except that of "logical"
memory. In this one, the substance of two passages of uniform and
easy prose of equal length was written down as soon as read, and
the average of the two passages used at each series of tests was the
subject's score.

Results.

Accuracy and efficiency were the two things especially considered in working up the results. Efficiency was calculated by two
methods: first by the absolute amount of work done; secondly by
the formula given in Whipple's "Manual of Mental and Physical
Tests," p. 313: E = eA, where "e" is the number of symbols
(3 ? \y
examined and "A" is obtained from A = , "c" is the number
c -f- o
of symbols crossed, or attempted; "w" is the number of symbols
wrongly crossed; and "o" is the number of symbols erroneously
omitted. Owing to their nature, this method was impossible with
tests three, five, and six. The second formula also gives another
measure of accuracy, the results of which are given in table III.
Table I.?Experiment I.
Improvement of Smokers and Non-smokers.
Smokers.
Tests.
Genus-Species
Opposites
"Logical" Memory.
Addition
Aiming
Strength of Grip
Average Scores.
First Series.
5.0
8.5
6.8
61.3
5.9
38.6
Second Series
7.1
9.2
7.1
68.6
5.4
41.7
Third Series.
8.3
11.6
7.9
76.1
5.2
41.8
Average percentage of improvement
Average percentage of improvement, leaving out the test of strength of
grip
Percentile
Improvement,
Third Series
over First
66.0
36.4
16.1
24.1
11.8
8.2
27.1
30.8
Percentile
Improvement,
Average of
Second and Third
Series over First
54.0
22.3
10.2
17.9
10.1
8.0
20.4
22.9
Non-Smokers.
Genus-Species
Opposites
"Logical" Memory.
Addition
Aiming
Strength of Grip
5.8
7.0
6.3
53.2
5.8
40.8
6.7
9.7
6.9
64.0
4.8
42.1
8.1
10.8
7.2
69.6
4.6
41.4
Average percentage of improvement
Average percentage of improvement, leaving out the test of strength of
grip
39.6
54.3
14.2
30.8
20.6
1.4
26.8
31.9
27.5
45.7
11.1
25.5
18.9
2.2
21.8
25.7
136 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CLINIC.
*
?- ?
*
ttC-?^<l ^r,^711 tr> _ y
/oo
<J
-tj
nj
/ 0} f
$U b o r-c/i 7-7 &/e s u * Lb <g~ic&/ Memory'
Test , t Te.$-t
*jTT ? 1st fes k TnTY jTt " a.7idT J?/r
jT2>
<2
s,
?ty'Ut of drip
T*s~L
? Jj<y?\-S>riok<,Y?
ir ~  ? ???
'i'mo TferS
/0O
^ 0
?
jr e ^ |
S OppoSLr^s* ?
> <?
t>
Aiming' /*,st
_ ? S?*y o Jre >-s
,
f Jbrofj o7i c cvv ?Jti^tiS c mfrv U'TrJ <rit) ?
H>|
^ ^   0 _ __
J.st7*& Jt-ndT ~T 1st Test 7 JdT -1st TestJvST 3d T
^ o
fltddt i ^
Test
Figure I.

The improvement of the non-smokers, which was considered
normal, was compared with that of all the smokers and then with
the habitual and occasional smokers separately. The tables giving
the results of the last two have been omitted because of lack of
space. It was found, however, that the average improvement in all
tests from the first to the third series for the non-smokers was 7.4 per
cent less than for the habitual smokers, but 8.9 per cent more than
for the occasional smokers. If we leave out the strength of grip
test which was found valueless in an experiment of this kind, the
above values become 6.2 per cent and 10.3 per cent respectively.
From table I and figure I it will be seen that the smokers
improved more than the non-smokers in the genus-species test, the
"logical" memory test, and the strength of grip test when efficiency
was calculated by the amount of performance of the groups. But
it will be seen that improvement in "logical" memory is only 1.9 per
cent in their favor, which is so little as not to mean anything. As has
already been said, the strength of grip test was generally so unsatisfactory that the only thing it does show is its uselessness. The nonsmokers improved more in the opposites, addition, and aiming tests.
When the average improvement from the first series to the third for
all tests is taken, the result for the smokers is 27.1 per cent and for
the non-smokers 26.8 per cent. If the strength of grip test be left
out, the improvement for the smokers is 30.8 per cent and for the
non-smokers 31.9 per cent.

By referring to table II, it will be seen that the smokers
made a total of 26.5 errors in the genus-species, opposites,
and addition tests (the only ones in which errors could be counted)
in the first series, before smoking, as against 35.0 for the non-smokers.
Incidentally, this fact again illustrates the superiority of the smokers.
In the third series, these same smokers made 33.0 errors to 25.0 by
the non-smokers. In other words, the smokers increased by 24.5 per
cent their number of errors, while the non-smokers decreased theirs
by 28.5 per cent. The per cent of all errors made to the total amount
of work done during the whole experiment is 4.9 per cent for the
smokers and 6.2 per cent for the non-smokers.

Table III shows that the average improvement in efficiency as
measured by the formula given above is practically the same as
that obtained by comparing the actual amount of work done without
the use of the formula. The tests in which the smokers improved
most are the same here as before.

"Logical" memory is the only test in which the smokers
improved more in accuracy than the non-smokers; the respective
per cents of improvement are 24.6 and 16.6. In genus-species the
Table II.?Experiment I.
This table shows the number of errors made in three tests in the three Series.
Smokers.
Tests.
Genus-Species.
Opposites
Addition
Total.
First Series.
No Smoking.
0.0
11.5
15.0
26.5
Second Series.
Smokers Smoked.
0.5
9.0
38.0
47.5
Third Series.
Smokers Smoked.
1.5
9.5
22.0
33.
Total No.
of Errors.
2.0
30.0
75.0
105.0
Percentage of
Increase of
Errors in
Third Test
over First.
?17.4
46.0
24.5
Non-Smokers
Genus-Species.
Opposites
Addition
Totals.
0.0
18.0
17.0
35.0
1.0
15.0
11.0
27.0
1.0
10.0
14.0
25.0
2.0
43.0
42.0
97.0
-44.5
-17.7
-28.5
Smokers.
Tests.
Genus-Species.
Opposites
Addition
Total No.
of Units of
Work Correct.
204.0
293.0
2060.0
Total No. of
Errors Made.
2.0
30.0
75.0
Average percenta ;e of errors
Percentage
of Errors.
0.9
10.2
3.6
4.9
Non-Smokers.
Genus-Species.
Opposites
Addition
206.0
275.0
1868.0
2.0
43.0
42.0
0.9
15.6
2.2
Average percentage of errors
6.2

smokers improved 4.5 per cent to 13.1 per cent of the non-smokers;
in opposites 6.3 per cent to 35.5 per cent; and in addition 1.0 per
cent to 3.2 per cent. The average improvement from the first
series to the third series is 9.1 per cent for the smokers and 17.1 per
cent for the non-smokers. (See table III and figure II.)
It was felt that one reason why some of the smokers improved
as rapidly as they did, besides the probable effect of their superior

Table III.?Experiment I.
Comparison of amount of improvement of Smokers and Non-smokers in
accuracy and efficiency from the first to the third series of tests, when the two
following formulas were used in the calculation.
Accuracy = -??. Efficiency = eA.
c ?o
Smokers.
Testa.
Genus-Species
Oppositiea
"Logical" Memory.
Addition
First Series.
No Smoking.
0.87
0.79
0.61
0.95
E.
5.0
8.3
6.1
60.9
Third Series.
Smokers Smoked.
0.91
0.84
0.76
0.96
E.
8.2
11.2
7.6
75.8
Average percentage of improvement.
Percentage of Improvement,
Third Series over First.
4.5
6.3
24.6
1.0
.1
E.
64.0
34.9
24.6
24.4
36.
Non-Smokers.
Genus-Species
Opposites
"Logical" Memory.
Addition
0.84
0.62
0.60
0.94
5.8
6.3
6.0
52.9
0.95
0.84
0.70
0.97
8.0
7.0
69.3
Average percentage of improvement.
13.1
35.5
16.6
3.2
17.1
37.9
57.3
16.6
31.0
35.7
intelligence, was that they exerted themselves more than did the
non-smokers. The experimenter is sure that he saw evidences of
this greater effort, which in some cases at least undoubtedly was
unconscious. There is another factor which may have influenced
the results and which is closely connected with the one just mentioned. Unlike other experiments on the effects of drugs, it was
impossible to disguise the taking of it into the body. The value
of such disguise was recognized by Dodge in his experiment on the
effects of ethyl alcohol, and by Hollingworth in his experiment on
the effects of caffeine. If this factor would materially change the
subject's reactions, we are here facing a problem in technique which
is very difficult to solve.

In general we may conclude from the results of experiment I
that smoking reduces the accuracy and to some extent the efficiency
of mental and motor activity. Furthermore, that there may be a
great deal of difference in effects on different individuals and even
upon different functions of the same person. This is born out by
experiment II in which the method of experimentation lended itself
particularly to the discovery of effects on different individuals or
processes and the results of which are more definite than those of
experiment I.

{To be concluded.)
/&Qft
XOfo
Subordi Tndie s
resit
kV?>>
^ 3?r ,
Cppcst-Le*
S&%[ i <52^
75/ 7ej^" Test -Zstjest 3</ 7c~i?
'Loaned J
fatrporf 'jest
iC?j
?;j&/grs -7tu?-jgtfKii?
?*7<
yo%
/<??*
6??f
6~0?o
Ad Ji tLO~n
Test
j.&t> Jest 3d Test -2 $t Jest -^7<Xlt
Figure II.
Figure II.
