A Case of Pathological Day Dreaming
====================================

:Author: John Louis Horn, /
Stanford University, Cal. *
Introduction.

James, aged about eleven and one-half years, was given the
Binet-Simon intelligence test in the fall of 1917 and found to be at
about mental age. He was brought to the laboratory because
he is peculiar and deaf. These characteristics are undoubtedly
marked and obvious. One can not be in his presence more than
a minute before noticing them. In the course of the Binet test,
for example, he rose fourteen times and went about the office
examining things.

Clearly the boy is not feebleminded. This being the case,
it was decided that observation might be of some assistance in
disclosing the source of trouble and possibly help in developing some
remedy. Accordingly the writer arranged to meet the boy daily
for a period of eight or nine weeks. James called six days a week.
By far the greatest number of these meetings were spent in walking
about the country around Palo Alto. Occasionally the hour was
spent in reading, writing or some such occupation as gathering
pepper-berries. The boy was observed at the piano, at the table,
and in contact with others. Possibly the most effective description
will be one that consists of actual occurrences, grouped under several
subheads. The mere reproduction of notes made during the period
of observation does not seem feasible on account of repetition and
the scattering of the points. In this way it is hoped a picture may
be given approaching reality.

The order of discussion will be
I. Brief history and appearance.
II. Principal characteristics.
III. Tests and attempts at correction.
IV. Present status.
I. History and Appearance.
James is now twelve years of age. He and his brother, who
is about one year older and apparently normal, are the children of a
love match that was opposed by the parents of the mother of these
children and ended unhappily. The father is a professional musician,
a cellist, and from all accounts, normal, so far as concerns intelligence

The mother met him somewhere abroad while studying music.
Apparently she was temperamental and probably highly nervous.
They seem to have separated very soon after the birth of the younger
child. The mother died some four or five years prior to the observations here reported.
The boy was probably born deaf, but, for some reason difficult
to understand, this fact appears not have been noticed for several
years. It is not possible to say whether the deafness was partial
or total. He has some hearing now, as will be shown below. Whether
this was present to begin with or brought about by physicians in
whose care the child was placed, the writer does not know. At any
rate, he never learned to speak in the ordinary way. At about the
age of five, he came under the care of a lady in Massachusetts who
taught him speech by artificial methods?not lip reading. From
about the same time until two or three months prior to the observations here recorded he was brought up in the home of two New
England women. Between them and his speech teacher, he has
received practically all of the schooling that he has had. There
has been no firm masculine hand in the process of his raising. For
some little time he attended a private school for boys in Massachusetts but very little of his experience there is known to the
writer, except that he was not handled with the classes. He speaks
unusually good, though somewhat stilted, English, and is an omniverous reader, apparently consuming anything that comes to hand.
While he remembers and can reel off, he by no means comprehends
all that he reads.

His having learned to speak in the manner indicated gives
him an unusual and disadvantageous appearance. He has a deliberate slow speech, and being very deaf, is in the habit of approaching
one quite closely. His attention is wandering and very difficult to
hold. Anything distracts him. When he sees something he follows
it up with his eyes for minute examination, as a dog would with his
sense of smell. His eyes have had to make up in part for his lack of
hearing.

Physically noticeable in addition to his deficient hearing are
the facts that he has a somewhat shrill, unnatural, but not unpleasant
voice; that he holds his head in a peculiar forward position, apparently to hear the better; and that he has a painfully nervous twitching
of eyes and mouth and legs.

I made a rough measurement of hearing, testing with a watch.
He apparently has no hearing in the right ear and can hear the
watch ten or twelve inches distant from the left ear. Ordinary conversation sufficiently loud (not shouted) he does not seem to get at a
distance greater than eighty inches?less than the distance between
two persons opposite one another at the ordinary family table.
When brought to California some little time prior to the beginning of these observations, he was sent to the public school principally
with the object of securing him an opportunity to get into a manual
training class. He was placed in an ungraded room with one other
boy?very dull?and there he spent an hour and a half daily for
four days. On the fifth day he went to the manual training class.
His teacher told the writer that she did not consider him subnormal. He often made her realize, she said, the fact that in many
fields he was better informed than she. He was doing eighth-grade
work in every thing but arithmetic, and in that subject, which he
detests, he was doing fifth-grade work, practically at age. She
considered that it would be practical to handle him in regular class
were it not for his very deficient hearing.

The instructor in manual training reported that James was
doing below average work for his age. His great difficulty here
seems to be inattention. He will not stay at his work long. He
forgets what he is doing. He does not follow instructions. He does
not use the tools which he is told to use. He was making an ironing
board and getting on fairly well, when one day the instructor found
him gouging out a hole. It seemed an utterly unreasonable thing
to do. James claimed that he was decorating the ironing board.
II. Principal Characteristics.

Some of the more pronounced characteristics are his inability
to make social adjustment and his attitude toward food; his living
in a world of his own, describable roughly as a constant day dream;
his language peculiarities; apparent absence of emotional life; his
asking of questions and reciting of the lore with which his mind is
stored. Each of these phases will now be taken up in some detail.
Relations to Social Environment.

Socially he has troubles without number. The children are
pounding him and the teacher hastens to the scene. It appears
that he wants to get to the Yictrola first. To do so he makes a
direct rush, shoving others out of his way. Naturally they will
not stand for this.

He has broken up his Sunday-school class because the boys
pinched him, he yelled, and the teacher became so indignant at
the bad boys that he refused to continue teaching the class.
He went to the Saturday morning class for town boys at the
University but the instructor asked to have him withdrawn. The
boys mauled him. Just how this came about it is somewhat hard
to determine, but probably he failed to hear orders, his neighbors
nudged him or otherwise gave him a hint which he misunderstood
or resented, and trouble was on.

He takes no notice of anyone. Some youngsters we meet greet
him, but he is too busy telling me the unending story of his Gothic
palace to notice them. When I remonstrate, he calls out "Hello!"
without looking at them and goes on talking. He does not understand the business of greeting people and getting on common ground
with them. Apparently they are so many inanimate objects. We
go into a shop to have some ice-cream. A lad in the shop about his
own age suggests that I ask James how he likes gymnasium, quite
taking it for granted that there is something wrong with James.
I ask James whether he knows the lad. He does know him, remembers in fact that this boy was one of his rescuers in his gymnasium
troubles, but cannot tell me why he did not greet the boy. He
forgot. I insist on my rule about greeting. He understands and
yet leaves without noticing his friend, probably planning the wonderful organ in his Gothic palace. The boy calls "Good-bye, James,"
and James replies "Good-bye, boy."

James bears on his person evidences of war. A certain boy
in the manual training class apparently delights in hurling blocks
of wood at unoffending James. I cannot be quite certain of James's
innocence, however.

He does not seem to grasp the need for and significance of the
usual amenities. He possesses none of the automatically operating
habits of ordinary social intercourse. When he enters our house
he rushes past the person who has opened the door and makes for
the piano or the magazine he wants.

He does not seem to understand the life actually about him.
In the course of his embellishment of the great Gothic palace he
devises a motor boat and invites me for a trip around the world.
I cannot leave my wife behind. He includes her in the invitation.
I tell him she would not go without Dr K.'s baby. He demurs a
little but includes the child. I then tell him that the baby cannot
go without its mother. He includes the mother. The mother, I
then inform him, cannot go without her husband. Finally the
husband is included. There is nothing humorous about the conversation. It is all in dead earnest.
He reports that he was struck in the manual training class by
two German boys. Asked how he knew their nationality, he replies
that it was from their names which they disclosed to him on the way
to school. One is Karl Wilhelm, the other Eitel Friedrich Wilhelm.
He walked up to a house, the owner of which we did not know at
all and undertook to carry off a milk bottle because his brother is
gathering bottles in a war conservation scheme.

His attitude toward food does not seem quite normal or usual.
When anything edible is suggested he can describe the very best
and nothing else will do. He demands "juicy" oranges and the
"very best large apples that come wrapped in paper." He has
assured himself long in advance that there will be turkey for Thanksgiving dinner. In fact he keeps a close eye on the turkey in the yard
and would not for the world do anything to frighten it, because
that would keep it from getting "fat." It seems evident that every
time he sees the turkey in the yard he thinks actively of the Thanksgiving dinner. He is not aware of the need for inhibition.
When given anything, he grasps it in a way which shows the
giver is the merest instrument or means by which he gets anything.
When reminded of his failure to thank, as is almost always necessary, he is already far advanced in consuming the orange or cake.
Doubtless the nearest thing to agitation or emotion I have seen in
my association with him centered around the fear that there would
be no turkey for Christmas dinner. He has bad table manners
although he has always lived in a superior environment. He takes
two apples at once but puts one back on request. He innocently
expresses his opinion of anything placed before him, if it does not
please him. He was given two apples before we started for our walk
one day, with the suggestion that one was for me. He appeared on
the scene eating an apple and when he had finished this he drew
another and ate that. When I charged him with the offense, he
claimed that he had forgotten but that he had not meant to be
selfish.

When, instead of going into a shop with him to purchase a
cornucopia, I handed him a coin and waited expectantly outside,
and he did not appear, I entered and found him seated at a table
enjoying his ice-cream from a dish. Asked why he did not purchase
a cone, he claimed that they did not sell any. The man in charge
assured me that James had not asked for one. I feel certain he
knows they serve more ice-cream for the same money in a dish than
in a cone. On two occasions I sent him on ahead for some reason.
On arriving, he announced that I had instructed him to ask for an
apple. When his request was about to be granted he ordered "the
largest and juiciest." Both occasions were without warrant.
Charged with the offense he denies having said I instructed him to
make the request.

Living in a World of His Own.

Apparently he does day dreaming usually along some definite
line which keeps on endlessly developing and having entwined
into it everything that comes under his notice. One of these dreams
is about the great Gothic palace which he is to build. This is of
long duration, possibly of years' standing. It doubtless originated
with his reading of some article on architecture. Almost all of his
imaginary world seems to originate in this way. The plans for this
palace are never completed. If he reads something in the papers
about the dropping of bombs, then the roof of his palace shall be
bomb-proof. He will test it by having an aeroplane drop bombs on
it. If he reads about torpedo-boat destroyers, then he equips his
palace with motor-boat guards. He has a great organ, a picture
gallery, a beautiful gray automobile, servants, children, and so on
indefinitely without the remotest attention to practical daily life.
Forced to reply to the question where he will get money to fulfil
his dreams, he replies that he will make it by going to work in a
steel mill. Did not all the millionaires make their money in the
steel business?

For a little while he abandoned his Gothic palace and dwelt
on the Sonora Supreme, the phonograph he wanted, and his plans
were worked out in preposterous detail?a rubber cover in case
of fire, a drill in letting it out of the window, a sign warning children
not to touch it, and what not.

The conflict between imagination so active and reality leads to
frequent confusion. He often finds it hard to distinguish between
"Good morning" and "How do you do." When he arrives in the
afternoon he sometimes goes so far as to answer "Yes, grandmother,"
when speaking to me. He usually corrects himself. He is a poor
messenger and cannot seem to deliver a message in an orderly
manner, sometimes becoming painfully confused.

To this same living in a world of his own is perhaps due to the
fact that it is difficult to hold his attention. He will answer a question
and start in again on his Gothic palace.

I asked him to make me a copy of the rules which I had given
him but he came repeatedly without them. For eight or nine days
he kept on forgetting. Finally it seems he did write out the copy
but cannot remember to bring it. He says he forgets and is not
disturbed by this. He occasionally arrives bareheaded and does
not know where his cap is. He used to cut dead flowers on his
grandmother's lawn for ten cents an hour but he no longer does so
as he has mislaid the scissors.

He can keep his attention on a book for an hour if it interests
him, but he makes a poor report of what he has read. Apparently
he repeats without having understood, although this is not always
the case.

Language Peculiarities.

He does not seem satisfied to use ordinary words and delights
in employing unusual expressions. He will often ask for the Latin
equivalent for some simple word. For example, he reads a Bible
stOry for me and in repeating it refers to Joseph, the husband of
Mary, as "Jo, as his son used to call him." He refers to his skating
as a "tour on eight wheels." He commences classifying houses by
size and coins the designation "couple" for a two-room cottage. He
informs me that his uncle has returned with his "spouse." Asked
whether the turkey has been killed, he replies "Yes, the turkey has
been executed." In the same way, in reply to the question whether
his eyes have been tested, he says he has never had an "ocular
examination." He was struck in the manual training class with a
block of "Sequoia Washingtoniana." He talks of the "cord of
care" which will be broken for his grandmother when he is twentyone. When I object to his many questions, he replies that questions
are the "door to knowledge." He requested a little child to move
out of his way by addressing him as "you young microbe." He
asks for an apple that "has no inmates." All this deliberately but
without any attempt at humor. He has an odd trick of handling
figures of speech which he has read, as if they were ordinary idioms,
much as one might do who had learned speech out of books in Mars.

Apparent Absence of Emotional Life

Quite self-centered, one would ordinarily say of him. He
mourned the death of Mrs. S , his guardian and friend for five
or six years, "for two days" he says. I cannot get emotional
responses from him on this or apparently any other point. At the
time his friend Mrs. S  died (he was past eleven years of age)
it appears he unconcernedly placed some flowers near the body as
he was told to do. Now he never mentions her. We pick pepper
berries for Mrs. H . I cannot get him to look forward with
pleasure to presenting them to her because she loves them so. We
propose a visit at our house some time and when asked what we shall
do, he replies that he will have breakfast, lunch, dinner, and play
the piano. He uses the appropriate phrases when questioned but
I cannot discover any trace of affection for his grandmother or
brother.

Asking Questions and Reeling Off Information.

For final specific reference, has been left the characteristic that
is perhaps most marked and, certainly, most readily observed. Any
time that James is permitted to take the lead, intercourse with him
takes on two principal phases: He is either reeling off information
gleaned from reading, varied by an elucidation of his intentions in
the matter of his palace or other subject of his day dreaming, or else
he is wearing out his companion and testing patience and kindliness
to the breaking point by an incessant series of questions.
One's first reaction is surprise at the breadth of knowledge and
the intelligent character of the questioning. These feelings, although
eventually modified, are by no means extinguished. One learns
that frequently James doesn't understand what he is repeating,
apparently doing it automatically, and his questions are not always
intelligent. Sometimes he asks about things almost automatically,
as if going around in a circle. Sometimes he knows the answers to
the questions he is asking.

General Summary.

Finally, it may be of interest to reproduce some actual notes
of the first meeting, which will perhaps help to complete the picture:
I call at the house Friday evening, make the boy's acquaintance and arrange
to call for him Saturday afternoon. He acknowledges the introduction politely
and formally but with an unusual air not easy to define. Something is said
about music. He rushes off to the piano to play for me and does not appear
again.

I call for him at about 1:15 Saturday afternoon. He is ready but does not
know where his cap is. Some one else finds it for him. We start out in a friendly
manner and talk of games. He doesn't play many, but he can run and knows he
can run exactly forty yards. He proceeds to do it. I stop him and recall his
running to the piano the night before and his rising fourteen times and running
away to observe something during the Binet test.

He now proceeds to tell me about mushrooms, evidently repeating what he
has read or has been told and doing it well. His command of words even when
repeating is really fine. This recital of mushroom lore is typical of one of his
two principal mental activities. He is ever telling what he knows, or asking
about what he does not know. When the former, he does it well. When the
latter, it is like the thirsty desert drinking in the rain. His questions are almost
always intelligent if but rarely relevant. He asks about anything and everything
regardless of the usual amenities.

We arrive at the house and I seat him comfortably within earshot, and
proceed to water the lawn. Our intercourse, not exactly conversation, continues.
He does not like the way I neglect my lawn. The lawn should be mowed, rolled
and watered. Weeds should be cut and he describes the processes. He does
not like my house. It does not compare favorably with his grandmother's.
His own shall be large and of Gothic architecture, like a cathedral. He is naively
frank, curious, and wants to wander and woolgather, but I can hold his attention
by effort.

I suggest going to the University, where I have a book to get. He prefers
to ride, but first he would enjoy an ice-cream cone. He expresses his preference
as to flavor. He is impressed with the University Chapel. When I ask him to
look at a picture and tell him it is a mosaic, not a painting, he remarks: "How
they deceive us, they are so fine." I take him out in front. He can tell me
how many arches there are and how many windows above. He knows that
the general architectural scheme is mission. He wants to know why they call it
the Campus. At exactly the right place he tells me we are passing Dr Terman's
office. He must have noted this point in relation to the chapel the only time he
was here before.1

I give him his choice of riding or walking back. He chooses to ride, then
begs to walk and see the trees, but I insist on riding. We go back to the house.
He acknowledges the introduction to Mrs. H in his formal manner. They
sit down at the piano and his showing is really brilliant. This does not refer
to accomplishment, as he has had little instruction, but to innate musical tendency
and speed in grasping something new. He never lets a new word pass, demanding
explanations.

He really seems to be as capable as this in everything else. He was recently
presented with roller skates and without'further ado, although he had never had
skates before, he proceeded to do fancy skating, making figures. He can construct
more bridges, towers and so on out of the; Meccano than his older brother.
He spurns St. Nicholas and other juvenile magazines and devours popular
scientific journals. He reads the Book of Knowledge constantly, but for botanical
matters he prefers the encyclopedia. I am sure he could read the dictionary.
To give still more clearness to the picture, the following compositions are reproduced. These were written without previous
notice or preparation. The topic was dictated in each case:

Why I like to live in California.

1. Because California has less rain & less cold. 2. Because I can go outdoors more. 3. More flowers grow there most of the year & there are less sparrows. 4. Because of the eucaliptus & pepper & sequoia and other California
trees. 5. Because of the fig, orange, apricot, persimmon & strawberries & apples.
What I want to do when I grow up.

1. Build a fleet consisting of 22 freighters, 29 passenger ships, 24 torpedoes,
with mother, 4000 destroyers, 28 mother ships, with contents, 100 mertanks,
300 zeppelins, 30 navy ferrys, 1200 solid build hydroplanes and 2 light ships to
lead the way at night, and 25 motor gooses & 28 rams.
2. For my home I want a great Gothic and roman palace.

3. For land defense an army consisting of 1,000,000 footmen, 50 tanks,
12,000 tanklets, 22 zeppelin observation airships, 20,000 monoplanes, 18,000
biplanes & 2,000 military tractorplanes.
4. Commerce. 20 freight u-boats 12000 monorail cars.
1 Interesting because the style of architecture leaves this building indistinguishable from any number of others.
? German.
5. I want 4 children in the fimily, for music, chimes and a Sonora Supereme
phonograph.
6. Go to Germany and sell good aeroplanes, and when returning to my
home in holland, bring a fine solidly built plane, from Germany.
James.

One is tempted to easy explanations of the peculiarities, such
as deafness and late speech or the fact that many people recall
having indulged in day dreaming during childhood. James himself,
however, eventually forces one out of these temporary shelters.
After all allowances are made, something queer remains. When
things seem most hopeful, if another child of almost any age appears
on the scene, the contrast is very bad. Some boys on our block have
spotted him. They may be lined up near the house when he is
leaving, intently watching, but he does not see them. He cannot
hold attention. He breaks into a serious remark with "May I play
the piano?" or "I want to skate now." One feels that the talk
has been of no effect. Surely he is better off than people who have
no speech or hearing at all, but who are capable of making adjustment.

III. Tests and Attempts at Correction.

James was given four rules covering some of his principal
offenses?talking too loud, interrupting others, failing to observe the
amenities at meeting or parting, and asking too many questions.
By dint of hard work and constant repetition we made some little
headway, particularly in the matter of greeting.

It may be that this indicates that constant attention and
vigorous handling have some possibility of hope. With this in
view, and bearing in mind the opinion of his teacher above referred
to, that the boy could be handled in classes were it not for his
defective hearing, the experiment was tried of placing him in a
private school, where the classes consist of only four or five pupils.
It was thought worth finding out whether a full load of school work,
individual attention and association with the boys at the school
might help to recall him to the life about him. Unfortunately the
school to which he was sent could not handle him for longer than a
week, at the end of which time his withdrawal was requested. It
appears that the week he was at school was a week totally lost to the
rest of the class in which he was placed. His demand for the
teacher's attention was constant. He himself enjoyed his experience
immensely and it was a great blow to have to leave the school.
However, he required more personal attention than could be given
him. Equipped, for example, with a wooden gun, and asked to
stand aside and observe the drill, he had to be ordered out of the
lines eight times. Finally he kept out, but in his anxiety to see
what was happening he stood so close that the company ran him
down and in extricating himself he struck three boys with his
wooden gun.

In view of the suspicious symptoms, that is to say, of the fact
that we had a person who was not feebleminded and yet had decided
peculiarities, the writer gave James the Kent-Rosanoff Association
test in accordance with the instructions suggested by Whipple in
his manual, Vol. II, p. 55. The test was given twice because it was
felt that this might produce a clearer idea of the situation. After
accounting for the doubtful responses in accordance with the principles laid down by the authors, liberally interpreted, there were
left twenty-seven "individual" responses for the first sitting and
twenty-four for the second. This data consisting of these fifty-one
individual reactions will be treated together. It will be borne in
mind that the fact of having given the test twice probably magnifies
the individual reactions and their indications unduly and gives
a different aspect than would the usual single sitting. At the same
time the greater amount of data possibly assists in indicating certain
characteristics.

Kent and Rosanoff divide the individual reactions into normal,
pathological, and unclassified. The attempt was made by the
writer to exclude all reactions that might be regarded as normal.
By this process twenty-three of the fifty-one reactions are excluded,
leaving twenty-eight for study here. The data here treated would
therefore seem to come under the heads of pathological reactions or
unclassified reactions. It is always possible of course that in this
last classification there have been included words which to others
might be explicable as normal reactions, thereby still further
decreasing the total number of words treated.

In the class of pathological reactions, we appear to have one
sample of the class which Kent and Rosanoff call "derivatives of
stimulus words"?tobacco-backy?and one sample of what they
call "sound reactions"?street-stream.

Regarding derivatives of stimulus words, they say "the tendency
to give such reactions seems to be dependent upon a suspension or
inhibition of the normal process by which the stimulus word excites
the production of a new concept, for we have here not the production
of a new concept but a mere change in the form of the stimulus
word "
In the class, "complete dissociation," which forms the second
division of pathological reactions as analyzed by Kent and Rosanoff,
wa seem to have samples of both types referred to, i. e. perseveration
and neologisms.

The perseveration is confined to the type which they call "association to preceding reaction." In other words, the subject is
stimulated bjr his own last answer instead of by the new stimulus
word. In the following, we give first the stimulus word, then the
reaction followed in parentheses by the preceding reaction which
in our opinion produced the reaction in question.

dream - red (light)
scissors - satellite (sun)
music - horse (black)
comfort - chicken (beef)
eagle - motor-bike (bicycle)
Kent and Rosanoff say regarding complete dissociation that
"in the case of such reactions the stimulus words seem to act, as
Aschaffenburg has pointed out, merely as signals for discharge."
They say further regarding the specific type of perseveration here
presented, that "the phenomenon of perseveration occurs in cases
in which one may observe an abnormal immobility of attention.
To react normally to a series of stimulus words requires on the part
of the subject, in the first place, a certain alertness in order that he
may grasp quickly and clearly the meaning of each word, and in
the second place, a prompt shifting of the mind from one reaction
to the next."

Regarding neologisms, the second type of complete dissociation,
samples of which we quote below, Kent and Rosanoff say "here we
place the newly coined words so commonly given by the insane,"
man - boowhoon
citizen - woof
trouble - calm-down-ness
In connection with this tendency to perseveration and to
neologisms we refer to the wandering attention and the peculiar
tendency to use big words heretofore described.

Our largest class, as also Kent and Rosanoff's, consists of
"unclassified reactions," using their terminology of the type, however, which to us would seem fairly classifiable as "incoherent
reactions." An effort has been made to list these somewhat in
the order of their incoherency. In view of the fact that placing
reactions in this group is to a considerable extent a subjective procedure, it is possible that others may consider that some of these
words have some association bases that has escaped the writer and
do not belong here.

street-whiz (auto going along?)
slow-l'hirondale (swallow-l'hirondelle? *)
window-ugh
sleep-bang (thinking of someone being wakened?)
green-laugh (grin? x)
religion-list, cruelty
light-death (life? *)
needle-horse
priest-spectator
hard-bicycle
citizen-criminal
eagle-naughty
fruit-coddling moth
river-black
justice-deviltry
long-chubby (contrast?)
thirsty-contented (contrast?)
soft-black (an S B lead pencil?1)
IV. Present Status.

Reviewing, we find a boy testing at normal by the Binet-Simon
scale, which excludes the possibility of feeblemindedness. We find,
nevertheless, well-marked peculiarities, the principal one being the
living in a world of his own, making it impossible for him to adjust
himself socially to the life about him. Is it a case for psychopathic
examination? The results of the Kent-Rosanoff test make one
extremely suspicious. The facts of deafness and unusual up-bringing
are far from explaining away conditions. Seemingly it is a case of
pathologically exaggerated day dreaming, complicated, perhaps, by
other factors. If this diagnosis is approximately correct is there a
remedy?

1 These possible associations have been suggested by a student in the Dept. of Psychology, U. of Pa., who
read the MS.
