The Young Delinquent
======================

:Author:  Cyril Burt, M.A., D.Sc.
4th Edition. London University Fress. 2]s.

The increase in the incidence of juvenile delinquency
and the interest aroused by this social problem have
called for a fourth edition of what is recognized as the
classic on the subject in the English language. The whole
text has been revised without altering the format familiar
to us in previous editions.

An appendix gives us the author's most up-to-date
conclusions as to delinquency. The causes of delinquency, as has always been held, are multiple, some
being inherent and others environmental, but what is
crucial is the interaction between these two factors.
A good deal of research has been done on this subject,
but, as the author insists, it is absolutely essential that
investigations should be properly controlled and that
mathematical exactitude in compiling results should be
observed.

Treatment is now being undertaken by the Child
Guidance Clinics which have grown so much in numbers
and efficiency in recent years. Results seem very much
the same whatever method is used by those running the
clinics, so no definite conclusions can be drawn as to
choice of method. The controversy is mentioned as to
whether delinquency is a " mental diseaseand,
therefore, one to be dealt with by the medical graduate,
or a failure to adjust to the social milieu, and, therefore, a
social disease to be dealt with by the professional
psychologist and social worker. Naturally the author
leans to the latter view, but he allows that some cases
at least require the intervention of the psychiatrist, and
whoever treats the case should be conversant both with
psychology and some aspects of pediatric medical
practice.

As has been said, this book is not only a classic but
the classic, and it will require a new study of surpassing
merit to displace Professor Burt's work from its pride
of place.

R.D.G.
