News and Notes
===============

Memorandum on the Care of the Homeless Child
Because it is assured of the importance of understanding the mental and emotional needs of normal homeless
children, and in the light of its experience of training in
Nurseries, wartime Hostels and Homes, the Provisional
Council, in response to many requests, has been considering the publication of a simple Memorandum on the
subject. This should embody the principles on which to
base provision for the child who has to be brought up
away from his own family.

From many angles, work in the mental health field
shows that the child has the same fundamental needs"
whatever his environment. It is necessary for all those
in charge of children to understand these aspects of
child development, and especially important when
children have been removed from a family setting. The
same principles hold good whatever the age of the child,
and it seems important to stress this when there are apt
to be artificial divisions such as " under-fives " and
" school-ageThe fact that there are not final
divisions can be seen from the suggestion to raise the
nursery phase to " under-sevens " and the proposal to
extend the school age.

In laying down the principles, it became evident that
these should be followed by suggestions as to how staff
could be enabled to carry these out. The suggestions
had not been confined to one fixed syllabus, for the
conditions of the times as well as the present wide variety
of practice would prohibit the establishment at this
moment of a unified national system. A more general
standard may be desirable as an aim, but different types
and sizes of Homes will be required for many years, and
already exist, many with long and honourable histories.

The Memorandum which is being prepared will outline
the minimum proportion of teaching in the mental health
aspects of child care, which should be embodied in every
course of training for staffs of Children's Homes. It
advocates a national certificate for a course of adequate
length, but also makes suggestions for a short-term plan
to cover the period before staff can be equipped for
training.

It is hoped that such a general statement of princip'e
will be of use to those concerned with training in many
fields?Residential Nurseries, Voluntary and Pubhc
Assistance Homes, Hostels, and Residential SchoolsFrom requests made to the Provisional Council, there is
evidence that the staffs of many such places which care
for children are eager for a fuller understanding 01
child development. It is hoped that this Memorandum
will further the acceptance of the importance of knowing
something of the emotional life of the child.

After-Care of Men and Women discharged from the Services
During the past six months the Provisional Council
has tackled one of the biggest mental health problems
of the war?the social needs of the man or woman
discharged from the Services on psychiatric groundsUnder a scheme, the execution of which has been
entrusted to the Provisional Council, and which has been
planned in conjunction with the three Services and also
the Ministries of Pensions, Labour and Health, with the
Board of Control as co-ordinating body, some 1,500 such
men and women in England and Wales alone h^ve
already availed themselves of special after-care services
from experienced psychiatric social workers following
their discharge to civilian life. This is a part only ?l
the total number to whom such help might be given>
but it is a noteworthy beginning. ,

These men and women were discharged from a selected
list of some thirty Naval, Military and R.A.F. psychiatry
hospitals and E.M.S. Neuroses Centres. If, before then
discharge, their medical officer feels they would benen
from after-care, they are asked if they would like to see a
social worker and discuss their problems and
The Services After-Care Officer makes a report on this
interview, including the recommendations of the medico
officer. This report is sent to the Board of Control an<j
is forwarded to the Provisional Council for transmission
to their After-Care Officer in the patient's home area*
who visits him on his return and helps him in every vva^
she can to settle down happily and
civilian life. . Prnvisional Council's
The work is carried out by the P hiatric social
Regional After-Care Officers, who are p ^ responworkers appointed for each defence g ^ patjents in
sible for the visiting of hospitals a conVersant with
hat area. These officers are thoroughy ^ they work
the local treatment and social la Pdical Services of
closely with the Commissioners ot Me f ReSettlethe Ministry of Pensions, Ministry organizations.
ment Officers, Local Authorities and socia.^^j as
Jhey have done great work, n?to"y . j^ing together
fnend and adviser to the patient, but 1 -ble underthese services and so ensuring th eedy solution,
standing of his problems and their speeuy
Guy's New Clinic?a Modern Psychological
A. pioneer venture, and an important adva ^ York
rnedicine, is marked by the recent P ,s hospital.
Clinic for psychological illnesses _ try t0 be built
; It is the first clinic of its kind in th ^ patients, men
at a general hospital, and it has bed frQm tbe York
and women. A donation of ?43,, made the
Trust and Lord Nuffield's gift of half th ^ put up
building of the clinic possible. Ahhoug ^ ^
*n the first year of the war, it has damage inflicted
Guy's for other purposes as a result of damag
on the main structure through enemy but it is
A charge is made for all Pa Ilprorne established it
hoped that when the clinic has beds. An agreemay be possible to provide some *r provides that
ment under which the clinic will1 ?P -j' to reduce the
any surplus income shall be used p circumstances,
costs of maintenance to patients 1 P becjs to be at
t?' j\ternatively, for the ProvJ.sl?" vch0logical medicine
the disposal of the physician for psycho
at Guy's Hospital. , . . i units of this type
The establishment of psycholog j. ^oCtors and
meets a long-felt want both on th P' ourage persons
paUents. it should do much to enco ^ overcome
suffering from nervous and menta bmit themselves
the reluctance which is so often fel pi;nic will make
^ treatment. Access to the y?.rnk.pScation of the
Possible a great expansion and 1 - psychological
teaching to Guy's Hospital students o J.{lhealth in
Medicine and the psychological asp benefits.
general, which should have far-re^ueSbeginning of the
It is hoped that this venture mark kind, and that
establishment of further clinics of sabie units of
they wii\ become recognized as in P
general hospitals.

Child Guidance Clinics blishment S
during this year a marked featurein theest^ opened tl
?f new clinics has been the'increasing: n working on ?
? Greater London and the Home Coii raphically- ei
a sessional basis with the staffs gro p onjy resident
|n many instances the social worke hologist and
member of the team, whilst the n clinics, and
psychiatrist share their time between s while this is rn
many cases travel daily from t 'abljsbing Child P
obviously not the ideal method o brought to
Guidance, it has enabled the ser^hi: .foment of Outer >
rural areas and, through the estab ..ng lists jn the
London Clinics, is relieving the long ^icfo altogether
London clinics. The list of clinics, wn (and will in
now number 127, is in the pubhshers h^ Qffice_ of
shortly be obtainable at the Child G
in Nuffield Foundation Grant for Child Guidance Work
ps On the cessation of the grants previously given by the
aj Commonwealth Fund for the support of Child Guidance
n_ work, the Nuffield Foundation have generously agreed
to support this work until complete amalgamation is
effected, and have granted the Child Guidance Council
the sum of ?2,500 for the current year. This will enable
^ the Council to maintain their Central Office and to
increase the staff. The training of Fellows in Psychiatry
and Psychology will also be considerably increased.

Advanced Training in Clinical Psychology
-----------------------------------------
r- An Ad Hoc Committee of the Provisional Council's
i. Interclinic Committee has been discussing the establishment of training in Lay Therapy for selected Psychologists and Psychiatric Social Workers, who will work
as medical auxiliaries and in conjunction with a
[j Psychiatrist. As a temporary and emergency measure,
( a course of half-time training for a period of two years
is being planned, which it is hoped, will commence in
j September.
j As a longer term measure, this Committee is considering
. the establishment of training in Lay Therapy to cover a
J period of about four years, and to include academic as
\ well as clinical teaching.

After-Care of Special School Children (M.D.)
For many years the London County Council has
undertaken, on behalf of the Ministry of Labour and
National Service, the work of placing in employment
children leaving its Special Schools at the age of 16, and
figures have been submitted each quarter as to the
number of placings. But an attempt has recently been
made to find out " what happens ultimately to ex-special
school children "?a question which, in view of its
connection with the Education Bill, is now of particular
moment.

Accordingly, it was decided to investigate the records
of all the children leaving the L.C.C. Special Schools in
the specimen year 1935, with results that are described as
" illuminating and reassuring Out of the 493 school
leavers, 59 are now in Institutions or under Guardianship
under the Mental Deficiency Act, and 13 have died.
The remaining 421 have needed no form of public care,
and of these only 13 are unemployable; 198 are known
to be wholly or partially self-supporting, and 48 joined
H.M. Forces. There is a balance of 162 boys and girls
who could not be traced owing to evacuation, etc., but
there is every reason to believe that they, too, are living
successfully in the community, as no applications for
institutional care or other help have been received on
their behalf.

The report states that, on the basis of these figures,
it would appear that only 10 per cent, of its Special
School leavers are likely to need institution care, and
that the other 90 per cent, may be expected to " float "
successfully in the community. It is true that the
employment situation since 1940 has been abnormally
favourable for defectives, but, on the other hand,
attention is called to the "imponderable factor " of the
Disabled Persons (Employment) Act, under which those
mental defectives who become registered as disabled
persons may hold an advantage in obtaining work.

Testimony is paid to the value of the after-care given
by social workers in the L.C.C. Supervision Section to
these boys and girls, whose successful launching in the
industrial world depends very largely on the understanding help and guidance given to them, both at the time
of placement and afterwards.

The National Council for Mental Hygiene
----------------------------------------
The Duchess of Kent, who recently took office as
President of the National Council for Mental Hygiene,
honoured the Council by her gracious presence at a
special meeting and reception held at Manson House,
Portland Place, W.l, on April 26th. In expressing her
pleasure at attending the meeting and her keen interest
in the Council's work, Her Royal Highness spoke of the
important part which it had to play in relation to the
mental health of the nation, especially in view of the
accumulated strains of war, and of the help which the
study of mental health could bring to parents in the
upbringing of children. Dr Helen Boyle, Vice-Chairman, gave a most interesting address, which is printed
in full on pages 7-10 of this issue, on the Mental Hygiene
Movement, and recalled the little-known history of its
beginnings.

The meeting ended with a showing of the psychological
film " Fear and Peter Brown in the production of
which the Council had helped, and was followed by tea.

" Lord " Memorial Essay Competition
A first prize of ?3 3s. and a medal, and a second prize
of ?1 Is. are offered to all certificated mental nurses,
male and female, of the rank of staff, charge or chief
charge, in Mental Hospitals in the United Kingdom and
Northern Ireland in the " Lord" Memorial Essay
Competition, founded by the Society of the Crown of
Our Lord and administered by the National Council for
Mental Hygiene. The competition, which is an annual
one, takes the form of an essay of approximately 2,000
words. The subject chosen by the Selection Committee
for this year is " The Nurse's part in helping the newly
admitted Patient to settle down The latest date for
the reception of essays is September 1st, 1944, and these
should be addressed to The Secretary, The National
Council for Mental Hygiene, 39 Queen Anne Street,
London, W.l, from whom full details regarding the
conditions of entry may be obtained.

The Diagnosis and Treatment of Delinquency
------------------------------------------
The Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency has recently issued under this title an extremely
interesting and informative clinical report by Dr Edward
Glover on the work of the Institute during the five years
1937 to 1941. The report comprises Chapter IV of
Mental Abnormality and Crime, Vol. II of the series
" English Studies in Criminal Science published by
Macmillan. It contains a brief introductory note On
the history of the Institute, and also sections dealing
with clinical material, diagnosis and disposal of cases,
treatment and results, with comparative tables for the
five years.

In view of the public interest in the increase in juvenile
delinquency, a comment on this point, contained in the
report, is worthy of special note. Official records, it is
stated, go to show that there was a pre-war as well as a
wartime increase in juvenile delinquency, and suggest
also that the basic causal factors are not due to " war
conditions ", but that the latter act as a precipitating
factor. Some confusion, it is felt, has arisen owing to
the fact that the authorities have lost sight of the pre-war
increase and have taken the view that the increase is only
a wartime phenomenon. Pending a reasonably scientific
investigation of the problem, the necessity for suspending
conclusions as to the nature of wartime " waves " of
delinquency is stressed.

The report ends with suggestions for future developments, among which may be cited the provision of
Hostels for patients under the control of the Institute,
of an Observation Centre outside the London area, and
the organization of seminars for Magistrates and Clerks
of the Court.

Workshop for Epileptics
-----------------------
The Provisional National Council for Mental Health
opened in South-East London on April 18th last an
experimental workshop for the employment of epilep*lCS'
whose fits were too frequent for them to be suitable ft"
work under normal conditions. Eight men wer*j
enrolled to begin with, all of whom had been unemploye
for a considerable time, and of these, two were discharge0
from a Colony for the purpose, as their families weJ.e
willing to have them at home if work could be providedThe screw sorting first obtained for them (after severa
months spent in searching) has proved to be monotonou
and financially unprofitable, but it is hoped that something more suitable may be found shortly.

Even under present conditions, however, good result
have been noted. The men have attended regularly>
are happy and contented, and express appreciation a
being able to lead a normal working life. In some cases,
fits have decreased, and there has been a general improvement in health. Wives and mothers are quite deligWe?
with the change, and unanimously express the
that the workshop has made a striking difference in tn?
men, who are better tempered and easier to manage in
every way.

Children's Painting and Epilepsy
--------------------------------
An account of the purpose, progress and development
of an experiment carried out at Lingfield Epileptic Colony
during the last four years, with painting as an activity to
epileptic boys, is described in an interesting article
Charles Handley-Read, M.A., with a foreword by 111
Medical Superintendent of the Colony, Dr J. Tylor Fo*>
reprinted from The Studio, Vol. 127, No. 614, May 19'4?*
As one of many possible activities of real therapeu*1
value, painting is, in a number of respects, ideal. Tfl
article attempts to show that a concern for the PT0^e
values in art, and an equal concern for therapy can R,,
fulfilled through painting organized on " libertarian
lines. Thus the children concerned have had the chanc
to expand their personality to the full, and in doing s,
have produced work of considerable artistic interest an'
merit, a claim which the specimens of paintings repr?*
duced in the article amply support. Exhibitions of wor>
done are held from time to time, and paintings w#
shown recently at a London art gallery. These exlu^1'
tions have been found to fulfil several valuable purposes*
they act as an encouragement and incentive to
the children, and are also of propaganda value in that they
help to dispel doubts and misconceptions in the layman
mind on the subject of epilepsy. The author states tna
painting proves to the children themselves their normality'
as well as their ability, and serves to demonstrate tW
normality to others.

The Psychology of Tuberculosis
------------------------------
It is announced that the National Association for the
Prevention of Tuberculosis are to undertake a comp1?'
hensive investigation into the psychology of tuberculos'si
to last, in the first place, for twelve months. All types o
patients with pulmonary tuberculosis will be studie0^
and the work will be carried out by a competent psych'a,[
trist, with an assistant psychiatric social worker. Fu-t
personality studies will be the basis of the work which,
is hoped, will also lay the foundation for more ambitiou
sociological studies.

*en,al Health Courses
---------------------
founH^k" ^hool ?f Economics. The fifth year of the war
home ;!e Cental Health Course returned to the London
and w h ? Sch?o1 Economics after a period of exile
the rectn fu^n8' return meant the separation from
the ser ? School still working in Cambridge. Against
^eieh 'h 'OSS cornmon study and social life had to be
of do i gains of a far more satisfactory programme
area a h [e^ated. theoretical and practical work in one
'n tr'avn- saving to staff and students of energy spent
the ve 8 and settling in three different places during
ThfromVw-11111 t^ie Child Guidance Training Centre
that fo to Woodside Hospital, Highgate, meant
as a / e.^rst time since the war this clinic could work
Premis0ni tely independent unit, and with enlarged
Child r expand in staff and service. Increased
and th Uldance facilities were badly needed in London,
student 2Vas therefore added satisfaction to staff and
It wS ??11PPortant work to be done.

comminS ^n8 at this stage that the representative
Perman ac*visipg the School should have adopted a
The MCnt ,constitution after an experimental period.
those v7al Health Course Committee now represents
and Ce?t ,tary organizations, professional associations
eloselv anc* ^oca' government departments, most
Invali,aui0ncerPecl whh the Mental Health Services.
?n man advice has already been offered to the School
Contrih?taSpects training and employment. Financial
*he Sch 11? ^ave 8enerously been continued, though
its Snr:?i?l as now ^ul'y incorporated the Course into
GratifJScience Department.

generoi to Commonwealth Fund for their
have bpS suPP?rt over a twelve-year period could not
Secure LXPressed in a more fitting way than by this
No r(f j?tishment of the training.

hilities ?a- r ?f this Journal could doubt the responsiof psvrvrln? a^ead for those concerned with the training
sho\vn natnc soc'al workers. Each year of the war has
regional ^ demands for this service, illustrated in the
ofex-serP- ning mental health services, the after-care
of the P flcf,men and women, and the rapid development
throuov, ahhshed child guidance and mental hospitals
Much?H- the ?ountry.

methods lfScussi?n is now taking place as to the best
end 0r , expanding opportunities for training. The
exPerien ^War should see numbers of men and women
exPerien *n we^are service anxious to use this
be i0st ?e* Plans are being made so that no time will
skilis ofm Pfoviding training which will translate the
health o WaFtime experience into the much needed mental
TherrVlce.Sof Lilian life.

welcomp0rnm^tee anc* Staff of the Mental Health Course
future m an^ suS?estions as to how the needs of the
and invit '3est- met fr?m the training standpoint,
instarti encluiries from any individual wanting help
^ese lines ?r continuing their professional training along
HealthU^es can he made to the Tutor, The Mental
PolitiVni <?Hrse> The London School of Economics and
Scholars^- lence'. Houghton Street, W.C.2. (HOL. 9783).
1945/ applications should be received by April 1st,
inzrdJ"bUr8h University. In order to help to meet the
Workers ,demand for qualified psychiatric social
instituted University of Edinburgh has recently
Health f a, ?ne-year's course of training in Mental
has been?r ^ a Certificate in Psychiatric Social Work
approved. Candidates for the course, who will
be chosen by a selection committee, must be over 22 years
of age and hold a Social Study Diploma or Certificate,
or a Degree in Sociology, supplemented by practical
experience.

The fee for the course is thirty guineas, but the
University hopes to be in a position to offer a limited
number of scholarships to students who appear to be
specially -qualified to take the training, but who, for
financial reasons, might be unable to do so. The course
will normally start in October of each year, and applications for the next session should reach the Director of
Studies (from whom a copy of the syllabus may also be
obtained), Department of Social Study and Training,
Edinburgh University, not later than September 1st, 1944.

Medical Officers' Course
--------------------------
The twenty-fifth Course in Mental Deficiency and
Allied Conditions, organized by the Provisional National
Council for Mental Health (incorporating the Central
Association for Mental Welfare) in conjunction with the
University of London Tutorial Classes Council, was held
from April 24th to May 5th, 1944, at the London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Forty-five Medical
Officers from all parts of the country attended. This
was considered very satisfactory owing to the great
shortage of doctors and the heavy pressure of work on
those engaged in civilian practice.

Lectures were given by Dr H. K. Cowan, Medical
Officer of Health, Gloucestershire; Dr G. A. Danby, of
Sandhill Park Colony; Dr S. G. James, of Moss Side
State Institution; Miss Laird, M.A., Inspector of the
Board of Control; and Dr A. C. Turner, Senior Medical
Officer, City of Leicester Education Committee. There
was also a session on Child Guidance by Dr Frank
Bodman. Instruction in mental testing was, as formerly,
given under the direction of Miss L. G. Fildes, B.A.,
Ph.D., assisted by the Provisional Council's staff of
psychologists, Miss Blythen, Miss Cleugh and Miss
Johns, the necessary facilities being generously provided
by Acton Elementary Schools, Willesden Special
School and the Fountain Hospital. Each student paid
one visit of observation to either the Manor Certified
Institution, or to Willesden or Enfield Special School.

The Value of Boarding-Out
--------------------------
A Home Office Circular No. 93/1944 on the question
of boarding out, gives particulars of increased payments
allowed to foster parents of children and young persons
committed to their care. Emphasis is laid on the
valuable assistance which local authorities can give the
Juvenile Courts by finding foster parents for children
for whom the Courts wish to secure this form of treatment. Attention is drawn to the fact that the intention
of the Statute as well as that of the Juvenile Court is
frustrated if a child, unless its circumstances so demand,
is placed in an institution, instead of being found a home
with foster parents.

The employment of a special officer, preferably one
who has taken a recognized course of training in some
form of social work, and who has had practical experience
of home visiting and children's problems, is advocated.
The salary of such an officer will be allowed to rank for
grant as part of the expenses of the local authority in
respect of children and young persons committed to
their care.

The Scottish Association for Mental Hygiene
-------------------------------------------
The Annual General Meeting of the Scottish Association for Mental Hygiene was held in Glasgow on May
27th, 1944. Sir John Jeffrey, K.C.B., C.B.E., Chairman
of the General Board of Control for Scotland, was the
principal speaker, and delivered a particularly interesting
and stimulating address regarding the possible developments of the Association under the new Mental Health
Services. Sir William W. W. McKechnie, K.B.E., C.B.,
LL.D., the President of the Association, presided over a
large and representative audience.

Several important items were discussed, including the
establishment by Education Committees of Occupation
Centres for defectives who had been certified as unsuitable
for instruction at Special Schools, and also the possibility
of organizing a Course of Instruction in Mental Deficiency
for Medical Officers employed by Local Authorities.
It was reported that the Association had now completed
twenty-two years of service in social welfare, and that,
while work in some areas had been curtailed as a result
of the war, there had been a general improvement during
the past year. It had also been found possible to resume
activities in several districts.

The Association has been invited to co-operate with
the After-Care Organization (War Service Casualties)
in their recently inaugurated scheme for the rehabilitation
of Services personnel discharged from military and
E.M.S. hospitals on psychiatric grounds. Contact is
still being maintained with the War Office, Labour
Exchanges and other officials concerned, regarding the
question of the calling up of defective persons for
military and national service.

Speech Therapy
--------------
A short memorandum on the necessity for making
provision for Speech Therapy among schoolchildren has
recently been issued by the College of Speech Therapists.
Reference is made to the incidence of speech disabilities
and, while statistics for the country as a whole are not
available, it is estimated that at least 1 per cent, of the
children attending all types of schools in the
suffer from some speech disability, i.e. about 150,000 |
England and Wales and 25,000 in Scotland. The rati
of boys to girls varies from 5 to 1 and 3 to 1, according
to the nature of the defect.

Local authorities responsible for the welfare of chil<fre
and young people are urged to include arrangements to
the correction' of speech defects in their plans f?r ^
future, and it is suggested that speech therapists should o
available for those attending all types of education*
institutions, from Nursery Schools to County College '
The names of qualified members of the profession app?a
on the National Register of Medical Auxiliaries. Fur'tn?
information may be obtained from the Secretary oftn
College, 86 Harley Street, W.l.

Allied Students in Training
----------------------------
Reference was made in a previous number of
Health to the six months training course organized W
the Provisional National Council for Mental Healtn>
at the request of the British Council, for women of . s
nations who are preparing to work in their own country
during the relief and reconstruction period,
course, which ended on March 31st last, proved extremely
successful, and the Council wishes to acknowledge .ll
indebtedness to the Ministry of Health, Local Authority
and voluntary organizations for their valuable help. ^
providing facilities for some of the visits of observation
made by the students to nurseries, welfare centres,
schools, homes and hostels, etc., which formed an
integral part of the course. . h
The Provisional Council continues to co-operate
the British Council in providing speakers in the trainiDB
organized by the British Council itself for allied nationals,
which deals with physical as well as mental healtn
problems.
