The C.A.M.W. Guardianship Scheme
==================================

:Author: Lucy E. Beach, M.A.,
Guardianship Officer, C.A.M.W.

The Report of the Board of Control for the year 1922 points out that at
the close of that year there were only 370 cases under Guardianship, and in the
last Report of the Board it is stated that " the total number of cases under
guardianship for whom Local Authorities were responsible on 1st January,
1931, was 1,832, an increase of 306 cases during the year, as compared with
an increase of 188 cases during the year 1929." On the same date there were
1,327 defectives on licence from Institutions.

The development, therefore, of this form of care during the intervening
years has been steady, and is progressing, partly owing to the continued delay
in the provision of institutional accommodation, and more particularly owing
to its proved value. The Guardianship Society founded by Miss Woodhead
was the pioneer in this field. The C.A.M.W. scheme was inaugurated in 1924,
under a Special Guardianship Committee, of which Lady Darwin is Chairman.

Recently the Voluntary Associations of Kent and Devon have established
County Schemes, and a certain amount of work in this direction is done locally
by some of the older Authorities. Many Authorities throughout England and
Wales have been content to use the centralised scheme set up by the C.A.M.W.,
which was started to meet the need for further facilities for placing cases under
an organised plan of supervision. None of the cases supervised by the C.A.M.W.
are in their own homes, but Guardianship with parents or relatives is used
fairly freely by several Local Authorities.

Good work can and is being done through centralised schemes, but the
ideal before all those interested in the provision of just that particular environ-
ment suitable to each individual defective, should surely be that in every area
placing cases under guardianship or on licence from institutions should be
included as part of the local scheme for the care of defectives.

Voluntary supervision, statutory supervision, guardianship, licence, daily
employment from hostels, institutional care?not one of these various forms
of care should be neglected, but all, as far as possible, should be dovetailed
into a coherent scheme, so that as each case comes up varied solutions can be
considered.

Until such time has arrived, the C.A.M.W. helps to fill a real need, and
it will no doubt always be of use, in certain cases, especially when it is thought
desirable to remove a defective a long distance from present surroundings.
Local Guardianship Schemes would obviate a great deal of correspondence,
accounting and expenses of travel, necessarily involved when a central body
is undertaking the work. Moreover, the area that can be covered by the
C.A.M.W. is at present limited by consideration of distance from London by
train or car, for experience amply shows that in addition to the routine visits
necessary for adequate supervision, an additional visit, if required, from some-
one who can take a detached view, often ensures the easy adjustment of minor
causes of irritation and difficulty. To make a success of Guardianship no pains
must be spared in regard to small details which seem absurdly insignificant,
but which in the sum total make up all the difference between success and
failure.

The C.A.M.W. Scheme embraces all types of defectives suitable to be
placed in the community?imbecile children who attend Occupation Centres,
men who can be usefully occupied or can earn wages on farms, small holdings,
or at routine work in factories, women (from 16-50), some of them high-grade
feeble-minded, capable of contributing to their own support, and others of
the imbecile class for whom maintenance is paid.

In this survey, no distinction is made between cases placed under guard-
ianship and those on licence from institutions, as in practice, except for the
necessary formalities, the duties of supervision are in essence the same.
Cases are received from Public Assistance Committees as well as from
Mental Deficiency Committees. Indeed, there is reason to think that many
cases are still in Public Assistance Institutions who could very well be placed
in the community and could, at any rate, contribute to their own support if
they were under proper supervision.

Generally it is found that those cases are the more difficult to deal with
who come under the C.A.M.W. Scheme direct from their own homes. This
is to be expected, for it is usually because control is lacking that the defective
has to be placed away from home; discipline and restraint on leisure time are
resented more if no period has been spent in an institution. By those who have
experienced institutional life, and have expressed a great desire to be placed
out, the comparative freedom of conditions in a private household is apprec-
iated. After a period of some years' definite training in an institution, many
defectives become capable of quite good work, and can adapt themselves to
life in a private family after a few months, and it should be readily possible
to transfer such cases to guardianship from time to time if periodic review of
cases in institutions were made by authorities. The C.A.M.W. Scheme is
available for defectives of varying types and ages.

Children under 16 or between 16 and 18 (approx.)
By arrangement with the Middlesex County Council, if accommodation
is available, children from out-counties can, for a fee of ^15 per annum, attend
one of the Occupation Centres or Handicraft Centres organised by the
C.A.M.W. on behalf of the County Council. The C.A.M.W. undertake to find
suitable guardians in the neighbourhood, and such marked improvement has
occurred in the children receiving such training and control that it is hoped
that further use will be made of this opportunity. There must be many child-
ren up and down the country in isolated districts where an Occupation Centre
is impracticable and a home teacher not available, who deteriorate for want
of training.

In addition, the C.A.M.W. has recently undertaken to place under guard-
ianship children who are of such low grade or so young that they cannot be
with other children at Occupation Centres. Such children should more prop-
erly be in institutions, but while the shortage of institutions continues, the
C.A.M.W. is willing to consider such cases, and has been successful in finding
guardians who gladly expend time and patience on these particularly difficult
little ones.

Women
These may be divided into: ?
(a) Those capable of supporting themselves entirely or partially.
(b) Those needing training or such care and control that maintenance
must be paid for them.
Of the cases under the C.A.M.W. Scheme 50% fall within each of these
categories.

Great care is exercised in the choice of guardians, so that in the first class,
no exploitation need be feared, and in the second class, habits of cleanliness,
tidiness and orderly work can be encouraged.
Domestic service offers the best avenue of work for class (a) and the
C.A.M.W. makes a point of periodically reviewing the progress made by those
first placed in class (b), so that as soon as justified, Authorities may be relieved
of the payment of maintenance.
Examples:

E. J. Aged 33. First placed by the C.A.M.W. in 1927 at ^13 p.a., now earn-
ing over ^35 p.a. Her chief difficulty has been quarrelsomeness, ex-
treme talkativeness and impudence, and these characteristics have been
the cause of many changes in situations. Her work is, however, good:
she is thrifty and self-respecting.

R. C. Aged 29, First placed with maintenance in 1927, and within the last
six months earning "20 p.a. (approx.) Insolence and defiant behaviour
characterised this girl, and though she is still by no means easy to place,
she is beginning to appreciate that she cannot hope to realise her am-
bition to become permanently self-supporting if she resents control.
L. S. Aged 36. First placed in 1926, with maintenance grant of 10/-, and
now earning ^13 p.a. This woman is uncertified and was placed under
guardianship from a Training Home for Defectives. She has endeared
herself to the guardians with whom she has been placed and but for her
physical delicacy would now be earning more money. She is, however,
at present with a mistress who goes out of her way to see that she has
light work and gives her many special privileges, so that it is more in
the interests of the woman for her to remain where she is.

Others always remain in class (b) or are never able to earn sufficient to
provide their own clothes without some help from the Authority. Yet others
become so deeply attached to the family with whom they are first placed that
for the sake of their continued happiness, no change is contemplated even
though, were the particular guardians to be no longer available, the defectives
in question might possibly earn a higher remuneration elsewhere.
To class (b) belong the older defectives (imbecile) of quiet disposition, for
whom authorities are more and more asking the C.A.M.W. to provide homes.
There is a long waiting list of guardians willing to take younger women who
need training, and even in the case of these older defectives it is generally
possible to deal with the cases submitted without any delay.

One of the difficulties of the C.A.M.W. Scheme is that the defectives
usually come from areas too far away to make an interview possible, and yet
this in some instances would be exceedingly helpful in judging suitability for
a particular guardian. Although the special form which Authorities are asked
to fill up gives many details, it not infrequently happens that a girl whose
application form appears to indicate sufficient capacity to warrant a small
wage proves, when placed, to be too incapable and to need much training in
personal habits as well as in work; while another defective, who on paper
appears less efficient, is quite equal to domestic service under the right super-
vision. Authorities and heads of institutions who give careful notes on die
particular capacity of the defective assist very much towards a satisfactory
selection of guardian.

The aim of the C.A.M.W. is, on the one hand, to ensure the happiness
and protection of the defective, and on the other, to relieve the economic
burden on the rates, and this double aim, of necessity, involves changes from
time to time as the defective becomes more and more able to hold her own
in life.

Mention has not been made of other types of work for women because
up till now, few cases have been placed who are specially fitted for laundry or
factory work. There is, however, a demand for girls in suitable garden-city
or new suburb surroundings who can go daily to small factories or laundries
and little difficulty would be experienced in finding suitable guardians who
would give them adequate protection. The cases which have been tried in
such situations have worked well and there is scope for extension.

Youths and Men
----------------

While there are several boys under 16 placed with guardians so that they
may attend Occupation Centres, the number of youths and men placed under
the C.A.M.W. is much less than the number of girls and women. The diffi-
culties in the way are obvious. When there are so many normal applicants
for one job, it is unlikely that the defective will be preferred. In the areas in
which the C.A.M.W. scheme has hitherto worked there is no very great
demand for factory hands and even if a youth can obtain a job, he is likely to
be put off on account of slowness.

Examples: ?
F. T. Aged 17. Placed with a Guardian who is indefatigable in obtaining
jobs for him, which he is constantly losing. When in work he earns
approximately 15/- to ?1 a week.

J. B. Aged 21. He was placed in March, 1930, and earns approximately ?1
a week. Though he works steadily, on the whole he is not an easy boy
in the home, not really appreciative of the kindness shown to him, and
sometimes very unmanageable.

Even in the case of boys who are earning, it is usual to ask the Authority
pay a fixed maintenance fee to the guardian, so that there need be no anxiety
when a boy is unemployed in regard to payment for Board and Lodging.
Wages earned are in such cases refunded through the C.A.M.W. to the Author-
ity, less a small amount retained by the boy for pocket money.

The majority of male cases under Guardianship are not self-supporting,
though several of them are able to contribute indirectly by doing sufficient
work for their guardians to justify less being paid for maintenance than usual.
If the boy is fairly quiet and amenable there are a fair number of small nursery
men and farmers who are able to give him suitable occupation and recognise
that his work is of some small value. Whereas a girl can be happily occupied
in housework, needlework or helping with children, there is a much greater
difficulty in finding guardians for boys. Unless a boy is going out to work
it is almost impossible to place him suitably near a town. It might be sup-
posed that landwork would be freely available but no extra labour is being
employed at these times and not infrequently though a farmer might give a
lad the chance to work on his farm, he could not offer him accommodation
nor could a suitable guardian be found close by.

Many guardians who would not refuse to undertake the care of a girl
hesitate to accept responsibility for a boy, though in practice the boys we have
accepted from authorities are less changeable and more amenable than many
of the girls. Naturally the class of boy who is inclined to violence or has
abnormal sex-tendencies is not suitable for Guardianship.

It is probable that some openings might be found for quiet good-mannered
lads as houseboys, but up to the present few boys have seemed suitable for this
type of work, so that no special effort has yet been made in this direction.
Careful consideration would have to be given in each case, so that a boy so
placed would have suitable recreation, as he would not be " living with " the
family. Reference will later be made to the organisation of leisure time for
girls, especially for those in domestic service: the difficulty is less acute with
the boys, all of whom are living with the family of their guardians and sharing
the general amusements. As far as is practicable they join Boy Scouts, Clubs,
etc. If it were possible to group them more and to organise an evening club
for them, it would be of immense advantage, but at present there are not
enough of them in one place, and until labour conditions improve, it is not
likely that their number will appreciate sufficiently to warrant a club.
Choice of Guardians

At the commencement of the work, a great deal of time was necessarily
spent in getting in touch with social and philanthropic organisations and
religious bodies, through whom suitable guardians could be recommended.
The work is now better known and applications are constantly received for
the care of defectives and for their services. A personal visit is always made,
the premises are inspected, and references are taken up. There is of course an
inevitable difficulty in finding at the right moment the guardians who will
suit the individual case. No special rules for the choice of a guardian can
be made?an equable temperament, sympathy, firmness, are points to be con-
sidered. It is delightful to note the genuine kindness and goodwill shown by
the guardians who employ defectives in domestic service; they arrange outings
and amusements for them with their own family in ways that would never be
offered to an ordinary maid. On the whole, perhaps the happiest households
for defectives are those where there are children.

Of special value for higher-grade defectives of difficult temperament are
trained nurses, and some of those cases who have caused anxiety in the past
are now settling down under guardians who have professional experience.
Several defectives under the scheme are giving good service at a reasonable
wage in nursing homes and hospitals, and so successful have been these placings
that development in this direction seems justified.

Those who have the care of defectives on a maintenance basis though
they undertake their care for economic or other reasons become genuinely
attached to them. As one guardian said, " I need them and they need me."
Sometimes a defective will be taken into a family after the loss of a child, and
it is pathetic to see the devotion and affection lavished upon him.

While a great number of the defectives stay on with the same guardians
year after year entirely happy and contented, there are others whose nature is
such that they need rather frequent changes of environment. If they have had
the organised life of an institution with its social activities and companionship
and are placed in domestic service they often fret a good deal and it has to
be recognised that sometimes the first home found for them proves unsuitable,
not for any tangible reason, but just because they are making their first effort
to adjust themselves to ordinary life. When a second home is found, they
settle down well. Sometimes the fault lies with the guardian?as when one
guardian refused to keep a young girl of 16 who did " nothing but cry the
girl was moved and was placed with a woman who has had considerable ex-
perience, where she gives no trouble: her one fear is lest she should not be
allowed to stay. But the higher grade defective who is capable of earning is
often most difficult temperamentally, and though it is disheartening to have
to make fresh arrangements frequently, it should be recognised that this is
really in many cases an essential part of guardianship work. It should not
be thought that the guardians have been ill-chosen or that the defective has
proved herself unfit for life outside an institution.

Uncertified Cases
------------------

Among the higher grade groups are several who have never been certified
and are probably uncertifiable. It is hoped that Public Assistance Committees
who are usually responsible for these cases will continue to avail themselves
?f the C.A.M.W. scheme. Gratifying results have followed in very many
of the uncertified cases entrusted to the Association. An uncertified lad who
works at a Nursery, began at 2/6 a week and is now getting 15/-. A girl of
25, after having been in a small household on a small maintenance basis for
a few months, was transferred to the care of a lady who has two or three maids.
Every encouragement is given to the girl to improve herself and to become
more self-reliant and she is responding splendidly. She is already earning
more than ?21 a year. A disappointing case is B. R., who has failed under
guardianship as she has failed under every other form of care during childhood.
She is affectionate and can be very attractive and pleasant, but she becomes
defiant and entirely uncontrollable if she is not the centre of interest. She
was first placed with a lady who had been a nurse and wanted some assistance
in a small household, but she could not keep her after a few months: she ran
away from the next guardian, was afterward tried with another lady who was
prepared to give her a great deal of help and attention, but again had to be
hurriedly removed. A final attempt to help her by placing her with a nurse
with special mental training has failed : it has to be recognised that her mental
condition is serious and her Authority has been asked to withdraw her.

A marked improvement has been shown by A. J., who was exceedingly
hysterical and could scarcely speak coherently because of the nervous stress of
attempting to express herself. When she wrought herself up into a state of
intense excitement, she would lose control and smash anything that lay to her
hand. Though she is still unstable she has so improved that she can now speak
without stammering. Quiet, firm handling has helped her enormously, and
part of the success is due to her having been able to attend regularly every week
at the Leisure Club (referred to later) and to special Speech Training lessons
given by a specialist on the staff of the C.A.M.W.

It is often easier to find work for an uncertified case, even though certifica-
tion might be justified, as many people are afraid of the responsibility of a case
under the M.D. Acts.

Medical Care
-------------

Periodic visits by a medical man as required by the Regulations, are
usually supplemented by some medical or dental treatment during the year.
In some cases, if a special medical examination were given before the defective
were placed under guardianship, necessary treatment could be carried out
before removal, especially in regard to teeth and eyes. Such treatment is
disturbing in a new environment and often involves the Authority in greater
expense.

Clubs
-----

The organisation of the leisure time of defectives presents great difficulties.
They have so few resources within themselves and are apt to continue working
all day long, or to have nothing to do. If they have been in Institutions, the
girls can usually do needlework, etc., but many of them cannot read and if
they can, do not find any pleasure in reading for any length of time.

If a girl is living with a family she can of course share in its recreations,
but the defective in service is apt to be isolated. She may, and often does, join
a branch of the Girls' Friendly Society, or the Rangers, or the Women's In-
stitutes, but even so she finds it difficult to hold her own with normal girls and
she sometimes gives up attending. To meet this difficulty the " Girls' Leisure
Club " was started by the C.A.M.W. in Hitchin, and some 35 girls placed out
in the neighbourhood meet weekly in the premises of the Y.W.C.A. The
average attendance is high, and the guardians gladly co-operate. A local
committee of management has been formed, and at the end of its first year the
Club can congratulate itself on having steadily increased its membership and
having met its expenses out of the small weekly payment (id. for membership
and id. or 2d. for tea) paid by the girls, and some voluntary contributions.
Eurythmics, dancing, games, singing, sewing, are the chief activities of the
Club, and at Christmas time a very successful entertainment was given by the
members.

Those who have known the girls when they first came to the Club have
remarked on their general improvement?the opportunity for activities in
company with others, and organised play makes them more self-confident and
widens their interests. There is a Girls' Committee and this has been found
helpful in increasing a sense of responsibility. The Guardians generally ap-
preciate the Club (even though sometimes it is inconvenient to arrange for
attendance), for in so many cases, a defective may be quite happy at work, but
cannot be trusted to find her own amusement.

A similar experiment has been tried successfully in a suburb of London.
One of the Guardians invites all those defectives placed in the area to meet
weekly at her house. At present the group is only small, but club rules have
been drawn up and a Captain appointed by the girls.

Home Teaching
-------------

This year an attempt is to be made to give some regular teaching in rug-
making or other activity to certain of the defectives who are of the imbecile
class and who are thought likely to respond to some training but are not near
either of the Clubs. A member of the C.A.M.W. staff will visit regularly
and the guardians will be asked to supervise the work between the visits.

Holiday Camps
-------------
Last year some 37 girls spent a fortnight at Seaford in a Y.W.C.A. Hostel
in charge of three of the C.A.M.W. staff. The holiday had to be held in June,
which is not a convenient time for holidays in many households, but the
guardians went out of their way to make the arrangements possible. The
cost to the Authorities was approximately ^3 per head. The fortnight thus
spent with the girls, which revealed many sides of their character previously

unknown to the C.A.M.W. staff, has helped very much in the understanding
of their special difficulties. Throughout the fortnight there were organised
activities which afforded scope for unexpected capacities. Such an opportunity
for closer study has proved of great value and this year a certain number of
defectives are again going into camp?this time at Littlehampton, where the
C.A.M.W. have rented a hostel.

Other holidays are arranged for individually and occasionally a Y.W.C.A.
hostel will accept a certain amount of responsibility while a girl is on holiday.
It would, however, be very useful if there were some permanent holiday home
where the girls could be sent as required for holiday or convalescence. Similarly,
a real need would be filled if there were a home available where a girl could
be tested as to general capacity in house-work before being placed under
guardianship.

From the foregoing account it will be seen that Guardianship can and
does involve many subsidiary activities and cannot be gauged simply by the
number on the books at any one time. There are, moreover, constant changes
in the cases dealt with due to withdrawals on account of unsuitability, dis-
charges from the Act and occasional escapes. It cannot too often be repeated
that the keynote of success is keeping in close personal touch with the guardians
and with the cases, so that there is a real sense of friendliness.

Apart from maintenance charges (usually 15/- per week for girls and ?1
per week for boys), the Authorities pay ^5 (girls) and jCj (boys) per annum
for clothes and meet the necessary medical expenses for medical attendance. The
C.A.M.W. fee for supervision is 25/- a quarter. It is not claimed that in all
cases the cost is less than in Institutions, but if suitable cases can be placed under
Guardianship, institutional accommodation can be freed for more urgent cases.
And there is the expectation that a large number of the cases will contribute to
their own support.
