Instrumental Music in The Asylum of Quater-Mares
==================================================

Art. YI.?

WI DE. LEGEAND DU SAULLE.

IF we recollect rightly it is more than twenty years since Drs.
Parchappe and Debouteville started a class of vocal music in the
important asylum of St. Yon, and gave there a series of private
concerts, and even an annual public fete, in which the chorus
took the principal part. This tradition is preserved at St. Yon,
and the establishment at Quatre-Mares, which was opened for
patients on the 1st January, 1852, has soon followed the example
of its senior. Some difficulties, however, presented themselves
upon the separation of the men from the women. Nothing, in
fact, is more difficult than to make lunatics of the same sex sing
m different tones, whatever may he their voice, and nothing
becomes more tiresome than a psalm-tune sung by forty or fiftyvoices in unison. In Germany these things come about differently.
There the appreciation of varied intonation is developed naturally and without instruction ; the least well-to-do classes of the
population possess this musical taste, which with us, in most
cases, is only obtained as the result of care and study. In
all probability many years will elapse before our Orpheists will
have been able to propagate this taste, which we are, perhaps, too
much in the habit of considering as an aptitude inherent in
certain nationalities.

However this may be, Dr Dumesnil, chief physician of the
asylum at Quatre-Mares, soon ascertained that all the efforts of a
professor would have little or no success in any attempt to teach
part singing methodically to a number of lunatics.

But, seconded bj a very zealous superintendent, M. Goubaux,
and by a very distinguished professor of instrumental music in
Rouen, he saw a possibility of teaching the patients under treatment to perform some pieces together upon wind instruments.
Several of the attendants also gave their assistance to the work,
but these two elements taken, so to speak, from the most mobile
portion of the inhabitants, were not sufficient to form a proper
nucleus. It was then attempted to incorporate in the band
patients considered to be incurable, and the sojourn of whom in
the asylums of the Seinerlnferieur sometimes continues for
twelve or fifteen years.
The success obtained by M. Dumesnil is truly surprising, and
we have been told that the inspector-general, M. Parcliappe, at
his last visitation of the asylum, exhibited very marked satisfaction, and even a certain emotion, on seeing poor invalids whom he
had long left in an intellectual condition not susceptible of cure,
answer correctly numerous questions on the principles of musical
art, and play with precision and considerable taste, a series of
pieces which would do honour to more than one society of
amateurs. We can speak of this from our own knowledge, for
during a recent excursion we made in Normandy, we received, on
the strength of our having been a former medical resident in the
asylum, a serenade at our arrival and departure. We were fully
sensible of this unexpected honour, and we felt the greatest pleasure in listening to a series of selections from, and overtures of,
standard operas. For about two years, fifty or sixty lunatics have
taken part in these exercises. There are never less than fifteen
patients there, and it is seldom tliat a convalescent leaves the
asylum, however little disposed towards music, without having
been a member of the musical corps.

This useful and powerful distraction gives the performers an
unwonted expression of countenance ; the features of the demented and melancholic become animated, and assume an air of
gaiety; even the maniac under a certain degree of excitement,
follows his notes with regularity, and beats measure with an
imperturbable manner, though marking his stops perhaps by
reflections, signs, and gestures, which are not all on the programme! Dr Dumesnil is convinced, together with his colleague,
Dr Viret, that the hallucinated patients, and even those who are
only present as spectators, escape from their delirious conceptions
during these performances. This favourite influence is not less
marked over the minds of the other invalids whether they are
confined to their several departments, or whether with drums and
music at the front, they take long walks in the domain of the
establishment, or in the neighbouring woods.

These remarkable results have so struck the Administrative
Board, that every demand to facilitate and propagate musical
taste amongst the insane has been warmly welcomed by the
Commission of Inspection, and immediately approved by the
Prefect of the Seine-Inferieur. We know for a fact that a single
purchase of brass instruments alone has been made to the
amount of 1500 francs. But in no direction does the superior
administration exhibit more benevolent care, greater sacrifices,
and more sympathizing interest than in the department relating
to the treatment of the insane. We also congratulate M.
Dumesnil in that he never has occasion to present any request
for the well-being of the unhappy sufferers, to whom he consecrates with such success the remarkable administrative capacity,
the consummate medical tact, and the prodigious activity with
which he is endowed, without such request being at once understood and granted.
May the harmony of the Asylum of Quatre-Mares have more
than one echo in our other lunatic establishments. Some are
said to stand in much need of it.
(Annates Medico-Psychologiques.)
