Modern Developments of the Marvellous
======================================

Art. VII.?

The pretensions x)f the persons who call themselves spiritualists,
and who have been commonly known heretofore by the less dignified title of " spirit-rappers," have lately been advanced with a
boldness, and pushed with a pertinacity, that seem to demand some
examination from the press. As long as the performances at a
spiritual seance were considered esoteric, and the delusions of the
unfortunate mediomaniacs were displayed only within the charmed
circle of their deranged disciples, it was possible to cherish a hope
that this trans-Atlantic folly might gain no permanent footing
upon our shores, and to believe that a total disregard of its existence would best promote the great blessing of its final consumma* Histoire du Merveilleux, dans les Temps Modernes. Par Louis Figuier.
Paris, 1860.
The Spiritual Magazine, London, 1860.

'lite Arcana of Christianity, and various Sermons. By the Rev. T. L. Harris.
tion. The time for these opinions has gone by. Finding a
congenial soil in the presumptuous ignorance of the half-educated
classes, aided in its spread by the wonderful facilities for the dissemination of opinion that our day affords, appealing to desires
and passions always powerful in the human breast, and actively
promoted as the source of a profitable calling by many whose
barefaced knaveries can be ascribed neither to credulity nor
disease, spiritualism bids fair to become one of the institutions of
the time. It is incumbent upon us, therefore, to devote a portion
of our space to an inquiry into the origin and tendencies of this
growing evil; and while our admirable friend Punch, ever watchful and right-minded, bi'ings down his terrible baton upon the
ridiculous aspects of the question, we, on our part, must strive to
range the phenomena of modern spiritualism under their appropriate psychical laws, and to show the precise analogy between this
and former epidemics of a kindred nature.

A somewhat similar task has been undertaken by M. Louis
Figuier, in the work the title of which appears at the head of this
article, and the scope and objects of which are thus described by
the author.

" After casting a rapid glance (we translate freely from the preface)
at the marvellous as exhibited in antiquity and in the Middle Ages?
a necessary preparation for its study in modern times?the first
volume contains the history of the demoniacs of Loudun, and of the
Jansenist convulsionaries, showing the marvellous again reigning
supreme in the domain of theology.

" In the second volume the history of the Protestant prophets presents the characteristic type of those epidemics of delirium, excited by
religious exaltation, of which the history of medicine affords so many
examples ; and the account of the divining rod exhibits to us one of the
most singular developments of the marvellous, and one for which it
was most difficult to find a philosophical explanation.

" The two other volumes designed to complete the work will contain
the history of animal magnetism, of table-turning, and of spirit-rapping.
" We intend that each of these recitals should be followed or accompanied by that natural explanation which can now be given of the pretended prodigies described. In most cases the lights afforded by
physiology and medicine are sufficient for this purpose.

" We believe that these discussions will produce in the mind of the
reader a perfect conviction of the non-existence of supernatural agents,
and a certainty that all the marvels which at various times have
excited the surprise or the admiration of mankind can be explained by
a knowledge of our physiological organization.

" A denial of the marvellous is therefore the philosophical conclusion
to be drawn from this work, which might indeed be called the marvellous explained. And if we succeed in carrying our readers with us
to this end, we shall think that we render a very real service to
society?both to those who enshroud themselves voluntarily in the
dangerous shadow of the mysticism so unfortunately resuscitated in
our time, and to those who halt between two opinions, wanting the
evidence necessary to confirm them in convictions or to guide them
in conduct."

Of these volumes the first three are already published; and in
them the subject of animal magnetism is concluded, leaving only
table-turning and spirit-rapping to be discussed. A brief abstract
of M. Figuier's completed labours will be advantageous as an
introduction to the statements of modern spiritualists; and we
will therefore endeavour to place before our readers some account
of the general scope and tenor of his work. The special narratives are ushered in by a general introduction, which commences
as follows:?

"The phenomena of table-turning have been the signal, in both
hemispheres, for the appearance of wonders which recall to mind, or,
with little variation, even reproduce, the most surprising acts recorded
in the histories of the magicians of antiquity. A study of the supernatural manifestations which have furnished matters of dispute during
so many years ought to aid in the comprehension of many remarkable
facts recorded in history ; and which, received with many reservations,
or even totally rejected by the criticism of the two last centuries,
should now possess for us their interest and their value. But this
value will be greatly enhanced if the study, well pursued, brings us to
the conclusion that contemporary marvels, like the ancient ones they
so much resemble, are all connected by a natural link ; and that, being
all referrible to the same cause, they may be explained the one by the
other; or, in other words, that a single marvel, thoroughly comprehended, will furnish a key to all the rest. Such a conclusion as this,
removing every idea of supernatural agency, would be a victory gained
by science over the spirit of superstition, to the great advancement of
human reason and dignity.

" We purpose to enter upon this study from the double point of
view of the critic and the historian. We shall endeavour to prove
that the pretended supernatural manifestations by which the present
century has been, and is now again disturbed, are only the consequences, the continuation, the necessary and inevitable developments
of the phenomena of the same kind which have been displayed in the
centuries preceding our own ; and that all of them find their explanation in the nature of the human mind.

" The marvellous is, however, an aliment so necessary to humanity,
that among all nations and in all times mankind have exhibited the
same desire to believe in the wonderful and to admit the supernatural.
The imagination of the masses can only sympathize with that which is
astonishing. The harmony of the phenomena of the world around the
order of nature, the undeviating regularity with which her laws work
out their own fulfilment, or, in a word, all that is truly admirable and
wonderful in the universe, is unable to satisfy that passion for marvels
which distinguishes the vulgar, and which Horace condemus as unphilosophical?finding in the maxim ' wonder not' the foundation of true
wisdom."

M. Figuier passes on, concisely enough, but still at too great
length for precise translation, to glance at the time, long gone by,
when the personal intervention of Deity, either actually, or according to popular belief, governed the acts of the more primitive
human societies: an intervention recorded in Scripture, and
dimly indicated through the dense clouds of mythology. As this
intervention was actually, or was supposed to be, withdrawn, the
priesthood gradually succeeded to some share of the authority once
exercised by the Divinity?and were expected to exhibit, in some
unmistakeable manner, signs of a Divine influence operating
through them. Hence arose a demand on the part of the public??
a necessity as regarded the priesthood?for some supernatural
countersign in favour of every marked change of polity or laws,
and such countersigns, according to differences of time and place,,
were called signs, miracles, or prodigies ; and were renewed from
time to time, either to subvert, or to support, the systems they
had aided to establish.

The priests of Egypt, the Llamas, the Brahmins, the followers
of Zoroaster, the Gnostics, the Pythagoreans, and the priestesses
of the Delphian oracle, are enumerated as having among them
practised all the arts, and taught all the essential doctrines of
modern mediumship. To them we shall return hereafter.

Proceeding to the early Christian period, M. Figuier relates
how the general inquietude of mind resulting from the conflict
which raged between old and new opinions was especially favourable to manifestations of the marvellous ; and how, moreover,
these manifestations, which, for the most part, had formerly been
limited to certain times and places, and fenced about by various
mystic ordinances, then emancipated themselves from such restrictions. The temples and caves sacred to the pagan oracles became
mute as the public faith departed from them?the sibyls deserted
their ancient sanctuaries for an eternal exile?but oracles and
sibyls found their successors in so-called magicians, whose performances were held beneath the open sky, and before the gaping
crowds of towns and villages.

In the apostolic age there flourished two so-called magicians,
Simon Magus and Apollonius Tyanaeus, whose skill and pretensions created no small discussion among the early Christians.
" Many fathers of the Church," writes M. Figuier, " St. Justin
among others, were not restrained from considering Simon as a
god. The great magician had so mastered the faith both of
Christians and of Pagans, that neither one nor the other dreamed
of disputing the reality of his prodigies, but sought only to make
the most of them. The Pagans regarded him as an emissary
from the ancient gods, sent to manifest their power and to restore
their waning influence. The Christians regarded him as operating
by the immediate aid of demons, but still with the permission of
their own true God. In all eyes, therefore, the performances of
Simon were miraculous. When he made statues endued with
powers of locomotion, that walked in the presence of the astonished and affrighted mob,?when he remained unhurt among
the flames of a blazing pile,?when he changed stones to bread?
all were miracles! and when, having raised himself from the
ground in a chariot of fire by the aid of two demons, he fell, after
a few seconds of elevation?a miracle again. For the Emperor
Nero pronounced that this downfall ought not to be attributed
to any natural cause, but to the victory of the God of the
Christians ; and the people, eagerly embracing the opinion that
Coesar had delivered as from certain knowledge, and still further
imposed upon by his authority, declared with one voice that the
fall of Simon was due to the prayer of St. Peter, which had destroyed the power of the demons of the magician.

In a note M. Figuier adds?
" The followers of Simon, whom the populace and even the senate
of Rome worshipped as a god, raised a statue to him upon an island in
the Tiber, with this inscription : Simoni deo scincto. Many fathers of
the Church who read this inscription fully acknowledged the authenticity of Simon's miracles, and only protested against the attribute of
holiness added to the divinity of the great magician. Others were
not equally favourable to him, and alleged that he had sought to
.obtain from the apostles the gift of working miracles, and that he had
formed an alliance with demons when his offers were repulsed."
For the first part of this statement there is the distinct authority of J ustin Martyr, who, in his Prima Apologia, describes the
statue with minuteness, and cites the inscription. But M.
Figuier does not mention that, so lately as 1662, the following
inscription existed in the island of the Tiber?semoni sanco
deo eidio sacrum ; and that this has given rise to the supposition that Justin mistook a statue to Semo Sancus, the Sabine
Deus Fidius, for one to his contemporary the magician.
Among the acts of Simon that have been recorded for the instruction of posterity, there is one that may be recommended to
the notice of modern mediums. He did not turn tables, or cause
furniture to dance, but he ordered a scythe to work by itself, and
it performed an allotted task in a manner not to be surpassed by
the most dexterous mower.

Of Apollonius it is said that he was able to transport himself
instantaneously from one end of the earth to another, to change
at pleasure into a bird, a stone, or a tree, to predict future events,
and to evoke the spirits of the departed.

Besides Simon and Apollonius, the Roman dominions swarmed
with less distinguished professors of the magic art; and the
writings both of heathen philosophers and of Christian fathers
contain numerous descriptions of their practices. M. Figuier
quotes Tertullian and Ammianus Marcellimis to show that prophetic chairs and tables, circles of people, and divining perdules,
were among the machinery employed, and then passes on to
glance at the Alexandrian philosophy, which, after the suppression
of the schools, became the heritage of so-called sorcerers. From
this retrospect he draws the following conclusions:?

" What, then, were the means employed for the accomplishment of
the various miracles to which we have so briefly referred ? and how,
among the ancients, did sorcerers proceed to work upon the rich mines
of human weakness and credulity ? This question, like all others
which arise from facts dimly shadowed in the farthest distances of
history, and having ^ eir origin in the most remote antiquity, cannot
be resolved by any p^ sitive or documentary evidence. In default of
such proofs there are, however, data which enable us to arrive, by induction, at probabilities that are little less than certain.

" An attentive examination of the chief marvels related in the histories of paganism, and of the earlier portion of the Christian era,
shows that all these marvels might have been accomplished by a knowledge of certain physical principles and physical phenomena. This
lias been extremely well proved by a very ingenious and learned writer,
who has devoted a part of his laborious life to historical researches into
occult science. Eusebe Salverte has shown, by a profound study of
facts, and by inductive conclusions from them, that, in whatever time
and place the occurrence of such prodigies has been recorded, there
existed certain classes of philosophers who possessed scientific knowledge to a greater or less extent. In the skilful application of such
rudimentary science, the priesthood found means to astonish, to alarm,
and consequently to govern the vulgar.

" ' Patting aside,' says Eusebe Salverte, ' that which belongs to
trickery, to imposture, or to hallucination, there are no ancient
miracles which a man versed in modern science caunot reproduce,
either immediately, or after applying himself to penetrate the mystery;
and the same science gives facilities to work various other miracles,
neither less brilliant nor less numerous than those which fill the pages
of history. The example of what the moderns could effect in magic
is sufficient to explain the magic of the ancients.'

" It is certain that modern physical science gives us the means of
repeating the miracles of the ancients. To affirm, therefore, that
knowledge of such science was required for their first performance is
to advance more than a conjecture,? it is to form an induction that
has almost the force of an inevitable conclusion."

M. Figuier proceeds to describe the gradual dispersion of
the pagan priesthood and their neophytes before the advance
of Ciuistianity, and to assign to this cause the diffusion over the
whole Roman empire of persons and practices once confined to
the temples and holy places of mythology. Among the Druids,
especially, the professors of the magic art found a refuge and a
welcome ; and when Christianity penetrated into Gaul, the Druid
priesthood were discovered to he in the hahit of commanding
spirits and of exorcising demous. The like gifts claimed by the
Christians furnished an occasion of bitter rivalry between the
two religions, and the Christians, for the more effectual destruction of their adversaries, revived that argument which the
founder of Christianity had condemned in the mouths of the pliarisees. A demon expelled by a Christian priest, they said, was
expelled by the mighty power of God ; and the expulsion was a
miracle. A demon expelled by a heathen priest was expelled by
the aid of demons ; and the expulsion was a sorcery. By virtue
of this distinction the heathen priesthood were ranked with sorcerers and magicians, and under such denominations they were
exiled, drowned, or burnt.

The very miracles which the Church had employed for the
destruction of rival creeds without, were found useful, in the next
place, for the settlement of doctrinal points within her bosom ;
and the same prodigies which, by their occurrence among the
heathen, condemned those heathens as allies and servants of the
devil, were held to be ranged upon the side of truth in all disputes
between the Church and her own children. In case of schism,
therefore, or of division into two religious parties, miracles were
freely appealed to as the apostolic sign and the seal of tradition ;
and the Church, torn by many such divisions, and continually
struggling against heresies, had constant necessity that such
miracles should be worked. In order that the power of her
priests over the devil should not be diminished by want of
exercise, she had an equal necessity for demoniacs, and she found
no lack of them. The Church distinguished?it is useless to inquire how?but she distinguished, between the persons who, by
virtue of an agreement with the devil, had placed themselves
voluntarily under his dominion, in consideration of being gifted
by him with certain powers of infernal magic; and those whom
the devil had seized upon by violence, or who were possessed
through the intermediate agency of sorcerers. In all times, the
first class of demoniacs were found to be extremely numerous ;
and it is impossible to say how many thousands of these unfortunates perished in the flames. Such was the rage to exorcise
and to burn, that the monks discovered demoniacs wdierever they
had need of miracles, either to display the omnipotence of God,
or to supply the tables of their convents. Unhappy, indeed,
was he who was attacked by any malady. The most trivial
indisposition might often be the cause of a horrible death,
thanks to the zeal of the spiritual physicians who were eager
for its cure.

From this time forwards, until the eighteenth century, the
prevailing belief in the marvellous took the form of demonomania;
and Figuier's pages contain little more than a catalogue of judicial
murders. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, a
belief in the power of sorcerers was universal throughout Europe.
The presence and the action of the devil in the human body was
regarded as a familiar fact, altogether beyond dispute. When an
individual was said to be possessed, no discussion was likely to
arise about the actual fact of possession, but only as to whether
it was brought about by the direct action of the devil or by the
intermediate agency of a magician. Every sick person, for whose
symptoms or sufferings the science of that time could neither
assign a cause nor discover a remedy, was said to be possessed,
and this convenient doctrine relieved the physicians and the
moralists of the period from difficulty and embarrassing researches.
An invalid suffering from convulsions, from any nervous disease,
from any of the various hysterical or hypochondriacal affections,
or from others which were imperfectly understood, was considered,
by the mass of the people as well as by the educated classes, to be
possessed by the devil.

It was the custom to refer to the devil himself, that is to say to
the individual possessed, for information as to the manner in
which the possession had been produced. This practice was
extremely dangerous to many persons, inasmuch as the individual
designated by the energumene as the author of the calamity could
not be saved by any human agency; but, even if of the highest
rank, or if an ecclesiastic, would nevertheless be proceeded
against with the utmost rigour.

The Catholic Church provided a ritual for exorcisms, in which the
following were enumerated as the signs or proofs of possession :?
1. Power to discover the unexpressed thoughts of the exorcised.

2. Knowledge by the possessed of foreign languages which
he had not learned ; and power to speak them.
3. Knowledge of future events.

4. Knowledge of events occurring at distant places, or beyond
the reach of ordinary vision.

5. Sudden exaltation of the intellectual powers.
0. A development of physical strength greater than would
properly belong to the age or sex of the possessed.

7. Suspension of the body of the possessed in the air during a
considerable time.

The method in which these tests were applied in practice appears to have been somewhat similar to the manner in which the
pretensions of a modern clairvoyant, or medium, are examined by
a circle of enthusiasts. The curious love for the marvellous and
the horrible, which is so marked a characteristic of the human
mind, was sufficient to overpower anything like judicial impartiality, and to render the very judges themselves accomplices in
pious frauds, intended to prove either the reality of the possession^ or the guilt of the accused. In all cases, the confessions of
the accused were accepted as sufficient and damning evidence
against them, however they might be without corroboration,
however much opposed to known facts, however plainly the offspring of frenzy or insane delusion. The practice of judging the
so-called witches and sorcerers seems, indeed, to have developed
an insanity all its own; and to have been the source of a delusion
to the effect that the mass of mankind were in league with the
devil. M. Figuier quotes from a personage whom he calls " le
fameux Boguet," Chief Justice of the territory of St. Claude, who
wrote in the reign of Henri IV.:?

" I hold," writes Boguet, " that the sorcerers could form an army
equal to that of Xerxes, notwithstanding that it consisted of eighteen
hundred thousand men. For Trois Echelles, one of the best inquirers
into their affairs, declared, in the reign of Charles IX., that there were
three hundred thousand in France alone ; and how shall we calculate
the number to be found in the remaining countries of the world ?
Shall we not believe that from them at least as man}' more might be
collected P For my own part, I make no doubt that, if we glance only
at our neighbours, we shall find them all alike, swarming with these
miserable and accursed vermin. Germany can attend to nothing but
the preparation of fires ; Switzerland, for this cause, has depopulated
many of her villages ; Lorraine shows to travellers thousands upon
thousands of stakes to which sorcerers have been bound ; and for
ourselves (we being no more exempt than others) we see the frequent
executions that take place in many districts. Savoy sends us daily an
infinite number of persons possessed by demons, who, being conjured,
say that they were placed in the bodies of these poor creatures by
sorcerers, and that most of those whom we have burned, here in Burgundy, came originally from thence. And what opinion shall we form
regarding France ? It is difficult, indeed, to believe that she can be
cleansed, considering the number that she contained in the time of
Trois Echelles; and, without taking more distant regions into account,
the sorcerers walk about by thousands, multiplying on the earth like
the caterpillars in our gardens. I would have them to know that, if
1 had my pleasure, the world would be cleansed thoroughly ; for I
should desire that they might all be united in one body?so as to be
burned at one time in a single fire."

The benevolent intentions of this mediaeval hero, although not
absolutely accomplished, were not absolutely thwarted. For
some twenty pages, the work of M. Figuier consists of nothing
Taut a catalogue of judicial murders committed, not upon individuals, but upon masses of people. It is recorded that a single
official, Nicolas Remy, who exercised judicial authority in Lorraine towards the end of the sixteenth century, sent nine hundred
reputed sorcerers, within fifteen years, to the stake or the
gallows ; and, nearly a hundred years later, the Parliament of
Rouen addressed a solemn remonstrance to Louis XIV., who had
designed to exert his prerogative of mercy in favour of some
wretches sentenced to the stake, and had commuted their
punishment to perpetual exile. The Parliament, composed of the
most distinguished men in the province, commenced their memorial by reciting that the crime of sorcery had always been
punished by death, in accordance with Scripture and with the
testimony of the Fathers of the Church, by all the kings in
Christendom. They proceeded to cite instances showing that
successive Parliaments had invariably assigned the same penalty
to the offence ; and they appealed to the piety of the monarch for
the maintenance of the customary rigour. "In 1675," writes
M. Figuier, "when the Parliament of Normandy unanimously
signed this remonstrance to the King, the Misanthrope and Tartuffe had already appeared upon the stage, and more than thirty
years had elapsed since the foundation of the French Academy !"

The introductory and more general portion of the History of
the Marvellous embraces a glance at the progress and effects of
the belief in demoniacal possession from the death of Joan of
Arc to the end of the seventeenth century. In order more
minutely to describe the methods of procedure in cases of presumed sorcery, M. Figuier then enters upon a detailed narrative
of the so-called possession of the Ursuline nuns at Loudun, in
J 032, and the following years, and of the trial, condemnation,
and execution of Urban Grandier, charged with having bewitched
them. The history is one that cannot be profitably condensed,
and that space does not permit us to extract; but it may be
studied with advantage by those who would learn what kind of
hysterical excitement was then believed to indicate possession,
and what kinds of testimony were then (as now) accepted in
proof of the various matters alleged. The next division of M.
Figuier's work, under the title of Les Convulsionnaires Jansenistes, contains an account of the life and death of Francis de
Paris, of the so-called miracles worked at his tomb in the
cemetery of St. Medard, and of the various flagellations, crucifixions, and other torture, undergone by the fanatic devotees
whose minds were excited upon the subject of his sanctity.
This episode brings down the History of the Marvellous to the
year 17tt7.

The second volume contains the Divining Bod and the Protestant Prophets.

M. Figuier traces the history of the divining rod in its three
chief applications?for the detection of thieves, of minerals, and
of springs of water?from the earliest period down to the researches of M. Chevreul, in 1812, M. Chevreul, by a series of
careful experiments upon the suspended ring?the analogue of
the divining rod?showed clearly that the movements of all such
agents were produced by unconscious muscular action on the
part of the persons holding them ; the muscular action, in its
turn, being governed by expectant attention, or an idea of the
results likely to be produced. M. Chevreul's experiments and
conclusions are detailed in the Revue cles Deux Mondes for May,
1833 ; and it is unnecessary, in this place, to recapitulate matter
that is, in its principles, so familiar to every physiologist. M.
Figuier does not, however, mention (although the fact curiously
illustrates the vitality of all such delusions) the resuscitation of
the pendulum in late years, under the name of Rutter's magnetoscope, as a test of the veritable presence, in homoeopathic globules,
of the medicaments professedly contained in them; nor the experiments of Dr Madden, of Torquay, who, following in the
steps of M. Chevreul, showed that the oscillations of the magnetoscope were entirely governed by the mind of the operator,
and corresponded with his own belief in the nature of the globules under examination. It is melancholy to reflect that these
experiments should have been required after the publication of
those by M. Chevreul, and at a time when the pretensions of the
magnetoscope ought not to have excited a moment's attention on
the part of persons ordinarily well informed.

The Protestant prophets, or Camisards, have been claimed as
allies by some spiritualists of the present day. About 1668, the
Protestants of France, maddened by the sanguinary persecutions
that followed the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, deprived of
their property, their civil rights, and often of their lives by the
gibbet or the stake; unable to marry or to legitimize their offspring ; inadmissible as witnesses; precluded from holding any
office, or from following any professional or commercial calling,
were driven into a frenzy bordering upon despair. Forced by
persecution to fly from France, the pastors had said to their flocks
? "Fear nothing; although we are forced to leave you, the Spirit
of the Lord will not forsake you, but will be always present in
your assemblies, and will speak to you through the mouths of
women and children."

Understood literally, these comforting words had disordered
the imagination of many of the unfortunates who were detained
by poverty in their native country. Their churches being destroyed, arid their worship forbidden, they assembled among
woods and rocks for secret prayer. For these persecuted religionists, the mountains and deserts were peopled with phantoms,
and filled with the voices of revelation. In a profound silence,
the slightest sound was regarded as the word of the Holy Grhost ;
and, if we may believe Catholic writers, certain artifices were
used to exhibit miraculous visions to the more simple?visions,
which, in the opinion of the chiefs of the party, were likely to
attract adherents to' their cause. The armed insurrection that
followed, and that continued, with various success, until its final
suppression in 1705, was accompanied in its whole course by
phenomena of ecstasy and of pretended inspiration. The prophets ruled the camp, and were chosen as military leaders on
account of their spiritual gifts.

From M. Siguier's details, and copious extracts from contemporary documents, we gather that the supernatural manifestations
among the Camisards were remarkably uniform in their character.
With exceptions, and especially with exceptions in the case of
those men whose talents and ambition gave them the desire and
the capacity to rule their fellows, and in whom the means necessary to that end may pardonably be regarded with suspicion, the
great majority of the inspired were women and young children,
likely subjects for hysterical somnambulism. After the sermon of
some desert preacher, or any other circumstance that had strongly
fixed the thoughts upon religious ideas and upon the sufferings
of the Church, the individual about to be inspired would remain
for a time absorbed in his own reflections, and, wrapped in profound reverie, would become the subject of intense cerebral exaltation. After a longer or shorter duration of this phase, he
would suddenly fall, deprived of feeling ; and, stretched at length,
would be attacked by epileptiform convulsions. By-and-bve, the
scene gradually changed. The convulsions diminished and finally
disappeared, quiet and serenity took the place of trembling
and of pain. At length, the individual would rise apparently restored to himself, and would commence an eloquent discourse,
preaching the truths of the Calvinist faith, denouncing the idolatry
of the Papists, and prophesying future events, among which were
always the destruction of the modern Babylon (Rome), and the
restoration of the ruined churches. These discourses, which
lasted sometimes for hours, were always in French, although the
Langue d'Oc alone was spoken in all the provinces of the south.
The first words were invariably these :?"I tell you, my child,
I assure you, my child." It was the Holy Ghost who spoke thus
by the mouth of the inspired. The oration being concluded
gradually, and by a scarcely appreciable transition, the prophet
returned to his natural state and his ordinary language; not remembering, or remembering but confusedly, the words which he
had spoken during the strange and temporary exaltation of his
intellectual faculties.

Sometimes the ecstasy was provoked by the breathing of a
prophet. In the religious meetings, the preacher, having concluded his discourse, would approach the neophytes considered
worthy to receive the prophetic gift, and, breathing into the
mouths of one or two, would say, " Receive the Holy Ghost."
Soon after the newly elect would fall, would undergo tremblings
and convulsions, would presently arise, and speak as if inspired.
Having finished, he would in his turn breathe upon some other
candidate for the like gifts, who, after his own period of" excitement, would render the same service to others.

Moreover, a whole congregation, composed of perhaps a thousand persons, would sometimes fall into convulsions at the mere
command of the preacher. Having finished his sermon, the
prophet would exclaim, " Mercy!" loudly and repeatedly, and
would order his flock to fall upon the ground. The greater
number of the faithful would be obedient to this command.
The foregoing paragraphs (slightly condensed in translation),
if stripped of a few unimportant particulars relating to time,
place, and the accident of persecution, might serve for a description of much that occurred during the late revival at Belfast.
They might serve also, M. Figuier remarks, to describe a similar
movement in Sweden, in 1846 ; and all the phenomena appear
to be purely, and in the truest sense, hysterical. The use of the
French language is rendered less surprising by the sameness of
the discourses; and the ignorance and stupidity of those who
became eloquent when " inspired" is only an additional illustration of a very familiar fact. We have so lately discussed the
Belfast revival, that this subject need not detain us longer.
The third volume of the History is devoted to " animal magnetism,'' from the first appearance of Mesmer before the public,
to the latest applications of hypnotism ; and may be divided into
two portions, the first, a very graphic and entertaining narrative
of events, the second, their physiological explanation. Under
the latter head, M. Figuier disposes in succession of the various
hypotheses that have been advanced by the ignorant and the
credulous; and claims for hypnotism the power to explain all the
phenomena of cataleptic trance, ecstasy, or somnambulism, and
all the events that have supported, either in ancient or modern
times, a belief in possession or in inspiration (excepting, of course,
the inspiration made known to us by the evidence of Scripture).
He admits, and regrets, that in the present state of knowledge, it
is not possible to go much farther than this, or to state the
essential changes in which hypnotism or nervous sleep consists.

We know only tlmt it can be readily produced by expectant attention. and that such attention can be most easily commanded by
tlie aid of some object on whicb to fix the senses and the thoughts.
How the act of attention modifies the condition of the nervous
system we have yet to learn ; but we are certain that the influence
is only self-contained, and independent of any external agency
?whether of "spirit" or " fluid." That our knowledge extends
no farther is due to two causes ; first, to the discovery of anaesthesia, produced by chemical agents, a discovery that destroyed at once the surgical interest attaching to mesmerism ; and,
secondly, to the character of the persons by whom mesmerism
was chiefly practised, and of the performances in which its effects
were displayed. Respectable and intelligent practitioners were
unwilling to investigate a pursuit that afforded notoriety to the
most credulous of the profession, and gain to the most ignorant
and fraudulent of tricksters. Now that the popular enthusiasm
with regard to mesmerism has died away, now that clairvoyance
and phreno-mesmerism are forgotten delusions?succeeded by
the " spiritualism" of the day, there is a prospect of scientific
inquiry into the basis of reality underlying all these things, and
into the essential nature of the agencies concerned in producing
them.

In the meanwhile, the phenomena which can be referred to
hypnotism, or nervous sleep, may be stated as follows':?
1. Bodily insensibility, ranging in degree from that of natural
sleep to the most complete unconsciousness of pain, or other
external impressions.

2. Somnambulism, or a state of general unconsciousness,
accompanied by an exaltation of sensibility with regard to
impressions of a particular class. These may be indebted for
their power, either to their nature or their source; that is to say,
they may appeal to the sensorium by reason of being in harmony
with the dominant idea, or by reason of emanating from a particular person ; the attention being fixed subjectively upon an
idea, in the first class, and objectively, upon an individual, in the
second. The former condition may be illustrated by ecstasy and
mesmeric clairvoyance, the latter by electro-biology; and in each
there will be complete subjection of the belief and the will to the
impressions conveyed through the senses. Thus, in ordinary
mesmeric sleep-waking, or in the ecstasy of religious revivals, or
during the exorcisms recorded by M. Figuier, the " subjects" were
most acutely alive to every breath of suggestion from without
that had reference to the matter actually in hand, hearing the
faintest whispers, catching at the slightest hints; but neglecting,
or even absolutely deaf and blind to, any irrelevant speech or
action. The " electro-biologized" person, too, has his whole
548 MODERN DEVELOPMENTS OF THE MARVELLOUS.

attention engrossed by the speech of the operator; and his
powers of comparison, judgment, and volition paralysed?not
by any agency from without, but because his nervous force is
concentrated upon a single object. To these varieties of somnambulism, distinct or blended, differing in degree and duration
under different circumstances, the greater portion of the phenomena called supernatural may be referred.

3. Catalepsy, or rigidity of the limbs in a position not determined by gravity, is, when universal, of comparatively rare occurrence. In a partial form, it probably is more common, plays its
part in the maintenance of the attitudes of faquirism, and is
familiar to the habitues of the mesmeric seance.

4. Convulsions and tremblings are ordinary forerunners of the
complete development of any of the former states.

5. Muscular movements, involuntary and unconscious, are very
frequent in cases of partial hypnotism, and are brought about by
a degree of attention that would be insufficient to produce any of
the former classes of phenomena. They are exemplified in tableturning, in the movements of the divining rod, the exploratory
pendule, and the magnetoscope.

For all these there are at least two distinct sources; one, the
contemplation of an emotion, or state of feeling, as instanced in
all the varieties of ordinary hysteria ; the other, the contemplation of an object, as in all the varieties of artificial hypnotism.
In both, the operation of the state of attention upon the body is
not limited to the muscular and nervous systems; but may extend, under certain circumstances, to every function of organic life.
We proceed now to the consideration of the matter that most
immediately concerns us; that is to say, the relation borne by
modern spiritualism to these by-gone marvels. We may remark,
in the first place, that a popular belief in the agency of spirits as
the active causes of supernatural phenomena, has alternated with
a belief in the agency of fluids, variously described as electric,
magnetic, or odylic. While, therefore, we are not entitled to
speak of spiritualism as being, in its essential characters, a new
doctrine, still we cannot but recognise the existence of novel
elements in its modern phases ; and we think it will be found
that for these novel elements, for everything that is distinctive in
its characteristics or teaching, it is, in a great degree, indebted to
the impulse given to human thought by the writings of Emanuel
Swedenborg.

Into the theological and doctrinal teaching of Swedenborg it
is not our purpose to enter; but it is necessary to say a few
words concerning his account of the eternal world or state, for
the information of readers who may not be conversant with his
views.

He held, then, that the soul, or spiritual existence, rather than
the material body, constituted the essential and actual man ; and
that this soul, although not palpable or visible by material
organs, was just as really a substance as the earthly body itself.
He held that the spirit, when liberated from the body by the
death of the latter, passed at once into an intermediate state of
existence, the Hades of the Greek Scriptures, where it was prepared for its final destination, in heaven or in hell; and further,
that, at certain epochs of the world's history, Hades had been
cleared of its tenants by the operation of general judgments. Of
these he taught that the final one, the last judgment predicted
in the New Testament, occurred in or about the year 1757 ; and
that, from that date for ever, individual judgments will do away
with the occasion for general ones; each departed spirit going to
his own place speedily. The last general judgment but one,
according to this writer, took place during our Lord's ministry
upon earth: so that for 1700 years or thereabouts, Hades had
been continually receiving the spirits of those who departed this
life, and of whom there were many completely assimilated to the
state of the infernals, and ready to enter into Gehenna. He
believed, also, that the spirits in Hades were able to communicate
with men in this world, by suggesting thoughts to them?thoughts
good or evil; and that they were actually and continually so
employed; and he traced much of the profligacy and misery of
the time in which he lived to the number of wicked spirits who
were by this kind of suggestion constantly influencing the
thoughts and actions of the human race; then, as at all former
times, too ready to fall before temptation. As the immediate
result of the last general judgment, and the removal, consequent
upon it, of spirits confirmed in evil from Hades to Gehenna, he
predicted a great amelioration in the condition of the human race;
who, no longer brutalized by overpowering demoniac influences,
were to make prodigious advances both in knowledge and in conduct. Moreover, these advances were to be permanent: because
the individual judgments to be recorded for the future, and the
more speedy transmission of souls in consequence of them through
Hades to their final destination, would forbid any accumulation
of demoniac influence in a state able to operate upon mankind.
Swedeuborg taught, farther, that the spiritual world was
around us on every side, and only concealed from our view by
the veil of fleshly consciousness?a veil capable of being raised,
prior to dissolution, whenever it so pleased Omnipotence. Its
being thus raised was, he held, the means by which various
persons described in Scripture?e.g., Balaam and Elijah's servant
?were enabled to behold spiritual existences formerly invisible to
them; and he ascribed his own visions, into the nature of which
NO. XX.?NEW SERIES. O 0

we do not intend to enter, to a similar interposition of the
Divine.

Now an absolute belief in Swedenborg's doctrines of Christian
faith and duty, and a belief, more or less modified, in his visions,
and his views of the eternal world and state, have for many years
been very widely diffused among Protestant Christians, especially
in the United States. The small and most sectarian sect called
Swedenborgians, represent only a minute fraction of the followers
of their master ; and hence there were, when spirit-rapping was
first heard of, thousands of people perfectly familiar with the idea
of the nearness of the spirit world, and who believed that an
alteration in their own state would, even in this life, allow them
to hold actual and conscious communion with the souls of the
departed.

It may here be observed, however, that while regarding
spiritualism as in one sense a result of Swedenborg's doctrines,
we do not wish to be understood as implying that it is their
corollary. For these doctrines may be assented to by those who,
nevertheless, feel that intercourse with the spirit world is something entirely abnormal; possible, it is true, and perhaps occasionally permitted; but that, nevertheless, the barriers between
the natural and the spiritual states are not of a nature to be removed by any power short of Omnipotence, or to be suspended for
the fulfilment of any purposes short of those of universal wisdom.
The doctrine of the eternal spiritual existence of the human race
is so completely in unison with human hopes and aspirations, is
so agreeable to our reason, and so abundantly confirmed by revelation, that Swedenborg can add nothing to the evidence in its
favour. His works should rather be regarded as a natural and
necessary reaction against that Protestantism which, desiring to
overthrow the Eomish scheme of purgatory, had, in fact, utterly
ignored the spiritual life of Hades, and had been gradually developed into a belief in the suspended animation of human souls,
from the dissolution of the body to some period still in the future.
Under this teaching, the soul or spirit, destined only to be resuscitated after the lapse of ages, ceased to be regarded with the
interest properly attaching to it, and, instead of being considered
the essential man, was looked upon as a vague and shadowy
something of which it was impossible to give any precise account.
The most enlightened Protestants of the eighteenth century, as a
rule, would hold about the soul opinions only to be described
as a fasciculus of negations; and would look forward to its
reunion with the material body as a condition essential to its
active life. The writings of Swedenborg, to minds thus instructed,
would possess all the charm and interest of absolute and most
attractive novelty; and, instead of only modifying erroneous

opinions with regard to the state and condition of the soul after
death, would in many cases present for the first time a real idea
of the soul as a substantial existence. This idea thus given, and
spiritual bodies being described as perpetually surrounding us, it
is but a step farther to think of them as exerting active influences
upon material things.

Accordingly, when, nearly ten years ago, it was announced
that the then familiar table-turning was a result of spiritual forces,
and that spirits communicated with mankind through the agency
of persons called " mediums," by making raps upon tables, there
were thousands in the middle and upper classes, of the kind
called " intelligent observers," who saw no difficulty at all in the
matter. They knew of no reason why these things should not
be ; they were conscious of no broadly-marked distinction between
spirit and matter; they saw no incongruity in tbe presumed action
and reaction between them ; they heard tbe raps, and took the
spirits for granted. From this, the delusion prospered; and,
having at first been little more than a new method of drawingroom fortune-telling, it now numbers, in the United States by
millions, and in this country probably by thousands, adherents
who consult their familiar for every principle of conduct in this
life, and for every belief or hope with regard to the life to come.
Of this sect, the mediums are the priests, and raps upon a table
are the oracles.

The pretensions of the Spiritualists have steadily increased
during late years; but their present claims are stated as follows,
by a prominent brother of the order, who wishes to " present a
brief general statement of the leading phenomenal phases in
which, at the present day, Spiritualism is presented to us?
" Before doing so," writes this author (Spiritual Magazine, No. 2),
" as a preliminary observation necessary to a right understanding of
the matter, we would remark that there are persons in some way peculiarly constituted whose presence appears to furnish conditions requisite to enable spirits to act upon matter, or to manifest their agency
in any way cognizable to men. In what this peculiarity consists,
whether it be chemical, electrical, magnetic, odylic, or in some combination of these, or in what else, it would lead us too far from our
present purpose to consider." (We break into the quotation at this
point, in order to call attention to the effects of spiritual intercourse
upon English composition.) "At present we would only point out
the fact that the presence of one such person at least is necessary in
every circle before any spiritual manifestations can be obtained. Such
persons are now technically designated mediums."

The most common form of the manifestations, and that which
is most easily obtained, is seen in?

" 1. The Rappings, Table-tippings, and other Sounds and Movements
of Ponderable Bodies.?The company assembled place their hands lightly
on a table, and, if a suitable medium is present, in a short time sounds,
like raps or detonations are heard on the table, the chairs, the walls,
or the floor, often varying in power and tone At other times,
instead of sounds being heard, extraordinary movements of the table
are seen, it rising and falling vertically or perpendicularly, and to different elevations off the floor, or sliding along the room first in one
direction and then in another, or moving rapidly round it ... . On
more than one occasion we have seen the table rise from the floor
without any contact .... no one being nearer than from two to three
feet of it. Human beings also have frequently been raised off the
floor and floated round the room in the presence of numerous persons."

2. Spirit-writings and Spirit-drawings. ? The former of these
modes of communication is not unfrequent. Usually, the medium
holds a pencil in hand as for writing, and, sometimes immediately,
sometimes after a few minutes, the hand goes into involuntary motion,
forming letters, words, and sentences, making an intelligible communication or reply to some question, verbal or mental, that has been
asked With some mediums the hand is simply used mechanically, the medium not having the slightest idea of what is being
written; with others this is accompanied by impression as to the immediate word or sentence that is to be written, but no further. I
know one medium who sees before him in the air, or upon the table,
the word he has to write Cases of direct spirit writing, that
is, not requiring the intervention of a mortal hand, are comparatively
rare.

3. Trance and Trance-speaTcing ? In this state the trancee
frequently speaks as from a spirit?sometimes in long and sustained
discourse ; and even at times in a foreign and (to the trancee) unknown
tongue. We have scores of times heard persons of but little education
discourse, when in this state, with an amplitude of knowledge which
we are sure they did not in themselves possess, and with a logical
coherence and power of expression of which in their normal state they
were incapable This state is similar, if not identical, with that
which in the same persons may be induced by mesmerism.

4. Clairvoyance and Clair audience. . . .
5. Luminous Phenomena are sometimes seen at spiritual seances.
They are usually described as very brilliant; sometimes they appear as
stars, or as balls of fire; at other times they shoot, meteor-like, through
the apartment, or gleam over the walls, or appear as luminous currents circling round a particular centre, such as the hand of the
medium, the pencil with which he is writing, or some object in the
room.

6. Spiritual Impersonation, or the representation or reproduction in
a medium of the actions and manner, gait, deportment, and other
peculiarities which distinguished the actuating spirit in his earth-life.
7. Spirit-music.?A musical instrument, say a harp or an accordion,
being held or suspended in the hand of the medium, or of some person
near him, tunes are sometimes played on it by invisible agency, often
in a very superior manner; sometimes it will be a known and familiar
tune, at other times spirit-music will be thus improvised.

We know persons who often, when alone and unexpectedly, hear delightful music, apparently in the air, resembling, and yet unlike, any
other they have heard. . . .

8. Visible and Tactual Manifestations, such as the appearance and
touch of spirit hands. . .
9. Spirit Intercourse by means of the mirror, crystal, and vessel of
water.
10. Apparitions of the Departed.
11. Visions and Pre-visions.
12. Dreams.
13. Presentiments.
14. Spirit Influx, by which ideas and sentiments are infused into
the mind. . . .
15. Involuntary Utterance. . . .
16. Possession.?We believe that many persons treated as insane
are only so in the same sense as the demoniacs of old.
Our space has compelled us entirely to omit the explanation
of some of these sixteen headings-; but we trust that we have
preserved enough to convey to the reader a clear notion of the
phenomena that are said to occur. In the fifth number of the
Spiritual Magazine we find a paper by William Howitt, entitled
" The Threefold Development of Spiritualism," from which we
learn that there are three distinct phases of mediumship. Of
these, the first, or lowest, is concerned in the production of the
physical phenomena, the second involves intellectual, and the
third, spiritual illumination. The poems of Mr. Harris, said to
be dictations from the spirits of Rousseau, Keats, Shelley, Byron,
Coleridge, Pollok, &c., are quoted as illustrations of the intellectual phase, and the sermons of Mr. Harris as illustrations of
the spiritual phase. To these compositions we shall have occasion to refer hereafter.

Mr. Harris himself defines modern spiritualism " as a series of
actions on and in the human spirit and body, and on the objects ol
the natural world, produced by the more abundant descent of the
Divine Spirit into Christendom and the world, for the purpose of
unfolding the more interior and spiritual, as well as natural
human faculties, into higher states of force, perception, and
utility. It may be defined, in its counter movement, as the results produced in man and on nature by the opposite effort of
infernal spirits, to take advantage of new openings, to invite to
evils, and to destroy the faith."

We have in these various quotations a sufficient basis of information concerning the alleged facts of spiritualism to enable us
to investigate their nature and causes. The three phases of Mr.
Howitt's are too much for us ; and we purpose to consider the
whole matter under two heads?first, the physical phenomena of
a seance ; and, secondly, the results of spiritual dictation.
(To be continued.)
