The Mental Philosophy of Fichte the Younger
============================================

Akt. IY.?

Under the title of "Contributions to Mental Philosophy," we
are indebted to Mr. Morell for a translation of " Zur Seelenfrage,
eine Pliilosophische Confession," a little treatise that has recently
proceeded from the pen of the younger Fielite. The translator
introduces his work by a prefatory chapter, in which his reasons
for undertaking the task are set forth in considerable detail; and,
before proceeding to the text of the volume, we will endeavour to
lay an abstract of these reasons before the reader.

After devoting two or three pages to a very brief account of the
biography, studies, and early life of his author, Mr. Morell
expresses' a belief that the treatise he has selected is calculated,
not only to throw some light upon the singular development of
modern German speculation, and the point to which it is now
tending; but, also, to conduce generally to the interests of
psychology. In support of the latter position he refers to the
present state of the science, and to efforts for its advancement
that have proceeded exclusively upon either the dunlistic or the
materialistic principle; neither of which has hitherto offered any
Prospect of satisfactory results. In the school of Ficlite there is
shown a way of escape from this old'alternative ; and a system of
spiritualistic psychology, based upon the most complete induction of facts.
" Another ground," writes Mr. Morell, " upon which it appeared,
to nie desirable to circulate the present little work in our own
country was, that it shows with such remarkable clearness the
bearing which psychological inquiries have upon other important
questions." As illustrations, the questions of a conscious immortality, of the bearing of psychology upon the theistic argument,
especially in relation to the Divine Personality, and of the nature
?1 the abnormal phenomena comprised under the word " mediumship," are separately advanced and considered.
Contributions to Mental Philosophy. By Immanuel Hermann Ficlite. Translated and edited by J. D. Morell, A.M. London. 1860.
With regard to the first of these questions, Mr. Morell compares the two extreme views respecting the nature of the soul as
an intelligent principle : namely, that which regards it as a manifestation of the universal and absolute reason, individualized by
connexion with a bodily organism ; and that which regards it as
consisting of a series of phenomena necessarily springing out of
a given nervous organization. To the first view he objects that,
if it were the truth, the severance of the connexion would destroy
individuality, and return the soul to the infinite, as a wave is lost
again in the ocean; and, to the second, that it cuts off the very
possibility of a continuous mental life, and, by making a physical
apparatus essential to the manifestation of mind, compromises
irrecoverably the whole hope of immortality. At the conclusion
of this argument, we find the following striking passage :?

" I know it will be said that the fact of immortality is made known
by direct revelation, and that the omnipotence of the Deity is not to
be limited by any notions of impossibility which we may entertain. To
which I reply, that nothing is more trying and unfortunate for our
mental peace than cases in which the dictates of revelation are opposed
to the obvious indications of science. Our faith is not so strong that
it can afford to disregard the intimations of science, even when they
are adverse to it; or to neglect them when they are confirmatory.
Scientific evidence will always prove stronger in the long run than
mere belief; for, as we cannot admit truth to be at variance with itself,
we must necessarily, in the long run, relinquish our hold of that side of
a contradiction on which the grounds are most open to dispute. For
myself, I must freely confess, that my own inward convictions of a
conscious immortality have involuntarily grown dim or vivid, almost
exactly in proportion to the strength with which I have found the
dependence or independence of mind upon physical conditions to be
confirmed by scientific considerations. When the dependence indeed
is made absolute, I cannot conceive that any mind much accustomed
to logical consecutiveness can hold the doctrine of a life hereafter with
any real tenacity." (p. xx.)

Upon the relations of psychology to the theistic argument, Mr.
Morell makes no remarks, but passes 011 to consider how the
principles defined by Fichte may be brought to bear upon the
explanation of certain abnormal phenomena of the human mind,
or iia other words, the phenomena of " mediumship." To this
question it will be necessary to return hereafter.

Finally, we learn from the preface that Mr. Morell is himself
engaged in an endeavour to construct a coherent and harmonious
whole from the materials prepared by various labourers in the
field of psychology, and " at least to commence the work of building up the science upon a broader and deeper foundation than
has been usually attempted in our own country." He therefore
sends forth this little book in order "that the thoughts of many
May be directed to those questions which I hope in due time to
discuss more fully, and as a kind of pioneer in the pathway of
popular interest." Especially when regarded from this point of
view, we cannot but regard the contributions to mental philosophy
"s a most seasonable and interesting publication, and as an
earnest of a pledge which Mr. Morell will, we trust, speedily be
enabled to redeem.

Passing on now from the translator's preface to the work itself,
we find this cast in a mould of eclecticism that renders any
attempt to abstract its contents extremely difficult and unpromising. The author has chosen the form of a free and personal
expression of convictions in order that he may offer to the world
^ succinct programme of opinions, and give a general view of the
grounds on which they are supported, without finding it necessary
to adduce logical proof of every position that is maintained, or
even to do more than hint at the nature of the evidence in the
case. Hence (the treatise being a model of brevity and conciseness) there is scarcely a passage that could be omitted without
injury to the general argument, or that could be condensed without injury to itself; and we are compelled to state the leading
characteristics of the volume in the very words presented to us by
the translator. In a chapter of " Introductory liemarks" the aim
of the author is expressed as follows :?

" To bring out the fundamental idea of the nature of the soul from
all the surroundings in which a complicated and critical inquiry necessarily envelopes it, and to state it anew upon its prominent and most
decisive grounds, this will be my first and foremost endeavour.
Having done this, it will become possible to cast a glance over the
whole system of truth to which this idea belongs, and through which
alone it can assume a deep meaning and a lasting value. Let us
attempt, then, to express in a few simple words what was before laid
down in the more complicated form of a scientific treatise.

" The human mind does not only possess d, priori elements (primitive
lotions, primitive feelings, primitive efforts) in its consciousness, but
it is in its own peculiar nature and composition, an d, priori existence,
one whose character is impressed upon it anterior to experience.
" This is not intended to affirm that mind exists originally in the
form of a mere impersonal Pneuma, or of abstract universal reason, as
Hegel imagined it; for independently of the special psychological
difficulties of this view, observation does not give us the very smallest
intimation of any such uniform mental constitution in the lully developed man, but rather of the exact contrary?the most marked individuality. So far from that, we must regard the human mind as being>
even in its primitive, pre-existent root, an individualized nature, a germ
of personality, since the result of its actual life shows it really to be so ;
lor it were a contradiction to suppose that individuality is added on
to it from without, or that it is the mere lortuitous product of its connexion with external circumstances. This idea we have had to make
good throughout all our discussions on particular questions. And if,
at length, we found it necessary to attribute to the mind a kind of preexistence anterior to its own conscious life, the question naturally
arose respecting the nature of such pre-existence, and the general
analogy by which it could be confirmed.

"And here the universal analogies of nature did not fail us. As
certain as it remains impossible to deduce the higher steps of existence
in nature (those included in animal and vegetable life) from the mere
development of inorganic materials and processes; and yet as certain
as the more perfect species of plants and the higher animals are the
latest, and man the latest of all (while yet it is equally impossible that
we should attempt to explain the higher animal, or man, by means of
a gradual process of development from the lower) ; as certain, in a
word, as every species of plant and animal must be regarded as having
its own commencement and its own ground of explanation, we are constrained to form, in relation to the whole range of natural science, a
universal idea of pre-existence, of which the pre-existence of the human
mind is only a particular expression and an individualized result.
Every distinct or individualized existence in nature (such as the species
of plants and animals in the region of organic existence, and the individual mind of man in the region of spiritual being) must have
eternally pre-existed, if it is possible that it should realize its individuality in time; for none of these individualities can be regarded as
being indifferently of one stamp or another, just as we please, or as only
having a temporary and fortuitous origin ; but each in its kind is an
integral part of a united whole, and must have been eternally planned
in relation to the particular as well as the universal harmony of the
universe.

" Accordingly, we find that we are constrained to admit the incontestable notion of pre-existence into the region of psychology, and to
co-ordinate it with those analogies of nature to which the geological
history of the earth conducts us. Here also already exist, potentially,
the future species of vegetable and animal life; and that too in their
entire individuality ; for this it is which gives them their unalienable
place in the eternal plan of the world. They acquire, however, temporal existence only when and so long as the material of life and the
outward conditions of its realization meet together (in the process of
the world's epochs) with the original type. Just so it is with the
human monad; it requires the organic process of incorporation, in
order for it to become endowed with consciousness. As soon, however,
as the material of life is afforded it, the whole process of realization in
time begins, first in the form of incorporation, and then of consciousness. In all this, be it observed, it is simply the original individuality
of the mind which is developed, and comes to itself; inasmuch as that
only can be unfolded in time which is prefigured in the eternal unity
and place of all things." (pp. 2-5.)

The leading idea of the passage we have extracted is expounded
.-and illustrated in several chapters, the first of which is devoted
to considering the essential nature of the human soul. The arguTHE MENTAL PHILOSOPHY OF FICHTE THE YOUNGER. 179
anent is made to proceed from the pre-conscious to the conscious
condition, upon the ground that the real or actual consciousness
is based upon a potential one, i. e., upon a middle condition of
the soul, in which it already possesses the specific character of
objective intelligence, but without being conscious of it. To such
a condition the author attributes all instinctive operations, the artinstincts of insects, for example, rejecting the commonly-received
opinion that these are due to physical laws impressed upon the
nervous system by the Creator. He concludes that?

" 1Vo organic activity is possible without the co-operation of thought,
which thought unquestionably can only exist in the soul; inasmuch,
however, as it precedes sensation {the principle by which consciousness
?is awakened), it must necessarily remain unconscious(p. 19.)
It follows that not only the formative or creative ideas of the
fancy, and the formative or creative acts performed by the perfect
organism, are attributed by Fichte to the soul, but also the modelling and formation of the organism itself from its earliest
rudiments. He regards the soul as the plastic power by which
its temporary and material house, the human frame, is built up
and put together; and each individual soul as being, so to speak,
an individual providence for its own body during the continuance
of the union between them. To put this view into somewhat
different words, we might say that Fichte regards a soul as the
medium of the Divine operation upon matter ; an operation which
we see exerted only under certain limitations imposed by physical
laws. The soul.

Has neither power to produce the real substantial elements, nor
to draw them near by any force of dynamical attraction, nor to effect
any change in their quality. In a word, the creation of matter and
the change of matter, the chemistry of all the processes (though a
necessary condition to all organic life), is wholly foreign to mental
influences. This rests upon general and independent laws, under the
conditions of which, indeed, the morphological activity is brought to
a conclusion, but which it is not able in any way to modify or change.
The soul is the form, and, at the same time, the formative principle
of its body?its real prototype; but it can only realize itself by cooperation with a world possessing distinct elements of its own, and
following distinct laws. Here accordingly, we can freely acknowledge
with Lotze, a physico-psychical mechanism, that is, the subjection of
the soul, in all its organic and conscious operations to a mechanism
not explicable out of itself. The non-ego, to use an old phrase, is met
by the ego, the soul, as a second, real, and independent power. This
power, indeed, the soul can subdue and use for its own purposes, but
ooly under certain definite limitations. This point in the whole system of arrangements must not be overlooked, for the traces of it are
only too visible. The organism not only furnishes the soul with the
?necessary conditions of consciousness, it binds and limits also the
power of consciousness itself; for in the freer states of the soul we
can clearly trace the effect of the temporary suspension of these
limitations." (p. 38.)

The conclusions of the author upon this subject (the essential
nature of the human soul) may perhaps be summed up by saying
that he regards it as an individual and distinctly personal a priori
substance, possessing certain inherent powers which require to
be developed and brought into action, or at least into the domain
of consciousness, by the aid of a material organism of which
the soul itself is both the plastic or formative agent, and also the
basis of all individuality. The whole of the pre-conscious state
of the soul is held to be essentially and specially a process of
thinking; without, however, its thought as yet touching the
threshold of consciousness.

The suggestion thrown out almost casually in the course of
argument, and not again taken up or followed to its results, the
suggestion, namely, that all organization is the work and proper
evidence of a soul, i. e., an individual soul other than the Divine
Mind pervading all things, will appear very startling to most
readers. In this country we are much accustomed to rest upon
the notion that organic acts performed by the lower forms of
animal life (the cited art-instincts, for example) are evidences only
of " laws written upon the nervous pulp" by the finger of God.
Still more are we accustomed to attribute vegetative life to the
direct agency of the Creator; and the idea of souls pervading the
inferior domains of existence is one that opens up an entirely
new future to psychology. If this idea should hereafter be found
to rest upon arguments that are unassailable, will it not probably
be developed into a belief that the perfect self-consciousness of
the soul is a state gradually brought about by connexion with a
successively ascending scale of physical organisms. The very
suggestion that such may be the case appears to throw some
light upon the great moral problem that is involved in the dnilv
misery brought upon the lower animals by man's sin ; while, on
the other hand, it seems a contradiction in terms to speak of a
soul that shall be other than immortal, or to imagine immortality for the individual plastic principle of a plant or an insect.
The next chapter, under the title of " Primitive Consciousness
and Sense Consciousness," is devoted to a glance at the inferences
to be drawn from all the abnormal phenomena of the human
mind, such as dreaming, visions, presentiments, clairvoyance,
mediumship.

The author sets out with the postulate that there are a sufficient number of facts of this class, apart from all wilful or unconscious deception, to require explanation at the hands of the
psychologist; and further, that the explanation commonly given
is not exhaustive of the phenomena. Neither a chance coincidence between the products of the ordinary laws of association
and the actual occurrences, nor a logical calculation of probabilities, the premises of which are tacitly present in the depths of
the consciousness, is sufficient to account for all the cases which
occur.

His general explanation of the class of facts referred to is based
upon the belief that there exists, in every human mind, a higher
region of thought than that which is reached through the medium
of the senses, an a priori life in the midst of its empirical and
conscious life. " Dreaming," he writes, " turns the inner side of
the mind, which is ordinarily concealed, to the light of consciousness, and thus it is the only form in which the other half of its
being, the background of its waking life, can be imaged forth
even in transient flashes." It follows that he regards these flashes
as evidences of preconscious being, and considers no system of
psychology complete which does not recognise and include them ;
more especially such of them as transcend the ordinary possibilities of sensuous life. As an illustration of this class he takes
an instance of clairvoyance, or a case in which a future or a distant event, one thoroughly fortuitous, incapable of being guessed
on the principle of probability, is minutely and distinctly pictured
to the mind in second sight* Such a case as this, we read,
" ? Is of extraordinary significance. The precise truth and perceptive
reality of vision, even down to its smallest details, is on the one side
the characteristic, on the other side the enigmatical element in it,
which peculiarly needs explanation. In dream waking of the kinds
before mentioned, it was possible to explain all that was characteristic
in them from internal conditions springing out of the preconscious
but special nature of the soul. This possibility now ceased ; a prevision so peculiar, and entering so much into detail, cannot possibly
spring from the preconscious region. It necessitates us to draw the
astounding but unavoidable conclusion, that a real and perceptive
* The writer of this article, some years ago, called upon a widow lady, whose
only son was then in New Zealand. The writer was received by the lady's
daughter, who stated that her mother was too unwell to see visitors, having been
much distressed during the previous night by a very painful dream. She dreamed
that she saw her son pursued, struck down, and killed by two New Zealander3,
Whose countenances were pictured to her with perfect distinctness j and she
related her son's dying exclamation. In due course the mails from New Zealand
brought intelligence that verified this prevision in a general way. The young man
Was last seen by his companions flying for his life irom two ot the natives, who
Were believed to have killed liini immediately afterwards, and that at the very
time of his mother's dream. In this case, neither the faces of the murderers, nor
the last words of the victim, could be compared with the details of the vision ; but
the general coincidence was remarkable ; and the writer relates it because the
dream was brought under his notice so long before its verification was received.
He is able to state, moreover, from personal knowledge, that the lady was not one
pf those habitual dreamers who are almost certain to meet with a coincidencj
in the course of a lifetime.

knowledge lies at the basis, which consequently can have its seat only
in the consciousness of a personal mind, and from this mind be carried
over into the consciousness of the seer.

" Herewith we have a series of further consequences opened up,
which carries us into a wholly unsuspected region, and one which has
hardly been touched upon hitherto, still less considered from a scientific
point of view. All that we have described is only possible under the
supposition of the immediate influence of one mind upon another ; and
this would further necessitate us to admit a hidden fellowship of souls,
underlying our ordinary consciousness and our daily communication
through the senses.

" It must be admitted, in reference to this theory, that the general
premises we have laid down in relation to the nature of the soul do not
present any grounds against its possibility. If it is shown that the
largest and most essential part of our mind is distinct from, and unexhausted by, our sensational experience, it can hardly be supposed that
this element stands alone, apart from all relations, and without any
influence beyond its own invisible region. Such a supposition were in
the highest degree improbable. As our mind has its root beyond the
world of sense, so will it stand, in a hidden and unsensuous way, in
mutual communication with the real existences of this higher region,
and that, too, with those who like itself hold intercourse with the
world of sense, as also with those who are already removed from it.
" It need scarcely be remarked how unexpected a light spreads itself,
upon this supposition, over emotions and relations in the human mind,
which no one has been yet able expressly to deny, but for which no
rational ground of explanation has been yet discovered. Here, I believe such an explanation has been found, and in such wise that no
doubt can be thrown either 011 the reality of the general foundation,
nor any limit set to the speciality of the facts. On the contrary, observation is directly appealed to, and it is demanded of observation that
it should search into the extent and the depths of what here becomes
possible. For here, in fact, the richest gradation of phenomena shows
itself from the special prevision of worthless events down to the warning and prophetic voice of a Socratic Daimon, or to the most powerful
and penetrating revelation of historical significance.

"We must here, however, draw a warning limitation. It would be
altogether unjustifiable and arbitrary, in the case of all such visions, to
imagine that they are direct communications from the Spirit of God
himself. We cannot deny, on our side, that we discover in this the
germ of a most destructive enthusiasm. The supposition of the agency
of mind of higher order than what is now to be found in the human
consciousness is all that is necessary. The fact that such a mind
knows the future beforehand, to an extent beyond what it is granted
us to know, nay, to foresee what to us is accidental, does not at all
militate against its possessing a finite nature, nor transform it into a
being incapable of ignorance and deception. That such a being may
gaze over a higher region of casualties than we do, is possible; for
what ice deem fortuitous is really only that whose causal connexion
escapes our vision, whether it may have its ground in the inextricable
web of outward events, or in the hidden motives of human character.

Chance, in fact, is only appearance (a relatively necessary appearance,
!t is true), which therefore may be dissipated by a more widely embracing view of the universe and its relations." (pp. 59-01.)
The fourth chapter is devoted to the " Organic double life of
the Soul," and is occupied chiefly in stating and elucidating the
idea that the nervous apparatus lias a very appreciable effect in
retarding and limiting the psychical operations. Upon this view,
the abnormal phenomena of ecstasy, prevision, and the like, are
supposed to depend upon a temporary loosening of the ordinary
bonds which fasten down mind to matter ; and to foreshadow the
great increase of power that awaits the disembodied spirit.
The fifth chapter deals with "The Question of Methodi.e.,
with the nature and limitations ,of the inquiry, and it hardly
admits of any condensation. The sixth has for its subject,
" The psychological origin of our perceptions of Space and the
author's views thereupon are illustrated at greater length than
accords with the general brevity of the treatise. In explanation
of this, we learn from Mr. Morell that the chapter is not that of
the original, which is indeed wholly omitted, an article more recently written by Ficlite, in his " Philosophical Journal," being
inserted in its place.

The author in this article starts forth from the Kantian principle of the original existence of space-perception in our consciousness ; and adds to it that this space-perception has its psychological origin in an original feeling of extension, which is inseparable from the consciousness of our own existence. He
argues that the mind can only be endowed with this original
feeling on the ground of its being, ab initio, a space-creating
being; and deduces from the argument a confirmation of his
belief that the soul is an extended substance.

The next, and concluding chapter, is entitled " General Betrospect and Prospect," and may briefly be described as a series of
suggestions, showing tlie bearing of the author's philosophy upon
the great problems of existence. The nature of the Providential
operations, and the relations subsisting between the Deity and
mankind, are hinted at, rather than discussed, everywhere in a
spirit of piety and reverence, but with a full appreciation of the
assistance which philosophy may afford to faith.

In thus noticing this little book, it has been our endeavour
to place before the reader a general view of its contents, and, at
the same time, wholly to abstain from criticism. We regard it as
being suggestive throughout, rather than argumentative ; and, as
tlie author's grounds of conviction are nowhere fully stated, his
results can hardly be assailed at present, even by those who may
refuse assent to them. We shall look forward, with the most
lively interest, to the more detailed evidence and reasoning which
the present work leads us to expect; and, in the mean time, must
use the " philosophical confession" chiefly as a new hypothetical
standard, against which to measure find compare our old opinions. Its appearance in an English dress must he considered,
we think, as adding largely to the debt of gratitude already due
from the public to the distinguished translator.
