The Instruction of Medical Pupils in Mental Diseases
======================================================

Sojie years ago, Dr Webster brought the question of medical pupils
studying mental diseases, as a part of their ordinary education, before the
profession. Additional facilities were subsequently, and in some degree
in consequence of the remarks contained in Dr Webster's pamphlet, given
to pupils, as well at Bethlehem Hospital as at St. Luke's; and although

the medical corporations have not hitherto thought it necessary to ex-
amine candidates coming before them as to their knowledge of the
nature and treatment of insanity, nevertheless, much more attention has
recently been paid in this country, than formerly, to that most important
part of medical science.

In Germany, the study of insanity has also attracted considerable
notice during recent years, as shown by the writings of Reil, Nostitz,
Schmidt, Heinroth, and others; and even so early as 1818, Horn gave
clinical instruction in Berlin on this class of disease, which he continued
to do for several years afterwards. Horn was succeeded by Neumann?
the latter being, in his turn, followed by Ideler, who still lectures on
mental diseases in the Prussian capital. Midler also, about the same
time, gave lectures on insanity at Wurtzburg. Subsequently, Autenrieth
at Tubingen, Conradi at Heidelberg, Joseph Frank at Wilna, and espe-
cially Nasse at Bonn, gave clinical instruction to students on the nature
and treatment of mental diseases; these lectures being illustrated by cases
of insane patients received for that particular purpose into the different
hospitals, of which the professors above named were the physicians.
Besides the opportunities now mentioned, young medical men are
admitted into the lunatic asylums of Illnau, Siegberg, and Winnenthal,
to reside therein, in order to acquire practical experience in the treat-
ment of insanity; and it is said the institutions referred to are at pre-
sent well frequented.

Van der Kolk in Holland, and Guislain in Belgium, also advocate the
necessity and advantage of practitioners studying mental diseases, the
same as any other department of medicine. But it is in France, where
the greatest progress has been really made in regard to the important
question now under discussion. In that country the celebrated Pinel
commenced a course of lectures, so early as 1814, on mental alienation,
at his own house, which he aptly illustrated by observations on insane
patients in the Salpetriere, brought for that purpose under the notice of
his pupils. Pinel was followed by Esquirol, who delivered clinical lec-
tures on mental diseases at the Salpetriere in 1817, which he regu-
larly continued every year till 1826, when the government appointed
him chief physician to the royal asylum at Cliarenton. More recently,?-
viz., from 1832 to 1839,?M. Ferrus lectured on insanity at Bicetre,
and also at the farm of St. Anne, an establishment subsidiary to Bicetre,
which is appropriated solely to lunatics for whom agricultural occu-
pations are thought advisable. At both these places the lectures of
M. Ferrus were generally very numerously attended. M. Leuret subse-
quently gave lectures also at Bicetre in 1842; whilst M. Bottex of Lyons,
and M. Rech of Montpellier, each distinguished physicians in the 'treat-
ment of insane patients, have likewise contributed to the advancement
of the same important object. In Paris, M. Baillarger, well known to
the profession in this country, as well as in France, annually lectures on
diseases of the mind, having commenced his first course in 1841, and he
frequently illustrates the subject under discussion by cases selected from
the insane patients resident in the Salpetriere. M. Falret, another dis-
tinguished physician, and attached to the Salpetriere, also gives a public
course of lectures on insanity, which he lias continued annually since
1843, with much success.

Although considerable progress has undoubtedly been recently made
in England in this department of medical education, for many years a
retrograde movement had actually taken place, particularly subsequent
to the period when the celebrated and learned physician, Dr William
Beattie, was attached to St. Luke's Hospital, who states in the preface to
his " Treatise on Madness," published in 1758, that "by an unanimous
vote, the governors (of St. Luke's) signified their inclination of ad-
mitting young physicians, well recommended, to visit the hospital, and
freely to observe the treatment of the patients confined." _ In order that
the attendance of the pupils might be rendered more instructive, Dr.
Beattie also " offered to the perusal of the gentlemen who honoured him
with their attendance the reason of those prescriptions which were sub-
mitted to their observation." Of late, however, the tide has happily
turned in the right direction, especially since so many new lunatic asy-
lums have been, and will be soon, erected throughout the country, which
must require a larger number than heretofore of medical practitioners
actually conversant with mental alienation. Besides Sir A. Morison,
who, for many years, was the only lecturer on diseases of the mind in
London, Dr Conolly has given repeated courses of lectures on insanity
at Hanwell since 1842. Dr A. Sutherland has likewise lectured and
given clinical instruction at St. Luke's, when the doors of that institution
were re-opened in 1842 for the admission of pupils, after having been
closed during a great number of years, notwithstanding one of the ob-
jects proposed at the foundation of that charity, according to the original
address in 1751, was "of introducing more gentlemen of the faculty to
the study and practice of one of the most important branches of physic."
Again, during last summer, Dr Hitchman has delivered a few lectures
on the pathology of mental disease at Hanwell. Besides the means
above stated of obtaining psychological instruction, several of the pro-
vincial lunatic asylums receive a limited number of young medical men
as resident pupils, for the purpose of obtaining information and prac-
tical experience respecting the nature and treatment of mental alienation.
However, until the medical colleges of the empire absolutely require from
all those applying for their diploma, proof that they possess adequate
knowledge to entitle them to undertake the management of patients
afflicted with insanity, quite as much as to treat diseases affecting the
physical frame, in all probability the progress made towards the attain-
ment of the object now alluded to will be slow, although, to use the words
contained in the pamphlet published by Dr "Webster, in 1842, on this
really important question?"Few diseases impose so much responsibility
upon the attending physician as mania, whether the case be considered
m a medical or legal sense, and the worst consequences may sometimes
result to the patient, should even a trifling mistake be committed by the
attendant. Examples of errors in judgment, of a very painful descrip-
tion, might be quoted, from books and public records, to show the im-
portant consequences sometimes resulting to a fellow-creature, from
inattention to the premonitory symptoms of lunacy. But it is unneces-
sary to enter into details, as it will be readily allowed by those conversant
witli the subject, that scarcely any complaint to which mankind is liable
requires more to be studied than a disease of the mind, so as to alleviate,
when unable to cure, the attacks of such a deplorable affliction to humanity,
which destroys, as it were, the moral existence of a fellow-creature,
although physical life, with all its wonderful functions, still continues to
animate this mortal frame."
