Case of Mania Occurring in" a Child Six Years Old
===================================================

:Author: T. C. Morison, ESQ., Surgeon.
The appearance of insanity before tlie age of puberty is at all times a
circumstance of so rare occurrence, as to render it highly important that
all such cases should be properly recorded and authenticated.

Although various instances are related of children of the ages of twelve,
nine, and eight years, being afflicted with mania, nostalgia, and even
jealousy, amounting to such an extent as to verge upon partial insanity,
I have never met with any recorded case in which the disorder made its
appearance at so early an age as it did in the following case. The un-
soundness of intellect in children is, in general, idiocy; cases of which,
with a disposition to violence and mischief, are to be met with in most
large asylums at a very early age. The phenomena presented in such
cases, however, are of a totally different nature, and owe their origin to
totally different causes.

E. A., aged six years, the daughter of an old furniture broker, was
admitted into Bethlehem Hospital on the 30th August, 1842, labouring
under an attack of mania, of ten weeks' duration. Her education was
good for her years, and she never, in any way, gave her friends reason
to suppose that she was deficient in intellect. There did not exist any
hereditary tendency to insanity or to epilepsy in the family. The im-
mediate cause of the attack was stated to have been inflammation of the
brain, preceded by a fit of convulsions. From her previous history,
it appeared that since the age of eighteen months, she had been sub-
ject to the occasional recurrence of these fits; that they first made their
appearance in consequence of teething, and were of rather a severe
nature.

Immediately before her admission, she had been under treatment
at St. George's Hospital for inflammation of the brain. At the
time of her admission into that hospital, the following is the report
of her case?" Attacked on June 3rd with convulsions; had a similar
attack at the age of eighteen months, when teething, and has twice
been similarly seized; appeared in very good health previously to the
present illness; is now wholly unconscious; is, in fact, in a state of
coma."

When admitted into Bethlehem Hospital, her conduct was violent and
mischievous; striking those about her, tearing her clothes, and destroying
everything within her reach. She was generally incoherent in her speech
?repeating any words she might hear in a monotonous voice, and with-
out appearing to understand them, such as " Poor thing?poor thing !"
Occasionally, however, by strongly arresting her attention, a correct
reply could be obtained from her. The expression of her countenance
was quick and animated; her general health was good, and she ate and
slept well. Sixteen days after her admission, she was attacked with
diarrhoea of a mild character, from which she recovered at the end of a
few days. Soon afterwards, a considerable improvement took place in
her general behaviour, and she began to pay attention to the directions
of one of the convalescent patients, who took charge of her; would say,
"Thank you, sir," on receiving any little present, and make a courtesy, &c.
She also gave over many of her mischievous tricks; but still continued
decidedly insane. She could not be induced to employ herself in any
way, and was subject to violent and unaccountable outbursts of passion,
in which she tore her clothes, and bit and scratched all who attempted
to restrain her.

After she had remained about six months in the hospital, she became
much more docile, and began to employ herself in sewing, &c. From
this time, also, a marked improvement gradually took place in her
manner and conduct, until she was reported well, after having been
about twenty months under treatment. She was, however, allowed to
remain in the hospital for about six months longer, until she could be
transmitted to the care of her friends, who were all abroad. At this
time she appeared to be a modest, quiet, and intelligent looking girl.
