On the Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment of Puerperal Insanity
============================================================

:Author: James Reid, 31.D.
PHYSICIAN TO THE GENERAL LYING-IN HOSPITAL, ETC.
{Continued from our last Number.)

The first step towards the treatment of any disease, is the knowledge of
its immediate and predisposing causes. Now, the opinion of the great
majority of those who are in the habit of seeing puerperal mania is, as
I before stated, "that it does not depend on the inflammation of the
brain; but that its origin may be fairly traced to cerebral irritation,
combined with great exhaustion of the nervous system generally." The
analogy between puerperal mania, and that state of the system which
exists in delirium tremens, holds good also in the treatment of the two
diseases. The aim of the practitioner in either case is to subdue excitability without, at the same time, depressing further the vital powers;
and as they are not simply diseases of mind, but dependent on functional derangement of the sensorium, the attention ought, of course,
to be primarily directed to the physical treatment of that portion of the
body, before attempting to remedy the mental mischief; or, in other
words, we should endeavour to remove the cause, instead of combating
the effect. The treatment will thus resolve itself into, 1. Physical?2.
Moral.

It is of importance to recollect that excitability is a frequent accompaniment of physical debility, and that violent paroxysms of mania
may arise under these circumstances. To those unaccustomed to such a
display of violence and apparent strength, the idea Avould, perhaps, immediately present itself, that depletion would be advisable in order to
subdue them, and into this error many medical practitioners have
formerly fallen. This leads us at once to the consideration of a remedy,
which, even at the present day, occasionally finds advocates in such
cases?viz., bleeding.

In PiniEXiTis occurring after childbirth, there can he no doubt that
very prompt treatment and active depletion are requisite, to afford a
chance of recovery to the patient. Bleeding from the arm, leeches to
the shaved head, blisters to the spine, repeated mercurial doses to prevent effusion, sinapisms to the feet, cold lotions, and all the other usual
remedies in acute inflammation, are here most essential.

Experience, however, does not warrant such treatment in puerperal
mania, notwithstanding the opinions of Puzos, Doublet, and some other
authors. As many cases of puerperal fever (which after death have presented all the traces of peritoneal inflammation) arise after severe accidental haemorrhage, or large bleedings from the arm, employed to arrest
puerperal convulsions, (facts which I have frequently observed in hospital
practice,) s<3 does mania occasionally appear likewise after a copious loss
of blood from any part of the system; and numerous cases might be
adduced to prove this fact.

Esquirol narrates an instance of mania following accidental uterine
haemorrhage, which had lasted eight days. Gooch also mentions one
which came on after an alarming haemorrhage, and another which
followed large bleedings from the arm. A very profuse leucorrheal discharge, in a case related by Haller, caused the patient to lose the faculty
of thinking. The brain appears in these cases to be unable properly to
perform its functions, owing to its not receiving its proper supply of
blood.

It is mentioned by Esquirol, that such a prejudice formerly existed
in favour of bleeding in cases of mania, that pregnant women were received into the Salpetriere who had been previously bled, as a precaution,
by practitioners, who knew that no bleeding would be practised in that
hospital; and in one case, the patient had been bled thirteen times in
forty-eight hours.

There is little doubt that, however violent the attack of mania may
be, copious bleeding will be extremely prejudicial; and Pinel has clearly
pointed out the liability of hurrying cases of simple insanity into a state
of dementia by too energetic a treatment. Bleeding, too, will not, in
many cases, even temporarily subdue the symptoms, but will cause them
to become more inveterate and fixed, as the cerebral excitement is
increased by the depletion. Gooch's cases give evidence as to the
danger of great depletion, even when the pulse is quick, if it be weak at
the same time. He says?"Bloodletting is not only seldom or never
necessary, but, generally, almost always pernicious." (p. 162.) Dr.
Gooch states, also, that he never met with a case requiring it.
From what experience I have had on this subject, I fully adhere to
Dr Gooch's opinion. I cannot recollect a case of uncomplicated puerperal mania in which the lancet was used; and in the most violent forms
of the complaint, a few leeches to the head have been alone employed
for the purpose of local depletion.

Cases have been narrated, both of this disease, and of delirium
tremens, in which a small bleeding from the arm has been followed by
speedy dissolution.

Dr Rush has been accused by some of his medical compatriots of
having caused much harm, by the directions, in his work on " Diseases
of the Mind"?" to bleed copiously in maniacal excitement," and a
writer in the "American Journal of Insanity" has lately stated?"that
of 622 patients admitted into the asylum during the past year, four
only were bled, and that in one case of the four alone did it prove at all
beneficial."

Emetics have been strongly recommended when the tongue is loaded,
and the breath foul, at the commencement of the attack. A combination of ipecacuan with antimony appears to be the best form, when
there is not great debility or anaemia.

Purgatives. Every obstetric practitioner of experience must be
aware how frequently a whole train of alarming symptoms, occurring a
few days after childbirth, and resembling the primary ones of puerperal
fever, is at once subdued by an active aperient, or by a turpentine
enema, which rids the patient of copious and vitiated dejections; the
same good result has often resulted from their employment in puerperal
mania also. Large evacuations of this description are, in fact, sometimes the first symptom of recovery in the patient. Even in cases of
unusual exhaustion, constipation should, at least be avoided; and the
bowels may be unloaded by means of gentle aperients and enemata of
warm water. Many cases of general insanity have their origin in the
state of the abdominal viscera alone; and in that dependent upon the
puerperal state it often acts as a partial cause also.

Gooch's first case is very instinctive, in showing to what an extent
hepatic derangement may be concerned in causing puerperal mania, and
the good effects of purgatives in removing it. The lady " had suffered
in two confinements from this malady, each attack being preceded by
jaundice. She was also completely jaundiced before her third confinement, but it was on this occasion removed by purgatives previously to
the occurrence of labour, and she this time escaped mental derangement."
?p. 112.

The form of aperient will, of course, vary according to the nature of the
case, and the condition of the patient. I have found 3j. of the pulvis
jalapse compositus, given in treacle as an electuary, answer the purpose
very well in several cases, and this may be repeated at intervals if required. Dark foetid evacuations are often dislodged; and many instances
might be cited, in which great improvement was immediately a consequence. Should there be a wish to get rid of the secretion of milk as soon
as possible, the hydragogue aperients will be best adapted for the purpose.

Anodynes.?Almost all authors on this subject, whether the mania
be general or puerperal, recommend the employment of this class of medicines, taking the precaution previously of properly evacuating the
bowels. As in delirium tremens, opium, in its different preparations,
may be given in larger doses than under ordinary circumstances. It has
been considered, however, as a doubtful remedy by Burns, and an objection has been raised that it increases cerebral congestion. The complaint, however, is one of irritation generally, more than congestion, and
opium, in most cases, will allay this. Opiates seem peculiarly adapted
to puerperal cases, especially when combined with some diffusible stimulus, such as ammonia, and more especially with camphor. Small
doses of opium will, in many cases, increase irritability, instead of allayino- it; and it is a better plan, in general, to administer a large dose at
night, and the effect may afterwards be kept up by repeated but smaller
doses.

The acetate or muriate of morphia, in quarter-grain doses, may be
given at intervals; but I have frequently known half a grain, and even
one grain, given at short intervals in otherwise intractable cases, with
good effect; and this has been increased by combining with the morphia
half-grain doses of the antimonii pot. tartras.
Dover's powder is another form of similar combination, which often
proves a valuable remedy.

An occasional change in the anodyne is advisable in those cases which
require the daily exhibition of such a remedy. Thus, half a grain of
muriate or acetate of morphia may be administered at one time, a
drachm of tinct. hyoscyami at another, and ten grains of Dover's powder on a third occasion; thus varying the form, when the repetition of
the same medicine seems to diminish its effect.

There are some instances in which opium, in any shape, gives no relief in procuring sleep, but, on the contrary, appears to aggravate the insomnia and irritability.'"* In one such case, I found the employment of
the hydrocyanic acid attended with the most beneficial effects. Fivedrop doses of the diluted acid, in camphor julep, at intervals of four
hours, were administered to the lady, and gradually procured a calm
state of mind, and some refreshing repose.

The cannabis Indicus, or Indian hemp, has been known frequently to
succeed in procuring rest, after the different preparations of opium had
failed; the tincture is the best form, and is employed in doses of from
twenty to sixty drops. It has, I understand, been used in the Hanwell
Asylum with much benefit.

As it is a great object to break the continuance of this sleeplessness,
in such cases the occasional use of the chloroform vapour Avill be found
valuable. I have had an opportunity of seeing more than one case in
which it not only induced sleep, which had previously been absent for
four or five nights and days, but the patient on recovering from its
effects, was found to be quite tractable and free from violence.
The inhalation of ether had been tried by M. Cazenave, of Paris, in
the case of a lunatic female who had rested neither night nor day for
five months, and in which it induced tranquillity. (Med. Gazette.)
M. Jobert, in a similar case, exhibited it with the good effect of inducing
sleep, and restoring, temporarily, a state of rationality. (Brit, and For.
Review.) M. Bouvier tried ether, also, in a case of puerperal mania,
with very beneficial results. In this case there had been no sleep for a
fortnight before using the ether; its use Avas followed on two occasions
by " un calme cle quelques heures." (Bull, de 1'Academie; Brit, and For.
Med. Review.) I am bound, however, to add, that in some cases in
which it had been tried by other practitioners, no beneficial effect was
produced.

As a sedative application, the employment of the warm or tepid bath
In a case which I am at present attending, with Mr. Thistleton Dyer, the patient,
who was attacked by puerperal mania on the eighth day after confinement with her
first child, occasionally passes sixty hours without sleep.

has been found of great service in cases of puerperal mania; it allays the
general irritability, causes the skin to perform its functions more healthily,
tends to restore the secretions to a proper state, and soothes the patient.
Iced lotions to the heated scalp may be applied at the same time.
Many authors speak most highly of the effects produced on females by
the use of such baths, especially when any suppression has occurred.
In some cases, the cold bath, the shower bath, and the practice recommended by Dr Currie?viz., placing the patient in an empty bath,
and pouring water on the head, have been attended with marked benefit.
In all these forms it is better, however, to commence with the Avater
tepid, and gradually to lessen the temperature in the succeeding applications.
Numerous instances exist, in which the tonic effect of the shower bath
has produced excellent results, but it has been employed at a period of
some weeks after parturition.

When the patient exhibits great watchfulness and inability to sleep,
notwithstanding the employment of all sedatives, and this is combined
with unusual irritability of manner and quick pulse, the case requires
our most anxious attention, and every method possible to allay such
excitement should be in succession tried. The room should be darkened,
and kept perfectly quiet and cool; the covering on the bed should not
be more than is sufficient; a mattress should be substituted for the
feather bed, if the latter be used; and it is most essential that a nurse
endowed with good sense and experience should be in attendance.
Counter-irritation is sometimes of considerable advantage under
such circumstances, and a blister to the spine, or dry-cupping over that
part, will sometimes produce excellent effect. Esquirol speaks very
favourably of blisters in the later stages of this form of insanity, when
applied between the shoulders.

In the adynamic form, attendant upon undue lactation, it is especially
requisite to avoid any depletion, or low diet. Sedatives are as important
as in the other cases, and in addition to these, the use of tonics, such as
quinine, bitter infusions, with the mineral acids, the various preparations
of iron, the moderate use of wine and beer, and, if possible, after a time,
a change to the invigorating breezes of the sea-side, or a quiet village,
will be advisable.

One of the best means of lessening the irritability of the brain and
the want of sleep, is shaving the head, and a persevering employment
of refrigerant lotions to that part.

Moral treatment is of necessity required in the management of all
cases of insanity, but by no means supersedes the physical. In the
peculiar form we are now considering, it is especially requisite to attend
most carefully, first, to the healthy state of the bodily secretions, as
without this precaution, many cases have withstood all the moral remedies employed for years, and yet at the end of this period, by judicious
means applied to the general state of health, they have yielded in a few
weeks, and have been cured.

The suppression of natural evacuations is peculiarly liable to form one
of the features of puerperal mania, but after these have been restored to
their healthy and usual function, then the skilful management of the
patient's mind becomes essentially necessary.

The moral management is simply that which is required in other
forms of insanity.

The first point of importance is to keep the patient in as complete a
state of quietude as possible. Every source of irritation, whether by
noise, light, &c., should be speedily got rid of, so as to aid the intention
of procuring rest for the excited cerebral organs. The presence of intimate friends and relations at this time is so far from being a comfort or
advantage to the patient, that it is considered by every practitioner of
experience to be absolutely prejudicial, unless under peculiar circumstances. If the patient still retain her love for them, there is a constant
source of excitement in seeing or talking with them; whilst, on the
other hand, should aversion assume the place of strong affection towards
them, as is very frequently the case, it is still more requisite to avoid
these meetings.

The withdrawal of the mind from former scenes and associations,
and giving a change to the direction of the thoughts and recollections,
is one of the principal aims to be attained; and the presence of strangers
is better adapted to this end, as the chain of ideas is more likely to be
interrupted and broken. With the same intention, of disturbing the
association of ideas, change of scene is desirable after a certain time, so
that the mind should not dwell upon the same objects which were presented to it by the locality in which the aberration of mind first occurred.
It is frequently noticed, also, that insane patients are able to exert
more self-control before strangers than when surrounded by their relatives.*
The infant should be removed from the mother, in the generality of
cases, as it is a great source of irritation by its cries, and precaution is
otherwise constantly required, least by some sudden aversion to it, its
life may be attempted by her. Such a case occurred not long since, in
one of the lying-in hospitals I have mentioned, in which the infant was
destroyed. In many cases there is such indifference towards the child,
and to all other relations, that their absence is no punishment to the
patient. The medical attendant will be the best judge as to when this
temporary scclusion may terminate; as, after a time, a break in the
monotony of it may prove beneficial, but great prudence is always
required in trying the experiment.

It becomes, under these circumstances, of the greatest importance
that the attendants should be peculiarly adapted for their duty; the
usual domestics, and even the experienced monthly nurse, are not so
valuable as one who is accustomed to the care of this class of patients,
and it is advisable, therefore, to replace them. A vigilant, firm, though
kind superintendence, soothing violence, encouraging and cheering despondency, soon produces its effect; and a nurse who is skilful and
experienced in these cases, will have much more moral control than
* Complete isolation from friends appears to be one of the most important items in
the treatment of all severe cases of insanity. It was remarked by Dr Willis formerly,
that foreigners who were brought from the continent to be placed under his care were
much sooner cured than English patients; and Esquirol has observed the same fact in
relation to the more speedy cure of provincial patients, as compared with the inhabitants
of Paris.

NO. II. tt
others who are unaccustomed to the varying symptoms of the complaint,
and will in many instances thus avoid the necessity of bodily restraint.
The control is not the less effectual for being mild, and those accustomed to the office may evince much quiet determination, without any
imperious, authoritative manner or irritating behaviour. There is here
no needless thwarting every harmless wish of the patient, which increases
violence and begets hatred; for even maniacal patients are often sufficiently acute in detecting injustice or oppression. Dr Conolly mentions
two female cases received into Hanwell, in 1845, who had both become
insane in the puerperal state. One was an irritable patient, easily
excited; the other, a delicate and timid woman, easily alarmed. Both
had, previously to their admission, been subjected to severe restraint,
and began to recover almost as soon as admitted, under kinder treatment. One remained three months in the asylum, and the other only
one month. No arguments should be entered into, in order to convince
such patients that they are labouring under delusion; they prove of no
avail, but rather confirm them in their opinions, as they are perfectly
contented and convinced by their own chain of reasoning, although
resting on false data, and often absurd.

Judicious and well-timed conversation often relieves the mind of its
terrors or doubts, and experience has amply proved that the comforts of
religion are fully realized by many insane patients. In the Glasgow
Lunatic Asylum Keports it is mentioned that a religious conversation,
and well-timed application of a scriptural quotation, had the full effect
of putting an end to a previously determined resolve to commit suicide.
A quotation from Sir W. Ellis's work should always be borne in mind
as to this latter tendency?" There is no form of insanity in which
attempts at self-destruction are more unexpectedly and suddenly made,
than in the puerperal form." The patient should never be alone for an
instant, not even when apparently asleep; for, connected with this
suicidal tendency, great cunning and ability are displayed in the attempts to avoid the notice of the attendants: many instances of regular
and progressive preparations for eluding suspicion and accomplishing
their purpose are upon record. Every dangerous article should, under
such cases, be removed, even to the pocket handkerchief and garters, the
windows should be unostentatiously guarded, and a quiet, though active
surveillance constantly kept upon every action of the patient.
A question has often been raised, whether patients labouring under
puerperal insanity should be removed to an asylum or not; but the
general opinion is against it?i.e., in private practice, unless the case
should subside into a chronic and lingering form. If change of scene
be deemed requisite, it is better that the patient should be removed at
first to a quiet country village, or to the sea-side, under the care of an
experienced nurse, but the frequent visits of the medical attendant will
here be advisable, on many accounts; the best nurses should not have
too much power confided to them in these cases, and the uncertain visit
of the practitioner is a safeguard against neglect or injudicious measures.
The friends of the patient should also pay occasional visits, to examine
into the domestic arrangements and comforts of the place, without,
however, seeing the patient herself, or, at least, refraining from doing
so until tlie medical adviser sees the propriety of trying the effect of
their presence upon her. One injudicious and too premature a visit
has, in many cases, retarded the cure for weeks, and even months, by
recalling distressing associations to the mind.

One very important item in the treatment of these cases, is great
attention to the dietary of the patient.

In the great majority of cases, it is requisite to give nutritious
though light food at an early period of the complaint, as it must be
remembered, that want of an adequate supply has in many cases of insanity been alone sufficient to induce the disease. Strong broths, or
beef-tea, farinaceous articles of diet, milk, eggs, etc., may be allowed,
the bowels at the same time being carefully attended to; and as the
tongue and pulse improve, a well-watched increase of nutriment will be
required. In lunatic asylums, the diet-table has much improved within
the last few years with great advantage, and in this peculiar form of
it, especially when arising from undue lactation, a generous diet is
advisable at once, combined with tonics and chalybeates. We must
'iot, in such cases, wait until the patient asks for food, but it must
be rather pressed upon her at regular intervals; in fact, it is of high
importance that great regularity should be observed as to the time
of meals, as well as to the hour of retiring to rest, and rising in the
morning.

When puerperal insanity has once occurred, it will be an imperative
duty on the part of the medical attendant, at any future pregnancy, to
insist strongly on the necessity of quiet, and the absence of all unnecessary excitement, by carefully watching symptoms which bear the appearance of premonitory ones, and taking measures to prevent their continuance; the cerebral irritation may be sometimes checked in limine, and
the case conducted to a favourable termination, without any further
bad effects arising from it.

The plan of treatment to be adopted in those cases of insanity which
occur during pregnancy is not materially different from that which is
applicable after parturition, or weaning. Anxiety must, however, always
exist in the minds of the practitioner and friends of the patient, until
parturition and its effects have passed over.

Occasionally instances have been met with in which the symptoms
have become so urgent, that it was deemed necessary to terminate the
period of gestation by artificial means before the proper time.
A case is mentioned in the "American Journal of Medical Science,"
of a lady in Avhom it was found requisite to induce premature labour on
three different occasions, for aberration of mind during gestation.
When insanity during the pregnant state is complicated with a tendency to epileptic convulsions, our treatment in some cases appears
totally inefficacious in warding off a serious result.
I was requested, on the 29tli of January last, to meet Mr. Hugman,
of Great Ormond-street, in consultation on an unfortunate case of this
description. The patient, a lady, aged thirty-eight, had borne seven
children, and was at this time advanced to the middle of the last month
of pregnancy. She was a liealtliy-looking woman, of florid countenance,
naturally of an excitable temperament, but had never previously evinced
any symptoms of this complaint. She had always recovered speedily
from the effects of labour, and had suckled several of her infants. For
the last twenty years, she had been subject to slight fits at each period of
menstruation, but never except at those times. Her husband thinks
they were of an hysterical character, but from the description of a near
relative, there can be no doubt that they were of an epileptic nature.
Latterly, too, they had become more decided, and of longer duration.
On first seeing the patient, she was tranquil, but had an expression of
anxiety, the pulse was rather quick, but soft, the tongue clean, no pain
in the head, bowels inclined to constipation, but easily acted on by medicine. She had had little or no sleep for the last two nights, and not
much during the past week. She had suddenly awakened her husband
three nights since, to inform him that it had been notified to her by the
Bible, that she should die in her approaching confinement, and that she
was an instrument chosen of God for some great purpose. This, she
repeated on our visit, in a mysterious manner, but could give no further
explanation, her manner being placid, but accompanied by a peculiar
expression of the eyes. As the want of sleep appeared to be the principal
symptom requiring attention, we decided upon giving half a grain of
acetate of morphia at bed-time, and a gentle aperient in the morning; the
diet to be light and nutritious.

At our next meeting, on the 30th, we found the patient quite
calm; she had enjoyed much refreshing sleep during the night; the pulse
was soft and natural; there was no pain in the head whatever, and she
did not recollect the delusions of the previous day. She said that she
felt perfectly comfortable in every respect, except that she was troubled
by slight recurrent pains in the abdomen, which it was considered might
be caused either by the aperient, or by the commencement of labour.
Mr. Hugman found no evidence, however, of the latter fact on examining
the os-uteri.

The patient was now apparently in so improved and favourable a condition, that it was thought unnecessary that I should again see her,
unless any change for the worse should occur; but it was understood
that she was never to be left alone, and that great additional care was to
be taken of her during, and after her labour.

During the night, however, decided epileptic paroxysms attacked the
patient, and in the afternoon of the next day recurred with great
violence and frequency. Blood was abstracted from the arm by Mr.
Hugman, leeches applied to the temples, cold lotions to the head, hot
bottles to the feet, mustard cataplasms to the calves of the legs, but
without any advantage.

Owing to my being engaged elsewhere, I was unable to meet Mr.
Hugman until eleven, p.m., but the patient Avas at that time moribund,
having been unconscious for several hours, the pupil not acted on by
strong light, and the convulsive paroxysms recurring with violence
every few minutes, until death took place at half-past one, a.m., without any further signs of labour being observed.
The following is a case which occurred in the General Lying-in Hospital, for the notes of which I am indebted to Mr. Smith, the housesurgeon at that period :?
H. C., aged 22, of dark complexion, with black hair, was delivered
of her first child on the 14th of March, 1847. She had enjoyed good
health previously to her admission, and was progressing favourably up
to the eighth day from her confinement. In the afternoon of this day,
she had been visited by some of her friends, and in the evening was
observed to be crying, and in a very nervous, irritable state, complaining
that some persons had been telling falsehoods about her at home. She
could not be pacified, but, on the contrary, became much more excited
on attempting to soothe her. A draught containing opium, ammonia, and
camphor was given at night, and a purgative in the morning. She continued in the same state of excitement, however, and in a cold, clammy
perspiration, the pulse quick and hard, bowels costive; she had had no
sleep during the night, and refused to take food. Twenty-five drops of
liquor opii sedativus were given every four hours, and continued for two
days without the least benefit; her symptoms became more aggravated;
she was quite unconscious of having an infant, and her milk gradually
diminished from the commencement of the attack. She was at times
exceedingly violent, making use of obscene language, and screaming.
The head was shaved, the ice-cap applied to it, leeches to the temples,
and a blister to the spine; aperients being occasionally administered also.
Calomel and opium were now given every four hours, and continued
for three or four days without the gums becoming effected, or the bowels
acting, although enemata were also occasionally employed. ISTo pain or
tenderness of the abdomen was present, but it was found necessary to
evacuate the bladder occasionally by means of the catheter. The temperature of the body was low, the tongue was white and furred, the
countenance wild, eyes large and rolling, and head at times hot. She
could talk for a time very rationally; but owing to her sudden fits of
violence, it was found unsafe to trust her alone for a moment. As no
improvement was taking place, it was thought expedient to remove her
to an asylum, on April 8th, from which she was discharged cured, in
about four months.

Mrs. , aged 20, had been distressed by some family occurrences,
which caused her much anxiety Four days after her first confinement,
she became much excited, and at length exceedingly violent, swearing
and using most obscene language, although at other times a lady of
most correct demeanour. As the usual treatment seemed to produce no
good effect, and she had taken an inveterate dislike to her husband and
child, it was thought advisable to remove her to a cottage in the country,
under the charge of two experienced nurses. In about five months,
she was restored to perfect health, and on her asking to see her husband,
he was immediately allowed to visit her. She has since this period borne
several children, but although of a nervous temperament, has had no
return of the complaint.

Mrs. , aged 30, of a timid, sensitive disposition, was confined of
her first child on December 25th, and was going on exceedingly well,
until six weeks after, when she suddenly expressed a wish to bid adieu
to her friends, as she thought herself dying. A great aversion to her
husband, child, and to a near relative who was staying with her, soon
after followed, and she refused to allow the infant to be applied to the
breasts. Violent mania supervened, and slie attempted suicide; but lier
language was not at all indecorous, and she sang with great taste almost
constantly. The head was shaved, the ice-cap applied to it, a few leeches
to the temples, and blisters to the spine; opium was given, followed by
gentle purgatives, but no decided improvement took place for >
time. She became exceedingly weak, and her nourishment was therefore
given in a concentrated form, and frequently. At length, evident signs
of amendment were observed; her mind gradually recovered its tone,
as her general health improved, and she was quite well within six
months.
