Religious Insanity Illustrated 
================================

:Author: Histories of Cases; a contribution
to the History of the Religious Errors of the A ge. By Dr K. W.
Ideler, Professor of Medicine and Clinical Psychiatry at the
University of Berlin, &c.

Art. III. -? Der religiose Wahnsinn; erlautert durch Krankenge-
schichten. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der religiosen Wirren der Ge-
genwart. Yon Dr Karl W. Ideler, Professor der Medizin und
Lelirer der Psyehiatrischen Klinik au der Friedricli-Wilhelms-
Universitat, &c. &c. Halle, 1847. 8vo, pp. 230.

The momentous results that depend upon a correct religious life and
conversation, the transcendent importance of thinking and acting rightly
as to religious doctrine, duties, and discipline, and the general demand
for an answer to the oft-repeated question, " What is Truth ?" give
both a popular and scientific interest to all those various forms of in-
sanity which involve religion and morals. The desire for eternal life is
the fundamental characteristic of humanity; for although it may he
considered as oidy a modification of the instinct of self-preservation and
the sentiment of love of life arising therefrom, yet the desire itself is so
Avrapped up with a religious and spiritual consciousness, and has such
profound and intimate relations to an unseen world of thought and
morals, that its instinctive origin is lost entirely in its results.
The manifestations of this desire of a return to life after death are so
numerous, that even a hare catalogue would hardly be contained in the
space allotted to us. Its relations to the Creator, as the Lord and Giver
of Life, are manifested in the multitudinous forms of religion that from
time to time have appeared upon earth, in a form, it is true, according
with the pre-existing habits of thought of the people, or the circum-
stances modifying them, but always pointing more or less distinctly to
a spiritual governor of the universe, and an omnipotent, unseen Being,
who can alike save or destroy as He wills. To such a centre of religious
doctrine and feeling all inquirers have referred.

" Father of all?in every age,
In every clime adored ;
By saint, by savage, or by sage,
Jehovah, Jove, or Lord."

The natural religion of man has never, however, been distinguished
for grandeur or truth, and there is great force in the declaration that
man makes his God like to himself. Let the man be bloodthirsty,
cruelty is an attribute of his divinity; let the man be crafty or libidinous,
such is his deity; let the man be profoundly philosophical, such is his
God; and the attributes of the human finite mind are imputed to the
infinite.

The object and aim of revealed religion is to modify the earthly and
false principles which natural religion includes and promulgates; and the
whole of Avhat is termed religious education ought to be conducted with
the view of bending the deductions of the untutored mind to the truths
of revelation, and by a diligent circulation of sound doctrines eradicate
the false; with how little success this has been done the pages of history
amply prove. Fanaticism, folly, knavery, insanity, are traceable in the
professors of every form of religious belief; very traceable in the false
creeds, but too lamentably manifest in the true.

The history of the church of Christ, the great teacher and promulgator
of His doctrines, and the means by which many successive generations
of mankind have been taught religious truths, displays an immeasurable
delineation of the most dangerous errors as the necessary results of a
degenerate piety and an ignorant devotion; mad bigotry and fanaticism
may be seen liand-in-hand, and darkening the fair doctrines and morals
of Christian truth. The most frightfully destructive wars, the incon-
ceivable cruelties, caused and practised by inexorable power, the deepest
sagacity, and the maddest insanity, have been the means used on too
many occasions to root out heresy, to promulgate dogmas, or to defend a
degenerate and an erroneous faith. If we were to look only at the dark
side of the picture which the history of Christianity presents, we might
be readily tempted to pronounce it a curse rather than a blessing, and
despair of human happiness.

To the psychologist, this dismal view of our holy religion becomes
the more dismal when he finds, in scrutinizing the details of history,
that often the heretic was only a religious madman, and that purgation
by hellebore would have been the remedy for his heterodoxy rather than
purification by fire. Knowing the all-engrossing nature of religion, and
the intensity of the emotions and feelings that it excites, he is prepared,
ct priori, to expect every form of insane aberration from religious
truth, and every form of mysticism and fanaticism. It enters every
action, it tinges every thought, it is manifest in every deed, and while
it is often the more intensely felt in the nervously susceptible, when
intensely felt by the strong, it does not fail to leave its traces on the
organism. How often religious excitement is mere animal' excitement;
how often religious insanity is excited by religion, and how often by func-
tional or structural disease of the cerebrum, are important questions to
solve, inasmuch as the solution involves not only the discrimination of
what is religious truth, but also the determination of the {etiology and
treatment of insanity in matters of religious belief and conduct.
Professor Ideler holds a prominent position in the medical school at
Berlin, as a teacher of the theory and practice of that. department of
medicine which comprises mental disorders. His work consists of an
Introduction of twenty-six pages, and the histories of nineteen cases of
religious insanity occupying the remainder of the volume. In the
Introduction, Professor Ideler developes a theory as to the nature of
religious insanity which presents all the peculiarities of German modes
of thought, and has therefore that transcendental and unpractical cha-
racter which renders German theories distasteful to the more practical
English mind. In connexion with this theory, and indeed as a prin-
cipal object, he developes his ideas as to the nature of those observa-
tions of the human mind in matters of religion, which becoming mani-
fest from time to time in great numbers of people, give them the
characteristics of an epidemical disease, closely analogous to insanity, if
not identical with it. And we apprehend that medical science may be
of great service to religion and morals, by showing in this way this
analogy or identity of fanaticism and mental aberration; many good
well-meaning persons might be saved from themselves and their cerebral
infirmities, and religion rendered the more holy and more useful by
being freed from the stains and incumbrances Avith which every new de-
velopment of it, in successive generations, is defiled and hindered by
ignorant prejudices, and the fantastic dreaming and visions of the par-
tially, if not wholly insane.

The histories of the cases recorded by Professor Ideler are well
adapted to this purpose. They are elaborate and complete, and satis-
factorily trace the morbid state of mind from the earliest outbreak of
religious feeling to its progressive and complete development?from
mental health to complete insanity. And it is only by such histories
that the inquiring mind can be fully satisfied as to those simpler forms
of insanity, in which the deviation from a healthy mental state appears
rather like an earnest and a truthful enthusiasm than that which it really
is. "We purpose, therefore, to give such a general sketch of one or two
of these cases as will exhibit their more peculiar points, and enable the
reader to trace the progressive changes in the mind of the patients. We
shall at the same time show the predisposing and exciting causes, and by so
much, contribute to a more perfect prophylaxis and sounder therapeutics.
The first case is that of a patient, born in 1813, the son of a car-
penter. From his infancy he was affected with scrofula, and, up to the
age of sixteen, had chronic ophthalmia. He was consequently feeble
and afflicted, never engaging in childish sports, but in manner grave
and melancholy. The father was a drunkard, and abused the children:
he had frequent quarrels with the mother in consequence, and the angry
feelings thus excited at last brought on epilepsy, which first deprived
her of reason, and finally of life, after sixteen years' duration.
In consequence of the long-continued ophthalmia, the patient went
little to school, and scarcely acquired the elements of secular knowledge;
but the religious teaching made a deep impression on his mind, so that
he viewed the mimicry and mockery of the minister by other boys with
lively displeasure, and often prayed earnestly to God to deliver his
mother from her afflicting malady. He became timid and shy, and had
a daily haemorrhage from the nose from the age of sixteen to twenty-
five, often accompanied by violent palpitation, sometimes alternating
with lieadach, and sometimes with depressing emotions. He often felt
so weak, that he feared lest he should fall in the street; or when he saw
the announcements of deaths, he was seized with fear and trembling for
his approaching end. He became so downcast, that he not only avoided
all opportunities of amusement, but resigned himself to the conviction
that God had appointed him to suffer, and he often burst into tears
when the sun broke forth, at the thought that he was not worthy that
the sun should shine upon him. In his eighteenth year he was appren-
ticed to be a carpenter; and whenever he had to walk upon rafters, he
was seized with giddiness, and was obliged to creep along them on
his hands and knees. The sudden death of a second master, to whom
he was transferred, made a great and serious impression on his mind,
and led him to think that he might also die suddenly in an unprepared
state of mind, and his soul perish everlastingly.

When twenty-two, he went to Berlin, and got on well in business.
He had now instead of the epistaxis a frequently recurring determina-
tion of blood to the head and chest, violent palpitation, intense headach,
vertigo, and flashings before the eyes; and neither bleedings from the
arm nor other means entirely relieved him. His mental troubles
were still further increased by an indulgence in illicit pleasure; this was
followed by bitter remorse, and in consequence, he was induced often to
receive the sacrament. He had spectral illusions when seven years old,
of a peculiar character, and these continued through life; at first, when
he went to bed in the dark, he saw visions of human forms, the bodies
of which were well-shaped, but the faces like those of spectres, and dis-
torted in every possible way. For the most part the nose was long, the
mouth wide open, the eyes large; there were commonly from four to six
such figures, which were partly motionless, mostly of unknown persons,
but occasionally of known, and disappeared in about five minutes. At
first these phantoms had no expression, but subsequently they grinned,
rolled their eyes, and made horrible grimaces. During later years they
appeared during the day as well, particularly during the heat of sum-
mer, or when lifting a heavy weight, or when fear excited flashings
before the eyes, vertigo, and palpitation. As lie liad experienced these
spectra] illusions from early infancy they attracted little of his attention,
except when a sudden sensation of fear was excited by some peculiarly
horrible grimaces, or when some dreadful ghost-story excited his imagina-
tion. He considered them usually as but phantoms of the imagination, and
it was only with increasing religious terrors that he began to think them
visions of the devil. In consequence of the long continuance of this
morbid state, the spectres attained so great vividness, that he saw the
figures of deceased people, as, for example, that of his mother, although
long since dead, with the greatest distinctness.

For a series of years he continued in tolerable health, except when his
conscientiousness and fear of death excited gloomy feelings. Insignifi-
cant circumstances brought on the most painful scruples of conscience?
as, for example, trifling expenses on festive occasions, when he con-
sidered he had thoughtlessly expended the money that ought to have
been given to the poor, or to his needy father. He thought his bodily
infirmities were a punishment for his crimes; he would often go to
church to pray for the forgiveness of his sins, and he entertained all
kinds of religious scruples, which were depressing and melancholy in
their general character. He wished to have his brother become pro-
fessedly religious, and got him persuaded to receive the sacrament;
previously to his going, however, the patient wished to wash his brother's
feet, in imitation of Christ, who washed his disciples' feet.
Encouraged by his success Avith his brother, he next attempted the
conversion of his sister; and it became a favourite object with him to
reunite the whole family, and to have them to receive the sacrament
together. The sister, however, received this proposition, and his pious
exhortations, with sulky silence; she was a married sister, and, in his
judgment, a very undutiful wife. This sister gave him so many renewed
occasions to reprove her conduct, that he became quite unhappy, and
passed his nights without sleep.

The patient so often sent money to his needy father, that he was
as often without cash himself, and was obliged to borrow from his sister.
One morning when he asked a loan of 8 groschen, (1(M) it was granted
him so reluctantly that he was highly offended, and left the room. The
sister followed him, and presented him the money with such an ugly
grimace that he was terrified. At the same moment he observed an
old broom placed against the wall, which, if met in the morning, accord-
ing to an old superstition, indicated bad luck, and might even call up the
devil himself. The thought came like a flash of lightning that his
sister was the devil, and that he had taken her form to give him the
money and thereby bind him to his service. Just at this time a piece
of glass wounded his foot through his boot, and this he considered to
have happened through the agency of the devil, who was continually
meeting him. He now took to continual prayer, or perusal of the Bible,
for assistance and consolation. A passage in the 10th chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles, in which Peter addresses Cornelius to the effect
that his prayer was heard, &c., suddenly excited the idea that God might
be induced to hear his supplications if he were to fast strictly, and lie
resolved accordingly. He therefore fasted from Sunday to the Mon-
day week following. During this time he felt no hunger, and only a
little thirst on Sunday week after the fast commenced. He occupied
his time with a continual perusal of the Bible, and with closed doors,
not able to work, and resisting all solicitations to take food. His
spectral illusions were more vivid than ever; they consisted in ugly
devilish faces, and the whole of his insane ideas (which are detailed at
length by Professor Ideler) had an almost exclusive reference to the
devil. After reading, however, the announcement by Christ of the
destruction of Jerusalem, he was convinced that the world was coming
to an end, and that Berlin would be destroyed by fire. Under this im-
pression he set forth, with a piece of wood as an amulet, to bless the
houses of his friends, and thereby preserve them from the impending
destruction. He walked before the house fixed upon for this purpose,
murmuring?"In the name of God the Father, the Son," &c. Arriving
at the Charite Hospital, he said the Lord's Prayer, blessed it, and feeling
thirsty, drank at the fountain near. He went also to bless the hospital
for invalided soldiers, to churches, and various private houses and public
institutions. The day following, he was admitted into the Charite, and
it was found necessary to feed him with a tube, lest he should starve to
death. On the next day, hearing that the various members of his family
were reconciled to each other, he considered that his prayers had
been answered, and that the necessity for fasting no longer existed.
Contrary to the earnestly expressed wishes of his physician, his father
now took him home, and as a necessary result, the patient soon fell into
his previous state of diablerie, began to exorcise, pray, &c., and shortly
again refused food, in pursuance of his resolution to fast and pray against
the devil and his machinations. His nights were sleepless, and he
was harassed with the most horrid spectral figures of grinning devilish
faces, with wide mouths, blazing rolling eyes, cornute brows, and the
other fantastic characteristics with which artists love to designate the
devil, and of which specimens may be seen in Teniers' painting, " The
Temptation of St. Anthony."

The patient was a second time brought into the Charite. He was
now sunk into a gloomy, contemplative silence, and took no notice of
the external world, to which he appeared altogether dead. It was neces-
sary to feed him with the elastic tube for six days; the cold douche to
the head was then used, and he at last began to become conscious of
surrounding objects, to sleep calmly, and to take his food. In eight
months he was restored to his friends in a tolerable state of bodily and
mental health.

A summary of the case which we have taken from Ideler's work, and
presented to our readers in an abridged form, but without any very
material omission, may not be uninteresting, especially if accompanied
with an analysis of the predisposing and exciting causes, and the
symptoms and cure of the affection. Of the predisposing causes we find,
first, an hereditary tendency to cerebral disease derived from both parents.
The long-continued series of epileptic attacks to which the mother was
subject previously to her death, and which, in effect, proved ultimately
fatal, on the one side; and, on the other, the habitual desire for alcoholic
stimulants, show this predisposition sufficiently, for all experienced persons
know that habitual intoxication is, in many cases, only another form of
insanity. Secondly, an actually existing morbid condition of the brain,
of a permanent character, is shown by the persistence of spectral illu-
sions from childhood, by vertigo, spectral flashes of light, headach, &c.
That there was congestion of the vessels of the head and face is shown
by the occurrence of epistaxis, and this was probably connected with
cardiac disease, of the existence of which we have a slight indication in
the attacks of palpitation to which the patient was subject. Disease of
the heart is a frequent concomitant of insanity; it is five times more
prevalent among an insane population than the general population.
The existence of active scrofula during childhood manifests a congenital
delicacy and susceptibility of the organism; all impressions, therefore,
would be more influential with the patient than with persons of ordinary
health; and hence we find that the cerebral phenomena alluded to above
were always aggravated either by emotional stimuli, or the application of
causes acting with a depressing influence on the system in general, and
the nervous system in particular.

The instinctive faculties appear to have been highly developed. The
same fear of death and of suffering, and its religious manifestation?the
fear of punishment by eternal death,?are both leading traits in the
character of the patient. Add to this timidity, the instinct of submission
to authority to escape the anticipated evils, on which the religious life
was based, and we have a clue to the conduct of the individual, and of
the peculiar form of insanity manifested. The chronic ophthalmia which
afflicted the patient until his sixteenth year prevented his regular attend-
ance at school, and thereby that training of the mental faculties, and
that development of the intellectual powers, which would have modified,
if not over-ruled, the predominant instincts. For want of these, the
development of the religious element of the man's character took the
lowest form of religious manifestation, and the Deity was regarded as an
avenging being, to be propitiated by prayers and intercessions, and a
scrupulous attention to ceremonials. It Avas a modification of demon-
worship. It was not surprising, then, that the spectral illusions of the
patient were of a corresponding character, and took the form of horrible
demoniacal spectres; that gloom and despair characterized the morbid
mental condition; and that an importunate devil was ever present in the
sufferer's thoughts, and only to be exorcised by biblical and supplicatory
exercises.

The patient's anxiety to withdraw his family from the evils which his
own too highly developed instincts led him to fear for himself, was only
an offshoot from those instincts; it bore the same relation to self-pre-
servation as the love of offspring bears.

The immediate predisposing causes of the paroxysm of insanity do
not appear from the history, and have evidently been overlooked. All
we learn is, that at a certain period of life the religious sentiment became
more and more manifested, and the whole current of ideas turned into
its vortex, until, progressing from one morbid state to another, the
cerebral irritability sank into inirritability; the mental activity ceased,
and life itself was only saved by the forcible administration of food. That
the immediate or proximate cause of the disease was cerebral irritability
was manifest from the therapeutics; the cold douche alone roused the
slumbering reason.

This history is imperfect in this, that it omits to describe or refer to
that large class of excitantia malorum comprising disorders of the organs
to which the peripheral nervous system is distributed. We have no
account of gastric, hepatic, or intestinal irritation; no account of the
state of the generative organs, bladder, or skin.

The lessons to be drawn, as to the therapeutics of religious insanity,
from this case, are for the most part obvious enough; we will therefore
only refer to the prophylaxis. Excluding the actual morbid condition
of the brain which existed in the chronic form, the most important pre-
disposing cause was the want of a general education. Where there is
already a predisposition to cerebral disease in a religious family,?that is
to say, a family in which the doctrines and discipline of religion have a
marked influence on their actions and habits,?it is a fatal mistake to
encourage the religious sentiment in early infancy or childhood, and
thereby render the youth precociously religious. The irregularity of deve-
lopment of the mental faculties that will necessarily arise out of this
exclusively religious training, will as necessarily lead to irregularity
of life and conduct, and the proverb be verified in the individual, " A
young saint, an old devil." The true check to a morbid and predomi-
nant action of the religious sentiment is to be found in the study of
secular science. Dr Cheyne observes,* " If the exercise of the religious
sentiments be interrupted by too exclusive an attention to science, com-
munion with God will lose its relish. Claudius Buchanan, while at Cam-
bridge, wrote to a friend as follows: 'I find the great attention to study
has made me exceedingly languid in my devotional duties; I do not
feel that delight in reading the Bible, nor that pleasure in divine things
which formerly animated me. On this account have many students in
this university wholly abandoned the study of mathematics, for it seems
they generally feel the same effects that I do.' "

This result of the close study of mathematics has been observed
before. The husband of the celebrated Mrs. Montague was an example.
His want of belief was a great sorrow to his wife. Dr Beattie in vain
conferred with the expiring mathematician on the truths of Christianity,
and observed, " he set too much value on mathematics, and piqued him-
self too much on his knowledge of that science." Other illustrations
might readily be adduced. It is obvious that any pursuit which requires
an habitual application of the strict laws of evidence, and disciplines the
mind to an accurate estimate of things, will be opposed to all ideas
founded on belief only. But as belief, or faith, is an essential element
of the human mind, and as without it there can be no religion whatever,
the exact sciences may be both an antidote and a bane. The cultivation
of them may beneficially repress an exuberance of religious sentiment, but
it may also extinguish a minimum amount, and so lead to another, and,
perhaps, more destructive form of insanity?a form characterized by an
utter abandonment of all religious and moral principles whatever, and
by utter depravity.

A remark worthy of point in the history of this case is, the suddenness
with which the ideas that determined the line of insane conduct were
excited. While reading of the religious exercises of Cornelius, the
Roman centurion, the idea is suddenly formed to do likewise, and its
* Essays on Partial Derangement of the Mind, in supposed Connexion with Religion,
p. 58.
action is pemanent, or at least remains on the mind until another
predominant idea is as suddenly developed. This is a general thing
in insanity. The excitants of these sudden ideas are various. Some-
times it is the sight of a material object. A mother, seeing a knife or a
razor glittering before her, is seized with the almost irresistible impulse
to slay her husband or child; or if upon a height, to throw herself or
another headlong; or if on the brink of a river or lake, to plunge in.
Sometimes it is spectral illusions that determine the line of marked
action, as in the history before us, where the sister was deemed to be
and treated as the devil. Sometimes voices will syllable names, or pro-
pose a line of conduct. A medical practitioner, lately deceased, informed
Dr Cheyne that his father was one day sent for to Mr. Cowper, (we pre-
sume the poet,) then labouring under an attack of fanatical insanity sup-
ported by auricular delusions, whom he found with a pen-knife sticking
in his side, with which, conceiving that he had received a mandate from
Heaven to that effect, he had made an effort to kill himself.'* Sometimes
mandates of this kind have the effect of determining a particular line of
religious duty. A friend of our own, influenced by the oratory of the late
Rev. Mr. Irving, and falling at last into religious insanity, received a
mandate in a dream to go forth into India and preach the Gospel of
Christ. He forthwith took steps to obey, with no other symptom of in-
sanity than this act of obedience. He gave up his business, sold his fur-
niture, &c., and prepared for his departure; but before he could embark,
the disease had sufficiently progressed to show its true character. He
thought handkerchiefs came from his abdomen, having the power to work
miracles; his nights he spent in wrestling in prayer with legions of devils,
and his days in preaching, Bible in hand, to any ragged lads or ragged
people he could gather round him in the streets or thoroughfares of London.
The history of almost all religious sects affords abundant examples
of spectral illusions suddenly influencing individuals to a determinate
line of conduct, and of such mere cerebral disease being mistaken for
demoniacal agency, or the operation of the Holy Spirit of God. That the
Deity communes with man is certain; and not the less certain because
multitudes hear him not; but Ave think the time is come when an import-
ant question of this kind should be put on its proper footing, so that our
holy and intellectual religion may not be sullied by words of man's
* Cowper, under tlie influence of bis attacks of melancholy despondency, made
several attempts to destroy himself. On one occasion, after suffering from a paroxysm
of hypochondriasis, he resolved to throw himself off the Tower-stairs into the river.
For this purpose, late one evening he called a hackney coach from the stand, and de-
sired the driver to take him to the Tower-stairs. The coachman drove off towards the
city. For nearly two hours he was engaged in driving about the streets without stop-
ping. At the expiration of this time the coach stopped at Cowper's house The driver,
upon being expostulated with, observed, that he had been in the babit of going to the
Tower frequently during the week, and he was ashamed to say that he had in vain
attempted that evening to find the place- Cowper got out of the carriage and returned
to the solitude of his own chamber, and offered up a prayer to the Divine Being for thus
specially interposing in his behalf. It was on the following morning that he composed
the beautiful hymn commencing?

" God moves in a mysterious way
His wonders to perform,
He plants his footsteps on the sea,
And rides upon the storm."
238 RELIGIOUS INSANITY.
invention, or obscured by the wild chaotic action of a distempered
brain.

It is very usual to attribute religious insanity to religion itself. In
the preceding case, however, no such imputation can rest; nay, it seems
the rather probable that the strong religious sentiment of the man
guided him aright when he would otherwise have failed, and it was
rather the cerebral disease that aggravated this, than this that induced
the cerebral disease and its manifestation?namely, religious insanity.
In the succeeding case, however, we find a sort of religious excitement
developing insanity.

A master shoemaker, aged 45, twice happily married, had been resident
in Berlin twenty-three years as journeyman and master. He was a happy
and contented tradesman, and so little given to religious duties that it was
rarely he went to church. In the year 1842, a member of the sect of
Anabaptists left him some mission tracts and journals, and he was in-
duced to attend their meetings. In a while he became more intimate
with the members, till at last the numerous services, both on Sunday
and week-day, tasked him beyond his mental powers, and he compared his
head to an overfull stomach. He became indignant against the prac-
tical opposition to worldly pleasures shown by the sect, against the dis-
putations held in the congregation as to the true exposition of the Bible,
and particularly against the oft-repeated dogma that other Christians
could not be holy, since, as they had not received the true baptism, they
could not live according to the Gospel. He was so shocked by these
things, that he the more diligently frequented the forbidden church, and
this might have warded off the impending attack of insanity, if the
mysticism so frequently characteristic of fanatical sects had not entered
already deeply into his mind. Notwithstanding his original aversion to
the Anabaptists, he felt himself irresistibly attracted towards them, lent
a ready ear to their doctrines, while emissaries were sent to him to con-
firm him in his tendencies. They taught him that baptism of adults, the
example of which was set by the baptism of Christ in the river Jordan,
could alone render a man truly pious, and save him from damnation.
He now became more than ever occupied with religious matters; he was
timid and undecided in his business, and was harassed with religious
scruples such as had never occurred before, so that his early life appeared
blameable, and caused him bitter remorse. To remedy this unhappy
condition he diligently read his Bible even while working at his trade, as
enjoined by his brother sectarians. Continually harassed by doubts, and
vainly wrestling for a solution of them, he at last became so miserable as
not to be able to follow his business, and even during the night had no
refreshing sleep, for he was disturbed from rest by horrible dreams of
spectres and ugly hags. At last he believed he had discovered a solution
of all this in the Bible, and that the grace of God and a new spiritual
birth by baptism were necessary to put away his sins. He now joined the
Anabaptists, and, with fourteen others, bewailed his sins with groans and
sighs, and deep regrets that he had not served God from his youth, &c.
On April 29th, 1842, at six o'clock in the morning, he went with
the other candidates for baptism to the Kummelsburg lake, about a
quarter of a (German) mile from Berlin, on the shore of which two tents
were erected for the two sexes to undress in. Every one had to
strip to his shirt and put on a blouse over it with a girdle. Previously
to the baptism, a prayer was offered up, a psalm sung, and a text read
from the New Testament, to which the preacher appended an exhorta-
tion. This finished, each candidate was led into the lake, the preacher
taking him by the girdle with his left hand, and with his right thrusting
his head under water, while he said, " I baptize thee in the name," &c.
The ceremony was not, however, calculated to have a beneficial effect,
since it excited a variety of mingled emotions. The sobs and cries of
the females (amongst whom was his own daughter, aged fifteen) dis-
turbed his devotion, together with the feeling of shame in having to
undress publicly and be exposed to a crowd of curious spectators. His
teeth chattered with cold, and he was glad to get home with the happy
consciousness that he was now born again.

This state of peace did not, however, last long; he soon got into
doubts and difficulties, then quarrelled with his brethren, and becoming
anabaptistically heterodox, was excommunicated. He then became con-
vinced that the Anabaptists were judaizing Christians, and wrote to the
precentor accordingly, and finally found his way back to the evangelical
church.

After awhile he again got into controversy with his former co-
religionists, and while under great consequent excitement, wrote an
" Answer to the Encyclical Letter of Pope Gregory XYI. from Rome,
May 23, 1844." This composition commenced with correctly expressed,
although desultory remarks, but it soon became incoherent and unin-
telligible, and the reader vainly attempts to discover a meaning. We
subjoin an example.

" Thou XYI. Cross-father, thou placed thy X on the Trinity, then remained to thee
three 666, and the one man, Christ, thou crucified, who lived here 33 years?666;
and since thou crucified the Trinity, who was the 33 years' man, (Revelations xiii.,
ver. 18,) one over the other, so it is?
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
10, 10, 10,

Hay, Straw, Stubble.

Mammala, will we go home ? Let one have bite at the crumb of the loaf, then we go
home. Rev. xi. ver. 4; xi. ver. 7. Conclusion Rev. xi. ver. 8. Yes, we have tor-
mented you," &c.?P. 32.
After awhile he began to have dangerous notions. He wanted to
force his wife through the window; he took a knife to slay his children,
as Abraham did to Isaac. At last, on the evening of March 17, 1845,
he became raving mad. He broke the furniture to pieces, tore up the
beds, and, between whiles, danced, sang, drummed, and called after his
children as they fled from his violence?" Quick, quick, a kiss." He
tore his clothes off to his shirt, then wrapped a table-cloth round his
body, and girded his chest so tightly with a towel that he could hardly
breathe. We need not detail his other fantastic tricks; in a word, he
became a raving maniac; and when the paroxysm passed away, he sank
into listlessness.

After various means were tried unsuccessfully, tartar-emetic ointment
was applied to the shaven scalp with the happiest results; and in a few
months he was restored to his family.

In this case we have a series of phenomena in remarkable contrast
with those of the preceding. The patient appears to have been a good
and kind husband and father, but without any religious predisposition
or turn of mind. It is only when the stimulus is accidentally applied by
the proselyting tracts of the Anabaptists, that there is action excited.
The enthusiastic character of the tracts would have an abiding influence
in a mind untrained in religious discipline or to religious habits; and
thus that morbid condition of the brain was excited, which, with a less
stimulation and a more judicious communication of religious views, would
have led only to a religious life and conversation.

The morbid condition took on the form of irritation of a chronic kind;
and it appears as if it had spread downwards until it involved the in-
stincts, the organs of which are situate laterally, and at the base of the
brain. "We thus find him running wildly, and destroying both inani-
mate things and animate. What the predisposing causes were do not
appear; but there must, we think, have been something to assist the
action of the Anabaptistical enthusiasm. That the latter was the excit-
ing cause is obvious enough.

It were a most ungracious task to designate analogous examples to
this as occurring amongst many protestant sects, and not unfrequently
amongst Roman-catholic devotees. We feel, however, that it is incum-
bent upon us to notice the mental aberrations that have been excited by
so-called popular preachers; for the results are equally injurious to
religion and morals, as well as to the unfortunate subjects of the false
enthusiasm. It appears to us that clergymen, ministers, and priests,
should more diligently study the history of religious insanity, and so be
enabled to discriminate accurately between the ravings of the insane, or
semi-insane, and the operations of the Holy Spirit. It is, we think, a
most dangerous error to confound the one with the other?dangerous to
the eternal welfare of the teacher, who will not be held blameless at the
great and awful day of the Lord, if he have neglected to inform his mind
rightly on the subject; and dangerous to the poor deluded sufferer, whose
mental life and spiritual prospects are thus prematurely blighted. Men
consider too seldom that, as regards eternal life, and a preparation for
it, the access of incurable insanity is virtually death; and, consequently,
that the wild preachings of the enthusiast have as deadly an influence on
his victim's future state, as if, by means of arsenic, he had been sent to
his account "with all his imperfections on his head."

It will, perhaps, be thought well to analyze this question more minutely,
and trace it to its elements. The question is of sufficient importance
in this age of religious inquiry and excitement. On a careful perusal of
those histories which modern literature affords of the great periods of
religious excitement and enthusiasm, and of those minor fermentations
which have led to the establishment of new sects, or have excited local
manifestations of religious aberration, we find this general principle
manifested in all?namely, that the minds of men have been directed to
one dogma, or doctrine, or point of discipline in especial, either to the
total eclipse of other doctrines, or to their partial obscuration and
neglect. And for the most part, it may farther be stated, as an im-
portant fact, that the dogma, or principle, or point of discipline to
which this prominent position is assigned, is generally of secondary
importance in the general estimate of Christendom. For example,
while all Christians maintain, with one exception, that baptism is an
essential rite, one sect attributes to it a sacramental efficacy, while
another maintains it is only a point of discipline or a ceremony, which
may be varied according to circumstances; or, to refer to a circumstance
in the last case, one sect may think psedobaptism is the important thing,
while another may assert the absolute necessity to salvation of adult
baptism. Now, the common faith of all these sects is, that, abstractedly,
baptism is necessary to salvation by Christ; and this, therefore, is a
fundamental principle of their Christian belief; yet none assert this
fundamental principle. What distinguishes each is, that baptism shall
be performed in a particular way, at a particular age, and with the
belief in certain dogmas of less importance than the fundamental prin-
ciple itself. We will mention an illustration or two of this point, as it
is one of some importance in the prophylaxis and therapeutics of religious
insanity, and cannot be too deeply impressed on the mind, or too clearly
stated.

When the Reformation had nearly established itself in Germany, and
men's minds had been agitated by religious strifes, about the year 1525,
the whole country was disturbed by some turbulent preachers. The
ringleader was one Thomas Muncer, " who, pretending a more than
ordinary zeal, (having with much passion preached against the popish
errors,) at length began to preach against Luther, terming him as too
cold, and his sermons as not savouring enough of the Spirit. With great
earnestness he pressed the exercises of mortification, and exhorted to a
more frequent and familiar conversation with God; he pretended to
some divine revelations, and that God, by dreams and visions, did reveal
unto his saints his will." At length he became so mad, that he told his
followers he had received a command from God to kill and root up all
wicked princes and magistrates. He was a mischievous maniac, like
the Kentish Thom. Muncer was the first of the Anabaptists who also
held certain quaker tenets, as that it was not lawful for Christians to
go to law, or to swear, &c.; and at first the members of the sect were
orderly persons.

A tailor of Leyden went to live at Munster, and privately taught the
doctrine of re-baptization, and won many converts amongst the lower
orders. When an attempt was made to confute him and his co-reli-
gionists, several went running about the streets, crying, " Eepent, and
be re-baptized, lest the wrath of God overwhelm you." After a while
they got worse in their insanity, and began to teach practices and doc-
trines very like those of the Mormonites of the present day. Prophets
and prophetesses began to arise, and revelations from God were plen-
tiful. John of Leyden, the tailor, (amongst others,) betaking himself to
sleep, continued in a dream for three days together. Being awakened,
" He speaks not a word, but calls for paper; in it he -writes the names
of twelve men, who were to be chief officers over God's Israel, and to
govern all things; for such," he said, " was the will of the heavenly
Father when he had thus prepared the way to his kingdom." He pro-
pounded, as a revelation from heaven, that no man was bound to one
wife only, but that every man might have as many as he pleased. John
took three; and those were considered to be the most pious and praise-
worthy who had the greatest number. One of John's queens (for he was
NO. II. it
made king) thinking that it was not pleasing to God that men should die
of famine, as they did during the siege of Munster, ventured to ex-
press her opinion, for which John led her into the market-place, and
commanding her to kneel down, struck off her head.

The wildest doctrines were preached, and every part of Holy Writ
applied to the most absurd ends by these insane fanatics; and the
wars were made abundantly serviceable in palliating or defending every
kind of cruelty and pillage. At last the ringleaders were taken and
tortured to death; and their historian in the Harleian Miscellany con-
cludes his history of their proceedings (how vainly history tells) with, " So
let all the factious and seditious enemies of the church and state perish,
but upon the head of King Charles let the crown flourish. Amen."
This account of the Anabaptists was entitled, "A Warning for
England, especially for London," and was written in 1642, during the
civil war. It is not a remarkable circumstance that the warning was
unheeded, and that every kind of religious insanity (or fanaticism, which
is only madness with a method) should so soon become rampant. Nay,
in Cromwell there was a man of the same order of mind as John of
Leyden, although more powerful and less deranged.

It is not always, however, that the influence of religious excitement
upon one topic terminates in an insane excitement of the destructive
propensities. We have seen that amongst the Anabaptists the sexual
passion was also active; but this, in some sects, has been a leading trait.
In the Harleian Miscellany (vol. iii.) there is an account of a sect of this
kind termed "The Family of Love," printed in 1641, an age of fana-
ticism. It is doubtful whether the facts related be true?they are inde-
cent enough?but the relater became insane, and the pamphlet is inter-
esting as significant of the current ideas at the time. In all ages,
indeed, this instinctive aberration has followed on religious insanity, and
entered largely into the celebration of " mysteries."

The vast majority of modern sects do not, however, go so far as those
of the stirring times above-mentioned. The religiously insane of these
sects seek usually for some spiritual or temporal benefit to themselves
by fasting, prayer, penance, &c., amongst one class; and by an earnest
desire for conversion, or spiritual gifts and graces, amongst another.
Occasionally the ceremonial most approved is a travestie of some point
in Jewish history, as with the Shakers or Jumpers. In almost all
examples of this form of religious insanity, it has appeared as an epi-
demic or endemic. In Hecker's Account of the Epidemics of the Middle
Ages, there is also an interesting history of certain epidemics of religious
insanity.

The way in which these epidemics arise is the same as that in which
religious insanity occurs in individuals. Some general cause directs men's
minds to religious thoughts and feelings?as a plague, a famine, an earth-
quake, or popular preachers, or religious dissensions and controversies.
The excitement is in proportion to the force of the impulse, the amount
of restraining power in the mass, and the general susceptibilities. The
general excitement, although at first chaotic, soon separates into distinct
forms or masses, or rather, the people affected form into groups around
some idea common to all as a nucleus. In proportion as the constituents
of these groups are people of low manners, uneducated, and vulgar, in
that proportion will the morbid phenomena be rhapsodical and inco-
herent as to speech, and violent and brutish as to action. Superstition,
cunning, avarice, lasciviousness, revenge will be predominant. In the
more highly educated person there will be more of refined mysticism,
more subtle superstition, and more delicacy in speech and manner. The
larger majority will have brains sufficiently healthy to resist the effects
of the excitement at this stage, and the irritation will not pass into con-
gestion or inflammation. Those, however, who may be predisposed to
cerebral disease, or with a highly susceptible nervous system, will be apt
to become truly insane, the subjects of dreams, visions, and revelations;
and, finally, exhausting the whole nervous force, a calm succeeds, and the
disease ends in health or imbecility, as circumstances may arise. Now,
the true preventive against all these evils rests in a great degree with
the teachers of religion and the conductors of public worship. Instead
of joining the insane fanaticism of the half-educated and the ignorant,
they should manfully resist it by every proper means. They should
avoid all controversial topics, all exalting services, all enthusiastic methods
of teaching or preaching. The precepts of Christianity, rather than
the doctrines, should be the theme of their discourses; and great moral
duties rather than sectarian peculiarities. In calling the attention of
members of the sacred profession to this important subject, we feel that
we are only following in the footsteps of our common Teacher and
Saviour. Jesus Christ pointed out very clearly how religious fanaticism
and fanatical errors would arise in times of great political excitement.
We would refer in particular to the thirteenth chapter of St. Mark's
Gospel, for an illustration. When nation rises against nation and king-
dom against kingdom, and earthquakes in divers places, and famines
and troubles, and yet only " the beginnings of sorrows;"?in those days
of intense affliction, Christ declares, false Christs and false prophets shall
rise, and shall show signs and wonders. But he adds, " If any man
shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ, or lo, he is there, believe him not.
Take ye heed; behold, I have foretold you all things." Such is the em-
phatic warning of Him who spake as never man spake; and in his foot-
steps should his ministers and people tread.

It will hardly, we hope, be thought that we advocate the doctrines just
stated as applicable to religious insanity exclusively. One idea is always
a dangerous idea to the man of weak or inharmonious cerebral develop-
ment, of whatever nature it may be, or to whatever applied. Indeed,
it only arises after the premonitory stage of insanity has commenced, in
a large proportion of cases. But the exclusive application of the mind
will induce this premonitory or introductory stage?the stage of incuba-
tion. The enthusiastic patentee of a new discovery, the devoted lover,
the absorbed mathematician, the devourer of novels, or books of travels,
the overworked politician or litterateur?all these have afforded examples
of the baneful influence exercised on the brain when the thoughts flow
in one current through it, and the faculties of the mind are brought
unequally into exercise. Mental gymnastics are as necessary as corporal,
else the mind becomes diseased or distorted.

The third case in Professor Ideler's work will illustrate some of our remarks. A female, the daughter of a mechanic, who was in narrow
circumstances, and sought comfort in religious exercise from the troubles
of poverty, was early taught religious views, and to exercise herself in
devotional services. Her mother died when she was young, and a step-
mother rendered her life miserable by scolding and beating her; so that
the world Avas as a waste to her, and she had great mental distress.
Her father dying, she had to go into service; but her bad bodily health
enabled her to do but little. Her bowels were obstinately confined,
menstruation irregular, her eyes inflamed, her head ached, &c., and
she only attained a tolerable state of health when menstruation was
fully established, at the age of twenty-three. Being servant at an ale-
house, the brutality of the guests so disgusted her, that she went to learn
dress-making, and engaged, for the purpose of solace and support under
her trials, in religious devotions, self-examination, and a strict asceticism.
She was so industrious at her employment, and so attentive to her duties
at a Sunday-school, that she had no time for amusement, and, in conse-
quence, her health became indifferent. Eager after continual religious
excitement, she seized every opportunity to induce and increase it, and
was not only a constant attendant at church and pietistic meetings, but
she had a number of pious sayings printed on her memory. Neverthe-
less, her hardly gained peace of mind was soon disturbed by the perusal
of divers fanatical and mystical tracts. She spent her nights without
sleep, and was anguished both night and day. She one evening saw
visions in the sky of a religious cast, and after a sleepless night went to
church, where she suddenly heard an inward voice say to her, " Thou
art a Jew, and must be baptized." She was much alarmed, and knew
not what to think; on her way home, she saw the Saviour as he is risen
sitting on the right hand of God the Father, but his head was bent, and
he seemed to suffer, so she remembered, that " without holiness no man
shall see the Lord." She considered these visions to be from God for
her comfort and the establishment of her faith.

Nothing more than the strictest attention to the duties of religion
seems to have been observed for nine years after this. At this time, she
was in the house of a Lutheran, who strenuously maintained his church
to be that in which salvation was to be obtained, and that all persons
not in it would be damned. A shoemaker who used to join their
society launched the most violent anathemas against the Anabaptists,
and said that they went about in the forms of angels, but the devil
was behind them. The violent denunciations of those two primitive
Lutherans had a powerful effect on her mind, and induced her to inquire
more into the tenets and worship of the Anabaptists, and was so pleased
with them that she attended their services. The question was now raised
whether she should be re-baptized or not, and she devoted much time to
prayers and perusal of the Bible, and long disputations with members of
the sect. She had again spectral illusions, one of which was the full figure
of an Anabaptist who had tried to persuade her to become one of them.
She was at last baptized in the Spree, and at the time experienced a sort
of ecstasy.

We need not trace the history of the case through the details of fana-
ticism and mysticism patiently collected by Ideler. She saw more spectral
illusions; lier health began to fail, and at last she was received into the
lunatics' hospital, suffering from religious melancholy. After nearly a
year's treatment, she wrote her autobiography, and it was so well put
together, and her mind and body in other respects were so much im-
proved, that she was dismissed cured.

We have in the preceding article discussed a psychological subject of
vast importance, upon which many very mistaken opinions are enter-
tained. In conclusion, we would observe, that an important distinction
is to be drawn between these deranged affections of the mind resulting
from the influence of false religion upon the understanding, and the
healthy effect of legitimate Christianity upon the feelings and actions of
man. During the course of our experience, Ave have never seen a case
of insanity which could be clearly traced to true religion?we mean,
the religion as inculcated by the great Author of Christianity?the reli-
gion that teaches " peace and goodwill towards men"?which advocates
the noble sentiments of love and charity?which inculcates the feelings
of " preferring others to ourselves"?the religion which represents love,
mercy, and forgiveness as the pre-eminent attributes of the Godhead?
the religion whose tendency is to induce us to take lowly views of our-
selves, to humble human pride, to produce a cheerful, serene, and happy
state of mind?the religion which enables us to bear with fortitude " the
whips and scorns of time, the oppressor's wrong, and the proud man's
contumely." We cannot believe that the influence of such a religion
can be otherwise than salutary in its effects on the human mind.
False, fanatic, and mistaken views of our duty to God and to man, of
our relationship to the divine and benevolent Governor of the universe,
have decidedly a most pernicious effect upon the feelings and intellect,
and often produce unequivocal insanity. How many, with, we believe,
the purest intentions, and for the best of motives, represent God, whose
great and noblest attribute is love, as a God of vengeance and terror,
and who have no conception of the Deity, except as one " riding upon
the whirlwind and the storm," hurling his thunderbolts among those
transgressing his laws. The inculcation of such doctrines to persons of
weak mind, of extreme nervous susceptibilities, or to persons predis-
posed to insanity, cannot but be otherwise fatal to the integrity of the
understanding. How often have we witnessed the lamentable results of
Such an injudicious course of procedure!

It should, however, never be forgotten, that the mind may seize upon
a delusion associated with religion, or it will lay hold of any other
fancy, without religion having anything to do with the derangement as
an exciting cause. There are thousands of persons capable of mixing
in society, and who daily participate in all the enjoyment that a social
life can produce, who are hovering on the brink of insanity, and who
only require to be exposed to some trifling exciting cause, in order to
develop insanity in its Avorst forms. The " exciting cause" may be an
injudicious attempt to proselyte?it may be violent mental emotion,
caused by the sudden accession of Avealth, or by some unexpected adver-
sity?causes most trifling in their character, often rouse the latent dis-
ease or tendencies, and induce positive derangement of mind. Again,
Avhen there exists a predisposition to insanity, the mind often seizes hold
of some prominent topic of the day, which it exaggerates and falsifies,
until it becomes a fixed delusion. The more the matter in question
affects the imagination, the more calculated is it to put the mind off its
balance. If the person who is unfortunate enough to possess an ex-
citable nervous temperament, or a tendency to derangement of the
mind, escape any great mental shock, he may pass through life a healthy,
sane man. We have in our " mind's eye" many individuals, who, we
conceive, require but some apparently insignificant cause to send them
over the precipice. Taking this view of the question, how important
is it that the mind should be properly regulated and disciplined; and
that correct physiological principles should be promulgated in relation to
the prevention of insanity in those constitutionally predisposed to this
fearful calamity !

With regard to the prevention of what is termed religious insanity,
we should be careful, particularly in early life, when the imagination is
most alive to impressions, to avoid allowing the mind to dwell too
much on the consideration of the abstractions of religion, and to keep a
check upon the feelings. Religious exercise, although all-important,
not only in reference to this life, but to a future state of existence,
ought to be kept within reasonable and healthy bounds. The mind
cannot delusively dwell for any length of time on a subject like that of
religion, without running a great risk of disordering its faculties. If the
intellect does not become palpably deranged, the mind will be disposed
to make false estimates of things, and to attach to trivial and unim-
portant matters, notions that it is not justified in entertaining.
We cannot unduly exercise any one class of mental operations with-
out weakening the other faculties of the mind?the feelings cannot be
exclusively acted upon without enfeebling the powers of reason and
judgment; neither can we call these latter faculties, important as they
are, into constant operation, leaving the sentiments and propensities in
abeyance, without endangering the healthy state of the mind. If the
nervous energy, upon which the powers of the mind depend, be concen-
trated in one part of the brain for too long a period, the other portions
of this organ must necessarily suffer, and consequently some of the
faculties of the mind become either debilitated, or the ideas distorted.
Many of the false views which the world entertains on the important
subject of religion owe their origin to this exclusive devotion and
consideration of one all-absorbing topic. The feelings and sentiments
are educated or exercised at the expense of the judgment, and thus
erroneous ideas force themselves upon the mind. He is the happiest
and the healthiest man Avhose mental faculties are equally developed
and exercised. Such a person, under the guidance of the Divine Spirit,
knows his duty to God and man; and whilst cultivating a cheerful
piety, will look with feelings of charity on the failings of his fellow-men,
and endeavour, by gentleness and Christian humility, to bring his " erring
brother " into the path that leads to virtue, peace, and happiness.
" True piety is cheerful as the day,
Will weep indeed, and heave a pitying groan
For others' woes, but smile upon her own !"
