Charge of Murder? Acquittal on The Ground of Puerperal Insanity
================================================================

CHELMSFORD?Friday, March 10.
{Before Lord Dentnan.)
Martha Prior, aged 37, a married women, was indicted for the wilful murder of
her female child, 13 days old, by nearly cutting off its head with a razor.
Mr. Kyland prosecuted. The prisoner was defended by Mr. Hawkins.

It appeared from the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution, that the pri-
soner is the wife of a labouring man, and resided at a village called North End, in
the parish of Great Waltham, in Essex. She was pregnant in December last; and
it would seem that she had made the usual preparations for her confinement, and
was delivered on the 10th of December of the child which formed the subject of
the present inquiry. The prisoner went on very well for some days after her con-
finement ; but from symptoms which the medical attendant then observed, he gave
directions that she should be kept perfectly quiet, and that the child should
not be allowed to go to her, and also that the prisoner should not be left
by herself. In consequence of these directions, it appeared that for two or three
days the prisoner was attended and watched by two women belonging to the
parish ; but on the 23rd of December, the day when the alleged murder was perpe-
trated, it seemed that they had left her, and there was no one in the cottage but the
infant and a daughter of the prisoner's, named Ellen, about 13 years old, who had
the care of it. About one o'clock in the day, the prisoner, who was in bed, called
to the girl Ellen, and told her to bring her the child. The girl at first objected to
do so, but the prisoner, in an angry and peremptory tone, insisted that she should,
and the girl being alarmed, carried the child to her mother, and laid it on the bed by
her side. A short time afterwards, the prisoner called out again to her daughter, and
told her to bring her a razor. She asked her what she wanted with a razor, upon
which the prisoner said she wished to cut some of the hard skin off her hands. The
girl, fearing some mischief, remonstrated with her mother, and asked her not to have
the razor till another time; but she again became very angry ; and the girl, it ap-
peared, being terrified, took her one of her father's razors ; but the moment she had
done so, ran out of the cottage, intending to give an alarm, but she had hardly
reached the door before she heard the infant give a shriek, and on her going into her
mother's bedroom, accompanied by some of the neighbours, immediately afterwards,
it was discovered that the child was dead, its head having been nearly cut from the
trunk, and only remaining attached to it by some portion of the integuments. The
prisoner appeared quite calm and collected, and she at once admitted that she had
destroyed the child, and said it was what she had all along intended to do; and she
added, that she should not care if any one served her the same. The women who had
watched with the deceased during the first period of her illness, said that she fre-
quently seemed as though her mind was roving, and often said that she knew she
was going to die, and, as she was certain she should go to hell, it might be as well
first as last, and other incoherent expressions. All the witnesses concurred in giving
the prisoner the character of a kind and affectionate mother up to the period of this
unfortunate transaction.

Mr. Bell, a surgeon of Felstead, proved the circumstances connected with the
delivery, and said, that when he left the prisoner after it took place, she was doing
very well. He was called in to see her about a week after, and he found her in a
dangerous state, suffering under a complete prostration of strength. Her eyes were
vacant and wild, and her countenance haggard ; and from what he saw, he was satis-
fied that her mind was affected, and he in consequence gave directions that the child
should not be given to her, and that she should be kept perfectly quiet, and not be
permitted to be alone. The witness concluded his evidence by expressing an opinion
that at the time the prisoner destroyed, the child, she was not aware what she was
doing, or if she xvas, that she was incapable of controlling her actions.
Lord Denman asked the witness whether he was of opinion that when the prisoner
sent for the child she was not aware what she was about ?

The witness said, that it was his opinion that the prisoner might have known that
she was going to kill the child, but at the same time was not aware of the nature of
the act she was about to commit; in point of fact, that she acted under a sudden and
uncontrollable impulse of the mind.

Lord Denman.?Do you call it a sudden impulse of the mind when a person
deliberately asks for a child, and then suffers a quarter of an hour to elapse before the
razor is asked for with which the injury then appears to be deliberately inflicted ?
Witness.?I am of opinion that she committed the act under an uncontrollable
impulse acting upon a mind previously diseased.

Lord Denman then addressed the jury, and said, that after this evidence, he had
no doubt they would come to the conclusion which it was intended to convey, that
the prisoner, although she had no doubt committed the act imputed to her, was not
legally responsible for it. He must, however, express an opinion that the judgment
of the medical gentleman had leen very rashly formed. How could one person dive
into the mind of another, and express an opinion with regard to its being in an un-
sound state, when there was no evidence of any alteration of conduct, or any circum-
stances in the case to show alienation of mind ? He said this on account of the great
danger that would prevail to human life if people were to be taught that a sudden
impulse was to be an excuse for a crime, and that the atrocity of the offence itself
was to be adduced as an argument in support of such a supposition. He could not
help thinking that such opinions were too often given by scientific men upon too slight
foundation for the safety of the public; but as lie felt that in this instance there was
no doubt that the jury would act upon the testimony of the medical gentleman who
had been examined, it would be useless to proceed any further with the inquiry.
The jury accordingly returned a verdict of Not Guilty, on the ground of
insanity.
