Advertisement
==============

It is only recently that Mental Philosophy and Physiology
have been practically studied. The subtleties and scholastic
mysticism which formerly obscured our metaphysical researches,
have been dissipated by a more enlightened method of induc-
tion. The discoveries which have been made in Physiology
and Pathology have revealed to us new' and important princi-
ples connected with the constitution of the human mind, both
in health and in disease. Hence the most valuable practical
results are being now daily developed, not only in private prac-
tice, but especially in those public Institutions which are dedi-
cated to the treatment of Mental Disease. It has therefore
been suggested, that a Journal, devoted to the progress of
Psychological Science, will not fail to be acceptable to all who
are interested in this department of knowledge. We do not
wish to deal with the Science of Psychology?which embraces,
in its widest sense, an investigation into the normal and abnor-
mal conditions of the human mind?as mere theorists. The
knowledge which does not admit of practical application to the
comforts or the wants of suffering humanity may be curious, but
is in a great measure valueless.

The aberration of the human intellect is that which, above
all other calamities, has the strongest claim upon our sympa-
thies ; and they only who, devoted to this branch of professional
study, are accustomed to watch the clouding and unclouding of
the mind, under the shadow of disease, can discriminate the

ADVERTISEMENT.

phases through which it passes, and the degree estoration
of which it may be susceptible. They only can from their ex-
perience acquire correct principles of diagnosis; and it is
thought desirable that a Journal should be establi iied specially
devoted to their communications,?which should enable them
to make known the results of their practice, anc1 the suggestions
and discoveries which may from time to time'occur to tjiem,?'
record judicial proceedings affecting the qi: jstion of Insanity,
and moral responsibility, occurring before our jivil and criminal
tribunals,?and open a field for fair and impartial discussi ms
on all subjects relating to the Physiology c 1 Pathology of the
Human Mind. Such a Journal we hope to supply in the
periodical now announced.

The Journal of Psychological Medicine will contain
Analytical and Critical Reviews.
These Articles will aim at conveying a concise'and impartial
abstract of all new works, domestfc and foreign, on Psycholo-
gical subjects. To concentrate carefully the knowledge diffused
over many pages, to select useful information, and expose un-
sound theoretical views, to deal justly and conscientiously with
all publications that come under notice, ""-ill be the object of
our ambition. We shall critically investigate, and fearlessly
pronounce judgment, on matters which come under Review, but
in so doing, we shall not affect that liypercriticism which
rejoices in the brilliancy of the wit with which it assails and
victimizes the object of its attack. The interests of Science
require no such display of intellectual gladiatorship. We shall
seek only to impart information; and in all cases to pronounce
judgment on doubtful or disputed points, fairly and without
acrimony ; for a critical analysis on subjects connected with
Mental Philosophy ought to be as carefully and rigidly con-
ducted as any analytical experiment in Practical Science.
We have reason to know that among our professional brethren
who are already interested in Psychological investigations, a
mass of valuable information exists, which is individualized and
scattered for the want of a Journal recognised as the organ of
such communications. We therefore cheerfully invite their co-
operation ; and have great satisfaction in stating, that we have
been already favoured vith contributions from many of the most
eminent members of the profession.

A careful abstract of the Reports of Public and Privat
Asylums in Great Britain, Fiance, Germany, Prussia, and
America, will be an imports , feature of this Journal. The
simultaneous publication of these, in a condensed form, will
constitute a valuable body of .evidence on the present state of
Lunacy, and will not fail to b? suggestive of many practical
improvements in the constitution and management of these
Institutions.

. It is only of late years that the voice of humanity has been
permitted to plead before the tribunals of justice in behalf of
the criminal lunatic. It is obvious that the reports of such
trials, the evidence upon which cases for future precedents are
established, ought to be recorded with great care. So, likewise,
the Commissions of Lunacy, so frequently held to inquire into
the mental competency of persons to administer their affairs,
ought, in like manner, to be carefully, or rather officially reported.
Cases also frequently occur demanding special notice, which ani-
madvert on doubtful evidence, and convey information which
may enlighten and guide juries in coming to a proper verdict.
The most extraordinary ignorance prevails on the subject of
Insanity, and it will be one of the objects of this department
? of the Journal to give an exposition of those Psychological
principles in the consideration of Insanity which should guide
jurors in the discharge of their solemn duties.
In Germany, France, and lately in America, Psychological
researches have been pursued with more zeal than in this
country; and articles which deserve more than an ephemeral
existence constantly appear scattered through different perio-
dicals. Translations and abstracts of these will appear in this
department of the Journal, and we shall be guided, in making
our selections, by the practical value of the articles, rather than
by their speculative ingenuity.

Under the head of Correspondence, Domestic and Foreign,
the Journal will be open to discussion on speculative as well as
practical subjects. We do not invite controversy, but shall
throw open our pages to fair, free, and independent inquiry,
satisfied that Truth, to carry out its own divine mission, must
breathe an atmosphere of freedom.

Edited upon these principles, we have reason to believe that
the Journal of Psychological Medicine will supply a
desideratum which at present exists in professional literature, and
we are fully satisfied that the success of the undertaking will
depend upon the ability with which the Editor will be enabled
to realize the expectations which he has in the above remarks
held out.

In endeavouring to establish a Journal devoted exclusively
to the consideration of the Human Mind in its abnormal state,
we feel that we are breaking new ground in this country, and
that many difficulties will beset our path; but the anticipation
of these obstacles does not in the slightest degree damp our
energies, or lessen our hopes of a triumphant result.
N.B.?It is the intention of the proprietor of this Journal
that it shall consist of nine sheets?144 pages. Owing to a
pressure of important matter, the first number exceeds twelve
sheets, which it is evident cannot be sold at the price announced
without loss. The succeeding numbers will contain nine sheets,
as originally proposed.
