A Treatise on Chronic General Paralysis, Considered Especially as Affecting the Insane
=======================================================================================

THE JOURNALOF
PSYCHOLOGICAL MEDICINEANMENTAL PATHOLOGY.
JULY 1, 1848.
xJ
^nalgttcal SfUbtefos.
Art. I.?Traite de la Paralysie General Chronique, considere speciale-
ment chez les Alienes. Par Hubert Rodrigues, Professeur Agrege
a la Faculte de Montpelier, Arc. Anvers, 1847.

:Author: Hubert Kodrigues, Professor of Medicine at
Montpelier, &c. Antwerp, 1847. 8vo, pp. 250.

It is a remarkable fact, tliat no monograph on this highly interesting
subject has been published in this country. Wc are principally in-
debted to French authors for our information on that peculiar form of
paralysis which affects the insane. The first notice of the affection is to
be found in a work of M. Bayle's, which appeared in 1822, entitled,
" Eecherches sur les Maladies Mentales." The first distinct treatise, how-
ever, was published by M. Delaye, in 1822, and was styled?" Quelques
Considerations sur une espece de Paralysie qui affeete particulierement
les Alienes." Since then, Messrs. Bayle and Calmeil have written most
ably on the subject. The work before us is the most recent which has
issued from the press, and is a systematic and comprehensive treatise.
M. Rodrigues appears to have had extensive opportunities for obser-
vation at the various lunatic asylums in France, and his views seem de-
serving of attention from the circumstances of his having obtained a
prize from the Cliirurgical Society of Emulation at Montpelier, for the
best essay on the General Paralysis of the Insane. This essay was
published in the " Revue Medicale," t. ii., 1838.
In the systematic work before us, M. Rodrigues has industriously
collected all that is known respecting the singular malady of which it
treats. He is, however, not merely a compiler. He has brought
forward some original views, and given the details of several interesting
pathological alterations, which demand especial notice.
The treatise is divided into three parts. The first two are devoted
t? the detail of cases. The third relates to the history of the disease,
NO. III.and comprises an account of the predisposing causes, symptoms, state
of the mind, duration, complications, prognosis, diagnosis, pathological
alterations, &c. We shall commence our observations with the third
part, referring incidentally, as occasion may require, to the cases con-
tained in the other portion of the work.

The first points on which we shall dwell at some length, are those
relating to predisposing causes, and the condition of the system most
conducive to general paralysis. Predisposing causes are those which
have reference to the state of the constitution, the action of the external
world, and the influence of some particular disease. M. Calmeil and
other writers have come to the conclusion that men are more liable to
the disease than women. M. Rodrigues is not only of this opinion, but
he also considers that men are more predisposed to every kind of
cerebral affection than women, in consequence of their proneness to sen-
suality, their greater intellectual exertions, and their professional
anxieties and disappointments. He also considers that men are par-
ticularly liable to disease of the brain when an inactive life succeeds
years of incessant toil. This opinion is plausible, but it is not borne
out by the experience of the majority of writers 011 insanity. All
writers are agreed, however, that men are more subject to paralysis than
women.

The predisposition to general paralysis varies with age. It is rarely
seen before twenty-five, is less rare from twenty-five to thirty, increases
in frequency up to sixty, and then diminishes. M. Bayle has never
.met with it in infants, nor between fifteen and twenty years of age.
M. Calmeil has only witnessed it twice before thirty-two. M. Rodrigues
says he has seen it occur in three cases before the age of fifteen. But
these instances can hardly be said to affect the general rule laid down
by Bayle and Calmeil. They can scarcely be termed exceptions, inas-
much as two of the patients were idiots, and the other was a child
three years of age, who had been subject to convulsions. These cases
cannot, therefore, be regarded as fair examples of the peculiar form of
paralysis under consideration; as this has distinct and remarkable
symptoms dependent on a state of brain which it is supposed cannot be
developed in idiots and very young children.

M. Bayle noticed that general paralysis of the insane commences
with ambitious monomania, and M. Rodrigues has ingeniously sug-
gested that this may arise from the circumstance of the disease generally
appearing at that time of life when the passion of ambition is strongest.
The disease attacks individuals of every kind of temperament. The
sanguineous and robust appear, however, to be most liable to the com-
plaint. Some of the cases which we lately witnessed have occurred in
particularly robust artisans. Profession has some influence in causing
the affection. Military men appear to be peculiarly liable to it. Many
of Napoleon's soldiers, during the retreat from Moscow, are said to have
been affected with this form of general paralysis, owing, no doubt, in a
great measure to their mental and bodily sufferings and their intem-
perance. M. Rodrigues thinks that the proud disposition of the soldier
subjects him to the malady. Next to military men, revenue officers
seem to be most predisposed to it. Calmeil says that four out of five
cases in his practice occurred in this class, and he considers their ex-
posure to cold and damp air at night as a cause of their liability to the
disease. M. Rodrigues states that miners are liable to trembling limbs,
the first stage of paralysis and premature old age. The peculiar organi-
zation which constitutes hereditary taint is no doubt a powerfully pre-
disposing cause. Venereal excesses, intemperance, excessive intellectual
labour, syphilitic disease, abuse of mercury, deranged catamenia, have
doubtless each an influence in deranging the nervous system, and thus
rendering it liable to paralytic disease.

It has been generally stated that this complaint is rare in southern
latitudes. Dr Vulques, physician to the Asylum at Aversa, in Naples,
informed Esquirol that amongst 500 insane patients of both sexes, he
had only two or three paralytic cases. M. Rodrigues, however, gives
some statistics which show that the disease is more prevalent at Lisbon
than in France. Dr Burrows thought that the disease was much more
prevalent in France than in England. But since the complaint has
been more generally known, it is to be recognised in all the English
institutions; and by the reports of the asylums in Scotland and Ireland,
which have been lately published, we perceive that the malady is not
uncommon in the northern parts of the British isles. These state-
ments render it very doubtful whether climate has much influence in
causing a predisposition to the complaint.

An apoplectic habit of body and hypertrophy of the heart must also
be enumerated amongst the predisposing causes. M. Bodrigues con-
siders that when the obstacle which produces enlargement of the heart
is situated at the opening of the aorta, the increased energy of the ven-
tricle is exerted to overcome the resistance, and not to communicate a
strong impulse to the carotid arteries. On the contrary, when the
aortic opening is free, the blood is thrown with increased force upon the
brain.

We are surprised to find that M. Rodrigues scarcely alludes to the
state of the blood as a probable cause of the disease : lie dismisses the
question by merely stating that little is known about the blood.
Modern researches have, however, proved that a morbid condition of
the blood is all-powerful in causing disease. The interesting cases
recently published in the "Lancet" by Dr Bence Jones, have shown
that preternatural quantities of the earthy and alkaline phosphates are
voided in the urine of patients suffering from cerebral diseases, and
Dr Hitcliman, in his Lectures on the Pathology of the Insane, published
in the same journal, has mentioned an interesting case of mania which
was apparently caused, almost instantaneously, by the introduction of
some poison into the circulating fluid. The deteriorated state of the
blood in Bright's disease of the kidneys, may easily be supposed to
have an influence in producing the particular state of the brain which
precedes general paralysis.

M. Broussais, whose fertile brain has detected a gastro-enterite in
nearly every disease, is himself quite convinced that an inflamed stomach
"will cause arachnitis and insanity. There cannot be a doubt that a pre-
disposition to disease of the brain may be kept up by its sympathy with
some other organ in the body, either functionally or organically deranged.
a a 2

Scrofula, again, a fertile source of insanity, must be mentioned amongst
the predisposing causes of paralysis.

The exciting causes of the disease are numerous. We may enume-
rate, strong impressions deranging the impulses and affections, such as
losses in business, disappointed ambition, anxiety, grief, &c., also in-
juries of the head. Many of the predisposing causes may be considered
as exciting when they are sufficiently powerful and long continued,
which is often the case.

The earliest symptoms of this malady claim our closest attention.
On this point we cannot too strongly insist. The disease being
fatal in nearly every instance, it becomes of the greatest consequence
to detect it at the onset, not only with the view of administering
our remedies at a period when we have the best chance of success, but
also that we may be enabled to give a correct prognosis at a time
when the friends of a patient, from his comparatively healthy appearance,
are led to indulge a delusive hope of recovery. As the majority of
medical men are not aware of the existence of this disease, and have had
little opportunity of recognising it, and as, moreover, they might be
induced to consider, with the friends of a patient, that the danger
was not imminent, from his joyous manner and the trifling symptoms
at the commencement of the disease, we purpose dwelling at some
length on the premonitory symptoms.

M. Rodrigues gives a minute detail of the first, almost imperceptible
and variable signs of the malady: he also gives us some peculiar views
of his own, which we shall presently discuss. He adopts Calmeil's
division of the symptoms into three periods; it is a convenient arrange-
ment, but it must by no means be considered absolute in nature. Our
attention will be more particularly directed to the first period.
Hesitation of speech and impeded motion of the tongue are the first
signs; the patient speaks with difficulty, and stops between each
syllable. Some words he cannot articulate; he passes over some lightly
and lingers on others. Some patients repeat the same words several
times, either at the beginning, middle, or end of the sentence. When
asked to show his tongue, he protrudes it straight forwards, and it
trembles as if between two antagonizing forces. The mouth is not
drawn to either side, but when he is about to eat or speak, there is a
slight trembling about the corners of the mouth as if the muscles were
hesitating; but this symptom is very transient. The muscles of the face
have free play, yet the medical man accustomed to see these cases
notices an incipient immobility in the features.

Good and bad symptoms may alternate for some time, and give rise
to hopes of recovery which the practised physician knows to be fal-
lacious. The first faint traces of immobility cannot be expressed by
language; it is only by the great study of nature it can even be reco-
gnised. No paralysis of the face is noticeable, yet, nevertheless, there
is an appearance of want of vitality in the features which gives a slightly
fatuitous and expressionless look. As the difficulty of pronunciation
increases, the immobility of the features becomes more characteristic;
the upper eyelid is raised with difficulty; the look is stupid; the cheeks
pendulous; and tlxe lips toucli, without the power of resting one on
the other.

The next organs paralysed are the arms, according to M. Rodrigues.
M. Calmeil, on the contrary, states that the legs are first affected, and
that he is surprised to see the power which remains in the upper extre-
mities, when the lower limbs are tottering under the weight of the body.
M. Lallemand is of opinion that the disease affects the upper limbs in
the first instance: he says, that the general incomplete paralysis of the
insane appears to begin in the lower limbs, because its progress is so
slow, and because the weakening of the lower limbs is more perceptible
on account of the strength necessary for the exercise of their functions.
He says he has met with patients, termed paraplegic, because they could
not walk or sit up; but who, when placed on their backs, were able to
raise their legs very high, and exercise them in various ways; but when
a glass full of liquid was placed in their hands they generally spilt a
portion of it in carrying it to their mouths. In the cases which we have
ourselves witnessed, it lias appeared that the arms and legs were simul-
taneously affected. We should, however, be inclined to agree theoreti-
cally with M. Rodrigues in attributing to general paralysis a " descend-
ing march," as he terms it. It is a well known fact that in cases of
hemiplegia, when the patients are recovering, it is the leg, in nine cases
out of ten, which recovers first and most rapidly; and it is also true that
when one extremity only is affected, in nineteen cases out of twenty, it
is the arm only that is paralysed. We may, therefore, naturally conclude
that this rule holds good in every form of cerebral paralysis. Mr. Her-
bert Mayo, who published his views of this peculiarity in hemiplegia in
the Medical Gazette several years since, attributes the phenomenon to
what he calls a palsy stroke, which affects the arms first, on account of
their proximity to the brain.

Leaving this question for the present, we will proceed with the de-
scription of the symptoms of general paralysis. It is soon discovered
that a patient labouring under this disease is unable to support a
weight in his hand, or raise his arms above his head. The legs are next
implicated; the patient walks a few steps, and knocks the earth as if to
support himself, and hesitates when he attempts to walk. Some can
walk firmly in a circle, but cannot walk in a straight line; many feel a
stiffness in their hams which gives them a peculiar gait; others, again,
assume an imposing attitude, and affect a grave and slow carriage, but
the muscles do not obey their will. Subsequently, the venous circula-
tion is carried on with difficulty in the inferior parts of the body; the
sub-cutaneous vessels become distended, and the skin looks unhealthy.
The premonitory symptoms of this melancholy disease are sometimes
intermittent; they disappear for several hours or days, to return with
fresh intensity. The loss of motive power is generally less percep-
tible in the morning and after meals; the walk is then firmer, and the
speech more articulate. The paralysis proceeds downwards on both
sides, but sometimes attacks one side before the other. The sphincters
are not at first affected, although they subsequently become involved in
the general paralysis. The muscles of the neck, back, and chest remain
free throughout this stage of the disease; still a slight difficulty in
breathing and some degree of constipation may be observed; the appe-
tite and digestion are generally good; the temperature of the skin is
scarcely increased; the pulse is very little affected; and, strange to say,
the patients generally get fat at this period of the complaint.
The second period need not detain us long. It is marked by an in-
crease of intensity in the symptoms, which are frequently aggravated by
attacks of congestion. There are sometimes moments of excitement,
when the mind is greatly disturbed, and the patient is quite delirious
and furious on being contradicted ; the face becomes red, the eyes pro-
minent, and the breathing hurried; this state often ushers in an attack
of epilepsy. After these paroxysms, the symptoms are discovered to be
greatly aggravated, although, during the excitement, the patient has had
a temporary increase of muscular power. As the disease progresses, the
deglutition becomes difficult, and the patient is apt to be suffocated by the
food lodging opposite the larynx. The paralysis extends successively to
the muscles of the jaw, neck, abdomen, alimentary canal, and the
sphincters; the retina becomes partly insensible to light, and the sensi-
bility of the auditory nerve is blunted.

It is a remarkable fact, that up to this point, the faculty of common
sensation remains intact. Dr Watson, in his valuable Lectures on Hemi-
plegia, has noticed a similar phenomenon: he says?" The function of
sensation (wherefore, I cannot tell) is less frequently abolished or per-
verted than voluntary motion." M. Rodrigues gives us an ingenious
solution of the problem : he says?" The remarkable fact that voluntary
motion, and the senses of sight, hearing, and taste, are blunted before
the sense of touch, is perhaps explicable by taking into consideration
the greater surface of the skin, the numerous and varied points of the
cerebro-spinal axis, towards which the nerves abut, and the greater sim-
plicity of this sense." He argues, moreover, that the precise seat of a
lesion of the cerebral pulp has more influence over the senses of
sight, hearing, smelling, and taste, than it has on the skin, because
of the limitation of the origin of the former senses. When the
paralysis is incomplete, it bears, he says, much more on motion than
on sensation; and that this inequality may be observed, whatever may
be the seat of the alteration?that it enters into a law, which holds for
all cerebral affections. Sensation and motion do not depend, in his
opinion, on distinctive organs, the loss of sensibility being merely in-
dicative of a more advanced state of the disease, and serving as a sign
of the extent of the lesion. He goes on to argue, that sensation is
merely a passive act of the brain, but that this organ has to re-act when
the more difficult and complicated voluntary motion is to be executed.
The material alteration in the brain must be great, indeed, he says,
" when so elementary a movement as sensation is abolished." This
theory is certainly ingenious and simple; but M. Rodrigues does not
seem to be aware, that although sensation and voluntary motion do not
depend on separate organs, it is rendered extremely probable, by the
researches of modern physiologists, that they do depend on distinct
parts of the nervous system. In the general paralysis of the insane, we
conceive it highly probable that the loss of motion is owing to a lesion
of those portions of the brain which are connected with volition; and
that at the onset of the disease, the parts of the nervous system asso-
ciated with emotional movement, the consciousness of impressions on
the senses, and the sensory and motive tract, are not implicated in the
affection. That emotional movement is not seriously disordered at first,
is shown by the fact, that the paralytic insane will occasionally have
paroxysms of emotional excitement, when he will run Avildly about, under
the influence of some moral feeling.

The reflex function of the spinal cord (which has been so beautifully
brought to light by the investigations of Dr M. Hall, and shown to be
a distinct centre, independent of the brain) remains entire throughout
nearly the whole progress of the disease. From the imperfect view
which M. Rodrigues takes of the nervous system, we are inclined to
think that Dr M. Hall's researches have not generally met with that
attention on the continent to which their merits so deservedly entitle
them.

M. Rodrigues' opinion, however, that the function of sensation is
simpler than that of motion, is probably correct. The functions of the
nerves of organic life may be even yet more simple; for Ave find that
they continue their operations up to the very last period of general
paralysis.

In the third period, the general paralysis has reached its height; the
patient is in a pitiable state, being far advanced in dementia. Hearing
and smell are gone; he may utter a few vague sounds, but speech is lost.
The mouth is opened instinctively when food is. offered, but deglutition
is almost gone, and it becomes necessary to put the aliment into the
pharynx. The head is drawn forwards, the lower jaw acts slowly, and
the tongue rests at the bottom of the mouth. The legs are now unable
to support the body, and the arms lie motionless by the side. Respira-
tion is short, and performed with difficulty, while sensation is nearly
gone. There may be constipation, but diarrhoea is most common. Ema-
ciation rapidly ensues, and death closes the melancholy scene. Slough-
ing bed-sores and gangrene of the lungs are common towards the
termination of the disease. M. Guislain attributes the tendency to
gangrene of the lungs to imperfect nutrition, on account of the patient's
repugnance to food; M. Foville, to the absorption of putrid matter from
the sloughing wounds; and M. Rodriques, to the weakened state of the
nervous system. No doubt each of these causes may have a share in
producing the phenomena.

It will be interesting to notice the character of the insanity associated
with general paralysis. Ambitious or exalted monomania is the form of
insanity most commonly associated with general paralysis; and in general,
it is some mental eccentricity which has first attracted the attention of
the patient's friends in these cases, his bodily infirmity having been quite
overlooked. The disease, according to M. Bayle, commences with more
or less excitement. The patients speak of their fortune and grandeur;
that they are able to make considerable purchases, and build palaces.
Everything is transformed into gold and silver; and the very pebbles
are precious gems, which they hoard with care. Some consider the
asylum as a magnificent palace; the persons around them are only there
352 THE GENERAL PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE.

to wait oil them; and tlie strangers who come to visit the institution
are regarded as petitioners for their powerful influence. Others con-
sider their detention as a shameful injustice, opposed to all laws, both
human and divine. They promise thousands to the physician for their
release, and they seek to corrupt the keepers by signing bills for enormous
sums of money. One fancies he is a king or an emperor, and exacts
homage; another imagines himself to be a Deity, requiring adoration.
In an asylum, containing patients suffering from general paralysis, we
find barons, peers, generals, physicians, astronomers, poets,?men who
know everything, even to the secrets of Providence, and whose power is
such as to give motion to the universe. Amongst the cases to which
M. Rodrigues refers, one believes himself an absolute prince, and promises
honours to his faithful servants, and threatens to exterminate the wicked;
another is anxious to distribute millions of guineas; while a third con-
siders himself the son of Jupiter, and visits his father in a balloon.
In the second period, the patients have the same ideas of grandeur,
but the insanity is more general. M. Bayle does not admit that the
ambitious characteristic is present at this period; but says the second
stage is merely distinguished by the greater intensity of the paralysis.
M. Rodrigues thinks differently; believing that even in the third period
ideas of riches still exist, though the expression is obscure, the patient
muttering such words as million, gold, riches, God, in reply to all ques-
tions addressed to him. Without doubt, paralysis, he says, may be
complicated with all the varieties of mental alienation, and that am-
bitious monomania may also exist without general paralysis.
Our author is of opinion that general paralysis may be developed
after and during mania or monomania, or with dementia. The greater
part of his cases appear to have been preceded by insanity. He thinks
that the paralysis may precede the insanity; but his evidence for coming
to this conclusion is not very fortunate : it is merely the assertion of
patients' relatives, who have affirmed that a tottering walk and imper-
fect speech have preceded the mental alienation. M. Rodrigues thinks
that ambitious monomania is not the form of insanity which invariably
accompanies general paralysis, although the most common, the insane
aspect varying very much in different individuals, and in the same per-
son at different times. The disease generally begins with mania or mo-
nomania, and ends in dementia. M. Rodrigues does not agree with
Broussais, that the insanity always terminates in dementia, and that
paralysis is merely a complication which shortens life. He says he has
seen patients live thirty years with general paralysis, remaining all the
time maniacal; and has observed others who have fallen into a state of
dementia without ever becoming paralytic.

The duration of general paralysis is not easily determined, as it
appears contingent on the progress of the cerebral disease. Calmeil
fixes the second period at an average of thirteen months. Bayle says
it varies from two months to six, eight, ten, or even twelve years; and
that its mean duration is from one year to a year and a half. Out of
one hundred and fifty-nine patients, he found that seventy-three did not
live longer than a year.

With regard to prognosis, nearly all writers consider the disease
incurable. Royer Collard lias never seen a perfect cure effected,
during a practice of twenty years in a large hospital. Esquirol does
not hesitate to say that it is incurable, even in the first period. M.
Rodrigues takes a more favourable view : he says it may be cured, but
that the cure takes place slowly. When a patient is about to recover,
the agitation is first noticed to become less, and the paralysis begins to
disappear in the legs, before the arms show any signs of amendment.
The paralysis of the tongue is more obstinate, some never recovering
perfect speech. Neither is the cure always definitive, as relapses are to
be feared; and when they do occur, the patient falls rapidly into the
first stage, and the periods succeed one another with more rapidity than
before.

In the second part of his work, M Kodrigues presents us with some
interesting cases of partial and perfect recovery, quoted from different
authors.

Of nine cases of recovery or amendment cited by M. Rodrigues, one
recovered partially as to the insanity, the paralysis remaining stationary;
three were perfectly cured; one recovered so perfectly, that at the end
of six months a slight impediment of speech alone remained; one re-
mained well for nine months, and then committed suicide; two recovered
perfectly as to the paralysis, and partially with regard to the insanity;
the other case occurred in an epileptic patient, who recovered perfectly
after two relapses, and remained so at the end of three years without
the recurrence of any epileptic fit. On the whole, we cannot consider
this list very encouraging.

Patients seldom die during the first period, except from attacks of
cerebral congestion. In the second period, death is apt to occur from
epileptiform attacks and asphyxia. In the third period, the patient
generally sinks from general weakness, cerebral congestion, disease of
the lungs, or asphyxia.

Complications with general paralysis often remain latent, because the
diseased brain is unable to re-act on the sensations which recur to it. In
these cases, the paralysis generally runs its usual chronic course; but
sometimes it suddenly becomes mature from effusion. Apoplexy is not
an uncommon complication. M. Rodrigues mentions an interesting
case, in which the patient recovered from two apoplectic attacks and a
partial paralysis whilst affected with general paralysis, but who died
from the effects of a third attack. This case presented the following in-
teresting physiological fact:?Whilst being bled for one of the apoplectic
attacks, the speech suddenly returned during the flow of blood, but on
closing the aperture in the vein, the power of articulating as suddenly
ceased; on re-opening the orifice, the speech again returned. This ex-
periment was tried several times with the same result. The instanta-
neous restoration of speech on opening the vein renders it probable that
sanguineous apoplexy depends rather on stagnation than congestion,
and tends somewhat to support the views of the Scotch physiologists in
opposition to those of Dr Burrows.

Our author not only considers that general paralysis will run its
course independently of bodily complications, but also of the associated
mental affections. He cites a case of M. Ferrus', in which the general
paralysis remained stationary, whilst tlie insanity became ameliorated.
This case, however, cannot be considered conclusive, as the insanity was
only subdued, not eradicated. When general paralysis is complicated
with paraplegia, he says there is commonly some disease of the spinal
cord, or its sheath; or else some effusion of serum, or blood, into the
vertebral canal. Phthisis is a common complication in this as in other
forms of insanity. The paralytic insane, it appears, are not exempt from
ague, cholera, or scurvy.

M. Rodrigues gives us a description of the pathological appearances
observed in twenty-one dissections. It is unfortunate for science, that
when post-mortem examinations are obtainable in subjects who have
died insane, the cases are generally of long standing. As usual, we find
that those of M. Rodrigues were all of a very chronic character, and
were likewise, in several instances, complicated with other diseases.
Eleven of the patients were far advanced in dementia, five had suffered
from epilepsy, two from apoplexy, two were associated with idiocy, and
one with extensive scrofulous disease. In examining cases like these,
it will often be extremely difficult to determine what relation a par-
ticular lesion may have to the malady in question. The pathology of
the brain, in connexion with insanity, is an intricately tangled web,
which has disheartened some of the most zealous and able inquirers.
Nevertheless, their exertions have not been altogether in vain, and we
hope that continued observations may ultimately light upon some
" glaring instance," to use a happy expression of Lord Bacon's, which
will clear up many of our doubts.

The chief difficulty in the pursuit of pathological truth is to ascertain
whether the appearances are causes or effects of the symptoms during
life; and should they be generally proved to be merely effects, we must
be content to reason from them inductively, trusting that patient observa-
tion will ultimately aid medicine as much as it has aided other sciences.
We shall now proceed to give, in the first place, a detail of the
morbid appearances found in the above cases, and afterwards to select,
for especial notice, those points which appear to be of practical im-
portance; and it is some encouragement to find that many of the
organic changes are tolerably uniform in their occurrence.

In one case, the scalp was gorged with blood. The cranial bones
were also injected. In two cases, the skull was thin, and presented
a milky-white appearance; and in one the bones Avere eburnated and
thickened. In three instances, the walls of the skull were irregular both
at the top and bottom; depressions were also met with on the internal
face of the skull. In a woman who had suffered from syphilis and the
abuse of mercury, the bones of the head were affected with caries and
exostoses. Obliteration of the pituitary fossse and anfractuosities of the
brain occurred in one case.

The dura mater was injected, thick, dense, opaque, and adherent in
three instances; sometimes it was cartilaginous and osseous, and occa-
sionally perforated, not uniformly, but as if from stretching of the
fibres; sometimes attached by its internal face to tumours more or less
voluminous, which compressed the contained organ. Yery commonly
the dura mater lay in folds in front, its cavity being too large for the
atrophied brain. The pia mater and arachnoid were injected in various
degrees. Distention of the vessels of the pia mater is one of the most
common features; the pia mater was sometimes pale and greyish.
The arachnoid was thickened and opaque in nearly every instance, but
not invariably throughout its whole extent; most commonly in that
part which covers the superior and anterior portions of the brain,
especially on either side of the superior longitudinal sinus, and on its
internal face. Granulations on the arachnoid membrane were found in
several instances; and in one case, the lining membrane of the ventricles
was so studded with these minute prominences as to feel like fine sand.
The granulations were most frequently met with in the ventricles, and
the inferior occipital fossa.

Serous infiltration of the cellular membrane of the pia mater, and of
the tissue which separates it from the arachnoid, was frequently found,
especially in the anfractuosities. In the greater number of cases, serum
was found in the cavity of the arachnoid membrane; this serum was
either transparent, greenish, or bloody, and of varying consistency. In
one instance, the pia mater appeared to be remarkably dry; the ven-
tricles were more or less full of serum, and frequently the distention was
so great as to destroy the middle wall. In a case of M. Bayle's, the
pressure of the liquid had occasioned a rupture of the arachnoid mem-
brane which lines the inferior wall; the serum had escaped into the
tissue of the pia mater which lines the middle lobes of the brain, and
had formed under each lobe a kind of irregular pouch, transparent and
soft, and lodged in the lateral and middle fossa of the base of the
cranium. On inclining the bodies, serum frequently flowed from the
vertebral canal.

Effusion of blood between the layers of the arachnoid rarely took
place in both hemispheres, but it was found that in flowing towards the
base of the brain it produced the same symptoms as if it occurred in
both. Calmeil gives a case of extensive effusion of blood of a violet
colour, covering the upper and lateral parts of this right hemisphere,
penetrating even to the base of the cranium, and bathing and compress-
ing the peduncles of the brain and optic thalami. In one case cited by
M. Eodrigues, there was an effusion between the dura mater and the
external layer of the arachnoid membrane, which had completely dis-
sected that membrane from the great falx to the tempero-parietal suture,
and from the coronal fossa to. the posterior edges of the parietal bones
on each side. There was sometimes found in the cavity of the arach-
noid membrane an albuminous effusion, which had some analogy to
trembling jelly, and which was easily removed; it may occur entirely at
the base of the brain, but it is occasionally met with between the arach-
noid membrane and pia mater.

False membranes are frequently found, resting generally on the con-
vexity of the hemispheres, and 011 the anterior part on one or both sides.
In M. Calmeil's cases these membranes were partly fibro-cartilaginous.
M. Rodrigues thinks that suppurative meningitis may sometimes produce
general paralysis. The pus, in these cases, he says, is situated between
the fold of the arachnoid and the pia mater, and presents a different
form from ordinary pus, haying a creamy-whitish appearance, and being
composed, according to Magendie, of irregularly-formed globules, less
than those of ordinary pus, but larger than those of blood, being, as it
were, in a state of transition between the two.

Hyperemia of the brain was met with in different stages; the cerebral
pulp was red, injected, and slightly tumefied, and when sliced, small
drops of blood oozed from the cut surface.

Softening of the brain assumes a variety of forms; it either pene-
trated to some depth, or extended over the whole cerebral surface; it
attacked some parts only, or it occupied the whole cerebral mass; some-
times there was a simple diminution of consistency; at other times, the
structure was completely diffluent. In one case, the face of each pos-
terior lobe, the cornua ammomis, the edge of the middle lobes, the
anterior part of the cerebellum, and the tuber annulare, were all in a
state of putrefaction. Softening may take place without change of
colour; in the grey substance it was found rosy, red, or a deep brown;
in the medullary portion of the brain it presented a pale hue, sometimes
greenish or yellow.

Hardening of the brain occurred as frequently as softening, and was
accompanied by either hyperemia or anaemia. In some cases, the cortical
substance and the ventricular walls were indurated; the other parts,
nevertheless, being in a normal state. In one case, softening of the
superficial parts of the brain occurred whilst the deep-seated portions
were hardened. In one case, cited from Calmeil's work, in which the
skull had sustained a fracture, with loss of substance of the parietal
bone, the part of the convolutions contiguous to the bony aperture was
firm and resisting, and covered a layer of hardened brain. In another
instance, the colour of the hardened brain varied from a light coffee
colour on the outside of the brain, to a reddish tint on the inside. The
cerebellum and pons varolii were indurated in one case.

Other lesions are to be met with in general paralysis; M. Leuret
notices two superficial erosions on the middle lobe of the right side.
M. Rodrigues says he has met with ulceration of the inferior face of the
cerebellum throughout the whole extent of the vermicular eminence; he
says he has also found tumours on the cerebral hemispheres, on the
corpus callosum, at the basis of the cranium, and throughout the whole
depth of the brain, causing prominences in the ventricles; and in one
case of general paralysis, he discovered a tumour compressing the spinal
cord, and reducing it to the thickness of a ribbon. He has also occa-
sionally seen fibre, cartilaginous and bony tumours, hydatids, tubercle,
cancer, and growths on the pia mater, in the bodies of those who have
been afflicted with general paralysis.

M. Rodrigues has detailed two interesting cases of oedema of the
brain, which he cites from M. Ferrus' collection of cases. One of these
patients was affected with general paralysis, combined with dementia
and epilepsy.

Having thus briefly enumerated all the signs which the morbid ana-
tomy of general paralysis reveals to us, we shall, in the next place, offer
a few observations on some of those points which appear to be of prac-
tical importance.

The condition of the skull first demands our attention. "Writers on
insanity have generally noticed either a defective form or want of sym-
metry in the heads of the insane. One English writer, however, of high
anthority, has stated it as his opinion, that the skulls are generally well
developed in those afflicted with this peculiar malady; this view of the
case does not accord with M. Rodrigues' observations, who has noticed
an irregular form of the cranium in several instances; and in all the
cases which we have lately seen, the skulls were strikingly ill-formed.
In some of the patients, there was a remarkable depression of one side
of the frontal bone, as if flattened by a mallet; in one man, the head
was singularly round, like that of a woman. M. Rodrigues informs us,
however, that Bichet, whose genius was so powerful, and who advanced
the opinion that a want of symmetry in the two sides of the head was
an obstacle to the development of intellect, had himself an irregularly-
shaped head; thus offering, in his own person, a singular contradiction
of his views.

Injection of the vessels of the pia mater, and thickening of the arach-
noid, combined with effusion, are found in the greater number of cases.
M. Magendie has advanced an opinion that the arachnoid does not re-
semble other serous membranes, inasmuch as the liquid, in cases of effu-
sion on the brain, is found between it and the pia mater, whereas, in
affections of the pleura and peritoneum, the serum is always found in
their cavities. M. Eodrigues is, however, perfectly convinced that, in
cases of chronic meningitis, he has generally found a variable quantity
of liquid in the arachnoid cavity as well as in the subserous space. The
frequent occurrence of serous effusion in cases of general paralysis led
Messrs. Bayle and Esquirol to ascribe the disease to meningitis. They
were hasty, however, in drawing this inference, as effusion of serum is
very commonly found in cases of insanity, uncomplicated with general
paralysis.

It has been remarked by authors, that hardening of the brain in
general paralysis is often accompanied by diminution of volume. As
the dura mater cannot, therefore, adapt itself to the brain in these in-
stances, and as the serum, though exhaled in great abundance, is not
sufficient to fill the vacuum, the dura mater naturally falls into folds, in
a transverse manner. M. Rodrigues suggests that this may be a cadaveric
effect, the serum having passed into the neighbouring tissues; he also
thinks that the atrophy and hardening of the brain in old age may be
owing to a deficiency of water in its substance; that the fluid of the
brain varies with age; and that it may even diminish to so great an ex-
tent as to leave the nervous pulp completely dry; and, moreover, that
it may, on the other hand, accumulate in such abundance as to consti-
tute what is commonly called oedema of the brain. M. Magendie, who
has devoted much attention to the subject of liquid effusion in the brain
and the vertebral canal, considers it as very probable that the ventri-
cular exhalations take place at the expense of the brain, which furnishes
the fluid for the purpose; and to this cause he attributes certain cases of
internal hydrocephalus, accompanied by a closing of the entrance of the
encephalic cavities.

With regard to oedema of the brain, M. Scipio Pinel considers it to be
merely an accidental production from cerebral irritation, and occurring
in individuals predisposed to anasarca. M. Rodrigues and Dr Etoc
Demary differ from Andral, who thinks that oedema of the brain pro-
duces no particular symptom; they, on the contrary, consider that it
must compress the cerebral tissue, and produce functional disturbance.
It occurs to us that numerous errors and conflicting opinions have
arisen in cases of effusion on the brain, in consequence of writers not
taking into consideration the question as to whether the fluid had been
suddenly or gradually effused. We all know that a very trifling extra-
vasation of blood into the corpus striatum will cause death when sud-
denly forced upon its structure. It is also generally well known that
the greater part of one hemisphere of the brain may be completely dis-
organized for some time before death, pi-ovided the changes have been
gradually brought about; and still more strikingly we have all observed,
no doubt, the extraordinary unfolding and extension of the fibres of
the brain in chronic hydrocephalus, Avithout derangement of the intellect
or any material impediment to the corporeal functions. An attentive
consideration of these well-known facts would, we think, clear up many
apparent discrepancies in cerebral pathology.

Messrs. Calmeil and Lelut believe that the atrophy, in protracted
cases of general paralysis, may have been occasioned by effusion of
serum; M. Rodrigues doubts the possibility of such an effect; but if we
keep before us the distinction alluded to above, we can easily conceive,
that after a long period (and these lesions invariably occurred in pro-
tracted cases) the brain might have gradually given way to the incessant,
the imperceptible encroachment of the liquid effusion.

The cause of altered consistency of the brain is a " vexata questio "
which next demands our attention. Induration and softening of the
brain, we perceive, are common occurrences in chronic cases of general
paralysis, and it is extremely difficult in these cases to determine the
nature of the vital changes which have induced the lesions. M. Ro-
drigues, in a hasty and dogmatical manner, asserts that all alterations
produced by inflammation begin with softening, and end with harden-
ing, but that it is not correct to infer that every kind of induration
indicates previous inflammation. He also states it as his opinion that
induration may be produced by an operation like that which presides
over the hypertrophy of organic tissues in general; and that, in conse-
quence, the external surface of the brain being softened and the mem-
branes inflamed, the tissues immediately adjacent must be subjected to
increased excitement, under the influence of which, the circulation
becomes accelerated, and the nutritious particles accumulated, and that
these particles, from the unyielding nature of the skull, must necessarily
be pressed on each other, and hypertrophy without increase of volume
be the result. This sweeping conclusion is opposed to the general laws
of the animal economy; for we find that the ordinary results of inflam-
mation, ulceration, suppuration, mortification, &c., are alterations dia-
metrically opposed to his statement, that hardening is the end of all
inflammatory disorganizations. We all know that induration may be
an occasional effect of inflammation, but not in the singular manner
which he supposes. Indeed, his opinion, that an inflammation on the
surface of the brain is capable of exciting that action in the substance
of the organ which leads to increased nutrition, is too fanciful to be
entertained.

Induration is no doubt tlie effect of various causes. The hardening
of some structures, as age advances, is a natural result which must not
be overlooked in pathological examinations. Sometimes a tissue is
hardened in consequence of an altered condition of the fluid exhaled
into its cells, showing that the disease may be occasioned by an altered
state of the blood. Induration is also, in many cases, preceded by an
inflammatory condition of the cellular membrane, as commonly seen in
affections of the lung. It does not, however, necessarily happen that
because an irritation has produced an induration, that it should con-
tinue; for we frequently find in an inflamed brain, portions of hardened
pulp, which look like inorganic matter, imbedded in the cerebral pulp.
Sometimes, according to Andral, a secondary irritation will ensue, and
restore the indurated part to its healthy condition. M. Lallemand has
supposed that partial induration of the brain may be a mode of recovery
from softening, and there are certainly some general pathological facts
which appear to support his view.

M. Rodrigues recognises three species of induration of the brain in
general paralysis?hypertrophic hardening, from irritating causes; in-
flammatory hardening, or that which is the result of inflammation; and
atrophic hardening, which has been occasioned by serum compressing
the brain. The first and last species, he believes, affects generally the
whole cerebral mass; the second partially only, but marked by a change
of colour.

Dr Delaye, who discovered hardening of the brain in the greater
number of his cases, attributes great importance to induration of the
cerebral mass, and considers it to be a frequent cause of paralyses in the
insane, and he gives, in his inaugural thesis, several facts which favour
this opinion. Foville also considers that hardening of the medullary
structure of the brain will cause general paralysis. M. Eodrigues thinks
that it may have some share in producing the paralysis, but very justly
observes, that its degree of importance is certainly problematical, inas-
much as it is never found alone, other lesions, sufficient to cause the
disease, being generally noticed at the same time.

Softening of the brain is, generally speaking, the effect of inflam-
mation; and occurs, as Ave have previously noticed, very commonly in
general paralysis. M. Rodrigues is naturally at a loss to know whether
the softening took place at the commencement of the paralytic symptoms,
or toAvards the termination of the disease. Although it appears im-
probable that a patient could live long Avitli extensive softening of the
brain, yet Lallemand and Abercrombie cite examples, Avliich render it
probable that patients may live a year, or more, Avliilst suffering from
this affection.

We are surprised to find M. Rodrigues, after the evidence Avhich he has
brought forAvard to the contrary, stating it as his decided opinion that
the paralysis of the insane differs from ordinary paralysis solely in the
circumstance of its progress being more sIoav. In justice to him Ave
Avill proceed to give a fair vieAV of his opinions on the nature of the
disease, and then state our OAvn reasons for not agreeing Avith him in
several of liis conclusions. He commences by saying that the symptoms
of the paralysis do not vary, whether arising from an effusion of serum,
or from a chronic alteration of the two hemispheres, or whether a
central portion of the brain, the cerebellum or the spinal cord, be
affected. The disease, in his opinion, commences with sanguineous con-
gestion, which is discoverable by symptoms differing in intensity, and
which may be occasioned by a blow or some other cause. This conges-
tion, he says, gives rise to chronic inflammation of the membranes and
cerebral disturbance, indicated by delirium and agitation; the inflamed
arachnoid, in the next place, pours forth serum upon the surface of the
brain, into the ventricles at the base of the brain, and into the vertebral
canal, producing general paralysis. If the progress of the complaint is
slow, it is because the serum is slowly secreted. He asserts that chronic
meningitis is the cause of insanity in the greater number of cases, and
that it is probable, therefore, that inflammation of the serous membrane
should give rise to a liquid effusion.

After giving this confident opinion, he singularly enough proceeds to
state that it frequently happens, on examining bodies, that the brain is
found infiltered and the ventricles distended by serum in individuals
who, throughout life, had never exhibited any signs of paralysis.
Autopsies, he says, frequently reveal that meningitis is connected with
inflammation of the surface of the brain; and in these cases the delirium
which occurs before death must be attributed to the meningitis; whilst
the early symptoms of the disease?viz., excitement and disturbance of
the intellect, the headach, the sensibility of the retina, the cutaneous
pains, and the contractions of the muscles, are all, he thinks, referable
to meningitis. When the brain is conjointly inflamed with its mem-
branes, he says the paralytic symptoms will vary, but he does not admit
coma as an effect of encephalitis. M. Rodrigues adduces the following
authorities in support of his opinion; the first he mentions is M. Bayle,
who has reported fifty cases of general paralysis, in the whole of which
he found the signs of chronic meningitis. The Memoirs of the Aca-
demie des Sciences for the years 1705 and 1706 contain some facts
mentioned by Littre and Geoffroi which tend to support the views of
M. Bayle. M. Rodrigues proceeds to cite M. Cliiarugi, a physician at
Florence, and M. Neumann, physician to the Hopital de la Charite de
Berlin, as authors who have published cases precisely similar to those of
M. Bayle's. Professor Rech, he says, has also published some observa-
tions on general paralysis, showing that opacity of the arachnoid and
effusion of serum were present in all his cases. M. Calmeil's cases and
those of M. Ferrus, published in the Gazette Medicale and the Lancette
Frangaise, are also brought forward by M. Rodrigues as corroborative of
this opinion. Notwithstanding the evidence which M. Rodrigues has
adduced, we consider that the cause of general paralysis is involved in
much obscurity, and that the short time which has elapsed since the
disease was first recognised has not been sufficient for investigations into
the nature of the disease. Enough, however, we think is known to
enable us to determine that it is a distinct and specific form of paralysis,
having a peculiar origin, progress, and termination. M. Rodrigues has
stated that it is not different from ordinary general paralysis; but a very
slight comparison of the two diseases will serve to show his mistake.
General paralysis in the insane comes on slowly and insidiously, and
commences with paralysis of the muscles of the tongue; ordinary general
paralysis, on the contrary, commences as an apoplectic seizure, paralysing
instantly all the movements of the body; or else as a spinal disease, in
which the muscles that derive their nerves from the brain and medulla
oblongata are seldom implicated except towards the termination of the
affection; whereas, in the paralysis of the insane, disordered action of
the muscles supplied by the lingual and facial nerves are amongst the
symptoms first observed.

With regard to the pathological features which he considers as corro-
borating his opinion that the disease originates in an inflammation of
the membranes, we would observe that they were noticed for the most
part in protracted and complicated cases, and similar appearances were
constantly observed in cases of insanity without paralysis; therefore
little reliance can be placed in them. With respect to the symptoms
(the delirium, &c.) which he has adduced as signs of meningitis, we all
know how little pathognomonic they are of inflammation of the mem-
branes, and that simple irritation of the brain is sufficient to cause them.
M. Lallemand has, moreover, mentioned facts which go far to prove
that an inflammatory state of the substance of the brain must tend to
compress its structure, and thus obliterate rather than excite its func-
tions. Mr. Solly, however, it must be stated, thinks, on the contrary,
that inflammation of the cineritious part of the brain stimulates it like
alcohol. This difference of opinion may arise from a proper distinction
not having been made between the effect produced by the velocity of the
current of blood as it passes through the brain, and that caused by
hyperemia; the former must excite, the latter depress its functions. It
must also be recollected that general paralysis may leave after death no
trace of appreciable alteration of the brain or its membranes; such cases
have been mentioned by competent observers. M. Lelut, in the first
number of the Annates Medico-Psycologiques, for January, 1843, has
noticed two cases of general paralysis, combined with dementia, in
which no alteration of the brain or its membranes could be discovered
after death. Sir B. Brodie has mentioned a very remarkable case of
paralysis that commenced in the muscles of the legs, and gradually ex-
tended to the other limbs, and which existed during a period of ten
years; after death, the most careful examination could not detect any
disease, either in the brain or spinal cord. We are, therefore, compelled
to confess that we are still on the threshold of our investigations with
regard to this singular disease, and that it is to future inquiries we must
look for more precise information respecting its nature.

It is probable, if we may hazard a conjecture, that the seat of the disease
will be ultimately found in those portions of the brain which preside
?ver the voluntary movements, and which may produce the paralysis by
being either sympathetically or directly affected. M. Kodrigues has
mentioned two cases which commenced with tremblings of the limbs,
somewhat resembling the muscular agitations perceived in delirium
NO. III. B B
tremens; but there is another disease which Ave think more closely re-
sembles the paralysis of the insane, and the study of which may ulti-
mately serve to throw some light on the subject; we allude to paralysis
agitans. Shaking palsy often commences imperceptibly and progresses
slowly; it may commence in the head or in the arms, which may remain
affected for years; after a while the paralysis extends to the legs, which
become weak and tremulous, and unable to obey the will; at a more ad-
vanced stage, the power of speaking and eating is lost; the urine and
faeces are passed involuntarily; coma at length ensues, and terminates in
death. Although the two diseases are distinct, there is, nevertheless, a
remarkable coincidence in many of the symptoms. It is also a singular
fact that induration of some parts of the nervous system has been dis-
covered occasionally in both diseases. The peculiar effect of lead and
arsenic on the movements of the muscles must not be overlooked in our
researches. The chemical composition of the brain, a fourth part of
which is composed of oleaginous matter, in a state of health, ought also
to be investigated, in order to ascertain whether it has undergone any
change. In consequence of the general opinion that this malady is in-
curable, the treatment has been too much neglected. M. Rodrigues
complains of the defective manner in which the treatment of diseases in
general is discussed by modern writers. This may be the case on the
Continent, where the expectant mode is adopted; we, however, do not
plead guilty to the charge in England.

In the first period of the disease, when the paralysis is slight, M. Ro-
drigues recommends the most heroic treatment; he says, that neither
advanced age, nor difference of sex, nor apparent weakness of the pulse,
contraindicate the use of the lancet. We must use it, moreover, not only
once but several times. Although some robust patients may bear frequent
venesections, we think it cannot be too frequently enforced that the brain,
in chronic, as well as in acute insane cases, is greatly injured by depleting
measures. M. Rodrigues has himself mentioned a case in the early part
of his work, in which a patient became paralytic, immediately after
convulsions, produced by bleeding. M. Pinel was so convinced of the
danger of general bleeding in chronic mania, that he was fearful of draw-
ing a drop of blood in patients labouring under insanity, lest they should
be hurried into dementia. No doubt M. Pinel carried his views too far,
and there is every reason to suppose that in the first period of general
paralysis, and in many forms of insanity, local bleeding is often of
essential service. When the first appearance of the disease has coin-
cided with the suppression of the catamenia, of hemorrhoidal or other
discharges, the restoration of these secretions is often attended with
marked benefit. Both Messrs. Esquirol and Rodrigues mention cases
in point.

When the general paralysis occurs in a debilitated state of the body,
induced by venereal or other excesses, M. Rodrigues recommends cold
baths, light tonics, and aromatics. But even in these cases we are sur-
prised to find he advises an occasional abstraction of blood from the
arm, although violent purges and strong stimulant excitants of the
nervous system, such as strychnine, he very properly condemns as in-
jurious. Everything tending to cause cerebral excitement, he says,
should be withheld; intellectual exertion proscribed; and communica-
tions of an unpleasant nature avoided. The douche, which has fre-
quently been boasted of as a powerful agent in those cases, he considers
hurtful, in consequence of the reaction which often occurs after its use.
He also considers ice, placed on the head, as equally objectionable.
There is a mode of applying cold to the head, recommended by Dr.
Arnott, to which he does not allude, but which, we think, deserves at-
tention in all cases requiring the continued application of cold. Dr.
Arnott ingeniously suggests that a bladder, with two pipes attached to
it, should be placed on the head; by means of these pipes an attendant
is to maintain, by pouring water into one pipe and allowing it to flow
out of the other, a constant stream of cold water, which will pass over
the head of the patient, and keep it incessantly cold, Avithout the possi-
bility of reaction, provided the attendant does not desert his post.
Digitalis, a remedy greatly extolled by Dr Locher, of Vienna, and
which he administered in large doses, was used with advantage in two
of M. Rodrigues' cases; and it was tried extensively at Hanwell, but
without any apparent benefit.

In a case cited to show the beneficial influence of digitalis in this
disease, there was a combination of epilepsy with the general paralysis,
a connexion which has been supposed never to occur. And Avhat is still
more strange is, that the occurrence of a severe epileptiform attack
temporarily rectified the disordered state of the mind. This fact would
appear most incomprehensible, had we not seen analogous phenomena
with regard to bodily disease. It is not uncommon for patients in
hospitals, who have been suffering from indolent ulcers, to be suddenly
attacked with erysipelas. In this case we have frequently observed, that
after the eruptive disease has passed away, the ulcers have put on a
healthy appearance, and quickly healed. It would seem, in these cases,
as if the disordered parts were righted by the general commotion of the
system.

M. Rodrigues speaks lightly of sedatives and antispasmodics, such as
opium and musk. He says no good has ever been derived from their
use. Emetics have been tried extensively by M. Royer Collard and M.
Bleynie, but were found rather to aggravate the disease. Tartar emetic
has been tried by M. Rech, in five patients; the first was maniacal, the
second was a case of dementia; the third and fifth were cases of dementia,
combined with incomplete general paralysis; and the fourth had am-
bitious monomania with general paralysis. Of these cases, the maniac
was the only one Avho Avas benefited by the remedy, Avhilst in the four other
cases the emetic appeared completely useless. When the disease has
reached the second period, M. Rodrigues believes general bleeding is not
indicated, and that revulsives must then form the principal part of the
treatment. If the digestive organs be exempt from inflammation, he
recommends laxatives and enemata. It will be necessary, moreover, to
Avatch ^ the digestive organs very attentively, for in consequence of the
alterations of the brain, gastro-enteritis, in great intensity, might re-
main undetected. Revulsives on the skin, setons, moxa, issues, &c., he
considers useful, and they Avere successfully tried by Messrs. Bayle and
Royer Collard. M. Esquirol, on the contrary, found the application of
b b 2
moxa unavailing when applied to the top of the head in cases of de-
mentia complicated with paralysis. He also applied the actual cautery
to the necks of patients who exhibited signs of paralysis, without any
beneficial result. M. Fabret, on the other hand, obtained great success
by the application of the cautery, in the case of an insane patient, at the
Saltpetriere; and M. Yoisin read a paper, at the Academie de Medecine,
in which he gives an account of the application of the cautery in ten
cases. In only one instance was it found useless, whilst in the nine
other cases an improvement, more or less appreciable, took place in the
mental disturbance, and in the disordered functions of sensation and
motion.

We are surprised to find that M. Rodrigues never alludes to mercury
as a remedial measure in this disease, although he considers it to depend
on inflammation. Mercury has, nevertheless, been given with advantage
for general paralysis in this country, as we shall hereafter show. M.
Rodrigues, no doubt, shares the prejudices of many of his countrymen
against this mineral. In one case that he details the disease ensued on
the suppression of a venereal rash; and although the indications of treat-
ment were clear, we are astonished to find that he never administered a
particle of mercury.

In the latter stages of the disease, M. Rodrigues recommends ex-
ternal counter-irritation, whilst internal revulsives must be omitted on
account of the diarrhoea, which then becomes very profuse. He men-
tions that M. Boudin, an old army physician, has much extolled the
power of nitrate of silver, either taken as a pill, or in the form of an
enema, as a remedy for muco-enteritis, and that M. Ferrus recommends
quinine and other tonics in the last stage of the disease. Should con-
vulsions, epileptiform attacks, or apoplexy supervene, M. Rodrigues
advises, even in the latter period of the disease, that antiphlogistic
measures should be employed, provided an effusion of serum is not sup-
posed to be present; for, should this be the case, he thinks the
symptoms would be aggravated by general blood-letting. We, however,
consider that general bleeding is to be deprecated in these complications.
Dr Conolly justly observes, that a flushed countenance and an excited
manner must not lead us to suppose that blood-letting is necessary; and
he mentions two instances in which full bleeding was practised, in con-
sequence of the supervention of violent epileptiform paroxysms, and
most serious effects were the result: the patients became reduced to an
extreme degree of mental and bodily debility, from which they never
rallied.

In the recent reports of the Commissioners in Lunacy, there are
numerous data from medical men connected with asylums in this
country, relative to the medical treatment of insanity. With regard to
the treatment of the malady under consideration, the information
afforded is, on the whole, very unsatisfactory and conflicting. The ma-
jority of the gentlemen who have sent in their evidence think that
little can be done beyond palliative treatment. From a review of these
statements, it would appear that general bleeding was had recourse to in
none of the cases, but that local bleeding, by cupping or leeching, and
counter-irritation, were frequently of service in the outset of the disease,
but that in subsequent stages of tlie complaint they were useless.
When the disease is advanced, a generous diet, attention to the secre-
tions and excretions, freedom from excitement, and cleanliness, will
often afford the patients a comfortable existence for many years. In
some cases, ammonia, porter, and tonics, combined with a generous diet,
appear to have the effect of prolonging life. Setons were used with
advantage, it seems, in the practice of only one medical man; air or
water beds are strongly recommended, in the advanced stages of the
disease, when the susceptibility to bed sores is great. The actual
cautery was applied to the nape of the neck in one instance without
benefit. Friction, warm baths, and alterative doses of mercury are
strongly recommended by several practitioners. In some cases, attended
with great irritation and distress in consequence of the elimination of
phosphatic salts in the urine, opium was found of great service. One
physician, on the contrary, found opium of no service in allaying the
excitement which often accompanies the disease, buo derived the greatest
benefit from hyoscyamus. Iodide of potassium, combined with vegetable
tonics and a warm temperature, proved beneficial in the practice of
another. Creosote and elaterium were also tried without any marked
result. Diuretics were of some service when oedema of the feet existed.
The temporary benefit obtained by medicine in this disease is often
so striking as to lead medical men to suppose that they have cured cases,
when speedy relapses too often show how fallacious have been their con-
clusions. M. Rodrigues justly observes, that the hygienic cure of the
paralytic insane is of the greatest importance, either as curative treat-
ment, or as means of rendering the patients more comfortable, when
all hopes of recovery are at an end. If the unfortunate patients are
able to walk, they will merely require to be watched; but on their
reaching the third period of the disease, they are generally suffering
from complete dementia, and then require much more care. They must
be fed, or they will die of hunger, and their cleanliness must be espe-
cially attended to; the nurses must remove them from their beds every
day, and place them in a warm, though airy spot, for several liours. The
bed sores, which occur towards the close of the disease, require the
closest attention. Many of the horrible wounds produced by the
pressure, and which are described in M. Rodrigues' cases, might, we
think, have been prevented by a timely use of the hydrostatic bed. He
recommends local applications to these sores, as lycopodium powder,
sprinkled on lint, soaked in citron-juice; a solution of creosote; tannate
of lead; camphor, charcoal, &c. These astringents and antiseptics are
no doubt calculated to induce a healthy action of these ulcers.
"W e shall conclude our notice of this work, by referring to a judicious
suggestion of the author with respect to the management of convales-
cents. He remarks, that generally speaking, the treatment of cases is
not sufficiently prolonged; that the physician should resist the entreaties
of the patient and his friends to dismiss him until he is completely con-
vinced that the brain may resume its functions without danger. He
must, at the same time, recommend the patient not to exercise too
severely an organ which, more than any other, requires the most careful
management, from the peculiar delicacy of its structure.

After having given M. Rodrigues' opinions such an attentive consi-
deration, we have neither time nor space to enter into his merits as an
author. The obscurity and exaggeration of his style we were frequently
compelled to deprecate; and occasionally Ave were startled by the
astounding dogmatism of his assertions; nevertheless, he has offered a
good digest of all that is known on the Continent on the subject of the
general paralysis of the insane. We cannot consider him as a very ori-
ginal writer; but he certainly deserves credit for the method and in-
dustry with which he has investigated the various and intricate pheno-
mena of an obscure and peculiar disease.
