============================================
Paralysis of the tongue induced by passion ?
============================================

:Author: Dr Pupke

He relates the following case in the " Medicinische Zeitung? MN, aged 59 years,
of delicate constitution and choleric temperament, while engaged in a
violent dispute with his partner, suddenly lost the power of speech, the
intellectual faculties, however, remaining unimpaired. He was from
this time unable to move the tongue freely, or to utter any articulate
sounds. Respiration, the heart's action, and the faecal and urinary evacuations were normal. His face was pale, and nothing particular was
expressed by the features. The tongue was clean, pulse regular, but somewhat sluggish and labouring. No symptoms of congestion of the brain
were observed. Dr Pupke being called in soon after the attack, immediately had recourse to electricity, by means of magnetico-electrical rotation, two metallic chains from which conducted the agent into the paralysed
organ. The electricity was employed three times a day, each operation
lasting from five to ten minutes. During the operation the patient was
requested to keep in his mouth a mixture of the decoctum radicis calami
and tinctura radicis pyretliri. In the course of five days the organ was
restored to its healthy state.

Remarkable post-mortem examination op an elderly idiotic
female.?Channel discovered descending between the pyramids of the
spinal cord from the fourth ventricle. By Dr Wallis. The patient
had been an inmate of an asylum for many years, and been gradually
declining up to the period of her death. The substance of the brain
was atrophied, and the membranes lying over it in folds, opaque in a
great part of their extent, and contained a large quantity of an aqueous
liquid. The structure of the cerebrum and cerebellum was normal, but
all the ventricles were extremely distended with serum. On separating
the medulla oblongata from the brain, it was found that towards the
centre of the two cut surfaces, Avhere the fibres of the medulla are
mutually crossing, a small opening was discovered leading to a channel,

which on being traced upwards, was found to communicate at the
calamus scriptorius with the fourth ventricle. This channel could also
be traced descending between the pyramids of the spinal cord, even so
far as this could be examined without opening the spinal canal, which
Dr Wallis was not permitted to do. The author states that he has on
three former occasions met with similar channels in cases of hydropsy
of the cavities of the brain, but this is the first instance, so far as he is
aware, in which such a condition was found to exist in an adult. Dr.
Wallis remarks that he subsequently became aware that Stilling and
Wallach had demonstrated the presence of a channel in the spinal cord
of children, which he had previously observed, which fully establishes
the existence of a channel in the spinal marrow, communicating with the
ventricles of the brain, which becomes, as in this case, visible in dropsy
of the brain and spinal cord.
Plea of insanity.?

---------------------Mania is one of the most frequent subjects of
forensic inquiry in which the physician is called on to decide; and, to
the disgrace of science, we find the most opposite opinions adduced by
practitioners of eminence. Much depends on the period during which
the physician sees the supposed lunatic, and more on a few necessary
distinctions, which, we fear, are sometimes designedly neglected. It is
possible for an interested relation to fix on a day when the patient is
calm and rational, an hour when he is usually collected, to introduce the
physician who pronounces him sane. Another, in different circumstances,
might pronounce him mad. It is necessary, therefore, to guard against
such deceptions, to visit him frequently, at different times, and at the
most unexpected hours. If this is refused, a collusion will be evident.
We remember seeing a man who was confined for a crime, and defended
on the plea of idiotic insanity. We visited him frequently, while unsuspecting any such examination, and found the plea strictly true; yet
when called into court for the purpose of acquittal,?when cleaned and
dressed, aroused also, perhaps, by the novel appearance of the scene,?
his look assumed a meaning, and he was almost rational.

In the general relations of life, a man may be thoughtless, ridiculous,
and extravagant, yet these errors will not be sufficient to fix the charge
of insanity; which consists, either in false perceptions, or erroneous
reasoning, on subjects distinguished in their true colours. Many individuals of this kind require guardians for their property, as much as
persons really insane, but the law entrusts no practitioner with such
discretionary power. The difficulty arises when this wild, absurd conduct is attended with such inconsistencies as lead to the suspicion that
the perceptions or the reason are affected. This situation is a question
of prudence, rather than of jurisprudence or medicine. The reflecting
physician will not fix unnecessarily the stigma of insanity on a whole
race, nor will he expose a family to ruin by a too great delicacy. In
this difficulty, he will rather take the opportunity of a calmer moment
to induce the patient to adopt such plans as may prevent the ruin of
the family, and may properly make use of the alternative as an argument in case of refusal. But this, as Ave have said, is not a medical
question.


There is another doubtful state, in which the physician is often called
on to decide,?viz., when, from disease, from general weakness, or any
constitutional cause, the mind is so much enfeebled as to render it
uncertain whether the patient can judge of the proper disposition of his
affairs. This, too, is a question of discretion; for the afflicted person
may be taught to answer common questions readily, or may be awed by
some interested attendant. In this case, if the physician, when alone
with his patient, talks to him of his affairs, suggests?for the sake of a
reply only?some objections to his arrangements, he will soon find
whether the testator has judged properly, or only repeats a lesson. The
circumstances themselves often suggest doubts; and when an infirm old
man disinherits obedient or near relations for the sake of those connected
with him only by accident, the presumption is, that his mind is not
sound.

We have said, in the article, "Mania," that by a fiction of the law,
every mania, we have been informed, is supposed to be relieved by occasional lucid intervals, and that, if the act of a madman is reasonable and
proper, it is a proof that the interval was a lucid one. Thus, in the
case which has just been considered, whatever be the state of the patient's
mind, if his will be judicious and proper, there is no reason why the
physician should not pronounce him in a sound state. Yet, in criminal
cases, the law is not equally indulgent, nor has it always, perhaps, been
equally humane. Lucid intervals, in cases of murder, are not allowed,
and a man who has been proved to be mad on the Monday and Wednesday, is not allowed to be sane on the intervening day; yet decisions
have occurred of a different kind, and an art in planning, a coolness in
executing, a deliberation in the conduct, have been supposed to constitute soundness of mind. On these grounds, Lord Ferrers and Mr. Oliver
were executed. Yet, if the motive is at any time connected with the
hallucinations, the subsequent action should certainly be considered as a
part. In later trials, the opinions have leant more on the side of
humanity.

The question of confirmed insanity must be decided by a comparison
of the patient's state with the pathognomonic symptoms. Yet there are
many sources of doubt, and often room for hesitation. In many instances the mind wanders,?at first, on one subject only; and when the
madman has any point to gain, he will, with great success, counterfeit a
calm, reasonable state. Each point must be carefully guarded; yet the
experienced physician will not be easily baffled. A wildness of the eye,
?a tension of the skin of the temples,?a dry, furred tongue,?often a
hurried pulse, will explain the real state. The madman is also a coward,
and we have drawn from this a good pathognomonic symptom. If
threatened with some vehemence with any punishment, however wild
and impracticable, he will shrink and tremble, forgetting all his art, or
returning to his original deviation of mind.

Returning sanity is another point of doubtful distinction, nor do we
see that it is possible to lay down any rules, except the absence of the
pathognomonics of the disease. Yet we have often witnessed the return
of persons from the appropriate receptacles, with a wildness of the eyes,
a quickness of utterance, rapid, unsteady motions, which showed cor

poreal disease, tliough the mind was calm. Such persons should not be
pronounced secure, and though confinement may not be necessary, the
most pointed caution should be continued.

Dissembled insanity might more properly belong to another head,
morbi simulati, but we may more easily speak of it in this place. An
experienced practitioner will soon detect the absurdities which assume
the form of insanity; for though incoherencies, wildness, and obscenity
may be imitated, the hurried look, the rapid pulse, the dry tongue, and
the sleepless nights cannot be assumed. Above all, the cowardice, the
apprehension of punishment, the influence of threats, are seldom to be
discovered. A French author details the symptoms of madness, for the
purpose of this distinction, so elegantly, as to induce us to copy the
picture:?"Thus to neglect what most deserves attention, and to value
what is least deserving of it; to rejoice or weep without an adequate
reason; to despise what is terrible, and to fear what is ridiculous; to
admire trifles, and to reject what is excellent; to love the objects of hate,
and to hate those of love; to hope without an object, and to despair
while in security; to be pleased with things which excite no agreeable
sensations in others, and to fly from what every one would anxiously
seek; to be timid with those who demand no deference, and bold to those
whom they ought to respect; such are the infallible marks of a wandering
mind. Art., "Medicince Forensis et Politico," Parrs Lond. Med. Diet.
Biographical Notice of Fodere.?(From Dacros's "Notice Historique sur la Yie et les Travaux du Dr Fodere.")?Francois Emanuel

Fodere was born January 8, 17 64, at St. Jean de Maurienne, in Savoy,
of humble parents. His father died at the time he was born; but his
mother carefully brought him up, so as to cultivate the talents he displayed at an early age, until the intendant of St. Maurienne, Ritter Von
Poniel Real, took him under his protection. During his medical studies,
which he prosecuted at Turin, he directed his attention to cretinism, and
the result of his labours held for a long time the first place in this branch
of pathology. He graduated in 1787; and was afterwards supplied with
money by Victor Amadeus III. to enable him to finish his education in
the hospitals of Paris and London. On his return, he was appointed
forensic physician to the Duchy of Costa. The Avar with the French
republic breaking out, and Savoy being united to it, led to the attachment of Fodere to the army of Italy. This did not, however, interrupt his
scientific researches, inasmuch as he published an account of the diseases
of the troops in the territory of Mantua. The campaign being ended, he
accompanied the division of the army to which he was attached to Marseilles, and there married the daughter of Dr Moulart, a distinguished
practitioner. This happened in February, 1793; and about the same time,
two of his wife's cousins were married also?the one to Joseph Bonaparte,
the other to General Bernadotte. This high connexion was never of
any benefit to him. After marriage, Fodere was attached to the army
of the Alps; and on his return, was appointed physician to the hospital
and lunatic asylum at Marseilles, where he commenced a course of lectures
on anatomy and physiology. In 1796, he published his celebrated
work on forensic medicine and public hygiene. Fodere was next professor of natural philosophy and chemistry at the central school of Nizza.

In 1803, his statistics of the Alps appeared; and in the following year,
he was physician to the Hotel Dieu and asylum at Marseilles. In 1814,
he was consulting physician to the captive royal family of Spain.
Although past middle age, he contested in the concours for the chair
of forensic medicine at Strasburg, and gained it over a learned and able
competitor. From that time to his death, in February 4, 1835, his
application to science and scientific pursuits was unwearied and constant.
Amongst his unpublished works are, " Traite des Maladies Nerveuses,"
2 vols.; "Philosophic Sociale, ou du Principe de Vie de l'Homme en
Societe," 4 vols.?Zeitschrift fur A llgemeine Psychiatrie, vol. iv. part 3.
The Jubilee of Jacobi's Doctorate.?Our German friends have a
pleasant custom of celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of some epoch in
the life of their acquaintance by a festival or jubilee. This custom is
more particularly adopted with reference to the fiftieth anniversary of
the doctorate. We subjoin an account of Jacobi's jubilee, and cannot
omit the opportunity of expressing our conviction, that the public services
of some of our more distinguished professional men might be acknowledged in the same generous manner, with great public advantage. The
honour thus paid to venerable worth and genius, Avould stimulate the
young and enterprising to a career of usefulness, and encourage the man
of middle-age to active effort, instead of leaving him to struggle on,
despairing of reward on this side of the grave, and scarcely hoping that an
acknowledgment of his labours will be accorded, when praise and blame
fall alike on the dull cold ear of death.?On the 21st of March last,
(1846,) the day was celebrated as a festival at Siegburg, on the Rhine,
as that on which, fifty years ago, the senior physician and director of the
institution, Ober Medicinal-rath, Maximilian Jacobi, donned the doctor's
bonnet at the then existing University of Erfurt. Although the immediate friends and admirers of the veteran of psychiatry received only a
short notice that so favourable an opportunity was to be afforded of
testifying their high estimation of him, a great number of friends and
comrades were invited from a distance to take part in the festival. And
so it happened that it was not local only, but had a general importance.
Not only did the Siegburg institution present its congratulations on this
day to its first promoter and hoary-headed director?not only did the
attendants, patients, friends, and patrons of the hospital bring to the
true-hearted physician, and in his field of duty the faithful officer, the
assurance of their esteem and attachment; but also the German?nay,
the European psychiatry shared in the festival. A multitude of voices,
sounding near and from afar, paid to their industrious and meritorious
fellow-labourer in the field of psychal medicine the tribute of grateful
acknowledgment and honour. Amongst those present at this festival in
the interests of science, we may mention the Gehein-rath Wutzer, who,
as Dean of the Faculty of Medicine at Bonn, presented the renewed
diploma of a doctor of medicine and chirurgery; Professor Argelander, Dean of the Philosophical Faculty at Bonn, who brought the
honorary diploma of a doctor of philosophy; the Lower Rhenish
Society of Natural and Medical Science at Bonn; the Psycho-Medical
Society of Erlangen, which sent a congratulatory letter; the Medical
Society of Hamburg, which forwarded the diploma of honorary associate;
and the Medical Faculty of Jena, which presented the diploma of doctor.
Further, we may add, Sir Alexander Morison named the appointment of
the subject of the festival as a corresponding member of the Society for
Improving the Condition of the Insane. A recognition on the part of
the government, by the conferring of the Order of a Knight of the Red
Eagle of the third class, added to the pleasure of the jubilee.?We
find the following particulars respecting the festival in the Rhenish
newspapers:?On the evening preceding, Jacobi was surprised by the
performance of a serenade, and prepared for the day of honour, of which
he himself had no thought. With the early dawn, the procession of
officers of the institution was in motion to the house of the jubilist,
(jubilars,) to congratulate him; and in it were also the former physicians,
and the chaplains and stewards, followed by the subalterns, and a crowd
of patients from the hospital. After the ecclesiastics of the two confessions had greeted him, there followed a festive deputation of the civil
and military authorities of the city and province, of the Royal Medical College, the general commanding the 8th corps d'arm6e, the governments of Coblentz, Treves, Aix-la-Chapelle, and Diisseldorf?Herr V. Laumer,
the chief president of the royal government of Cologne, being at their
head. Later in the day, the guests sat down to a dinner in one of the
saloons of the city of Siegburg, which was enlivened by numerous toasts
and festive songs. We must particularly notice the observations made by
Dr M , formerly an assistant physician at the institution, who proposed to establish a fund, to be called the " Jacobi foundation," out of
which a present should be made yearly to the deserving male and female
attendants of the establishment, proportionate to their services. The
proposition was so much approved, that the sum of ninety-five tlialers
was subscribed at once, which will doubtless be increased by the contributions of the friends of the establishment residing in the provinces, and
by the profits of a work to be published, entitled, "The Jacobi Festival
at Siegburg." The festival was concluded by a musical and theatrical
performance at the expense of the patients, and by an illumination got
up by the patrons. "It was a splendid festival," so concludes the
account of it in the "Rhenish Observerand we repeat the words, because
they express the sentiments of all those resident near the place of
Jacobi's labours; we repeat them, because they clearly express our own
feelings. " It was a fete of acknowledgment for long, unpretending,
unwearied, and enlightened activity; an activity, the deep importance of
which will only be made fully manifest after a lengthened period, and
truly in the hearts of those only who can understand such benevolence
of feeling, because they have it themselves. May men never be wanting
to the Rhenish province, to Germany, to the whole human race, who,
gentle and generous,' devote their lives to the service of suffering
humanity. Their day of honour will not fail, even although they may
not strive for it."? Zeitsclirift fur Psycliiatrie, vol. iv. part 2.
