Shaw and Sons
==============

Art. III.-
?Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy to the Lord
Chancellor.
1847.

There arc few subjects that can engage the attention of the friend of
humanity of more importance, and at the same time of more painful
interest, than the condition of the insane. The feelings of every one
who is in the enjoyment of that greatest of earth's blessings, the " mens
sana in corpore sano," are enlisted on behalf of the poor soul who,
deprived of nature's light and guide, is degraded below his species, and
reduced to the level of the beast which perishes. Man's boasted prero-
gative denied, the hapless lunatic wanders frail and helpless oil the shores
of life, and depends for veiy existence on the sympathy of those more
fortunate. His fellow-creatures are to him beings of a superior order,
and have the power to treat him as they will. He is as an infant in
their hands. But too often has this power been abused; and instead of
being ministering angels to the outcast, to win him back to light and
reason by kindness and protection, the imbecile has been pursued and
harassed by tormenting demons, and driven further into the abyss of
gloom. Surely there is a great responsibility attached to those who have
the care of the forlorn. This we are pleased to see is now felt. The
improvements that have successively taken place and the efforts still
making to befriend this class of the wretched, are the surest signs of
an enlightened age. Those names will stand prominently and most
honorably forward in the history of civilization, which have been united
with this noble cause. Philanthropy never was more needed or employed
to better purpose.

Mainly to the exertions of a few individuals, in the face of great
obstacles, has the condition of the insane been forced upon the legisla-
ture. To their zeal and persevering efforts do Ave owe, undoubtedly, the
present provisions in their favour. Honour be to them ! The general
apathy on this subject would be unaccountable, were it not considered
that the question is not even now properly understood by the public.
If the advocates of the insane have, after all, failed to create any perma-
nent interest in the subject, we must suppose that it has never been
regarded in the light of a great national evil, spreading through numerous
families, and calling for every remedy that medical science can suggest
or law can enforce. Its extent and importance have been greatly under-
rated. The whole subject is most distasteful to the public, and a cold
shudder runs through the frame at the bare thought of the wretched
lunatic. It has never been sufficiently taken up as a matter of general
interest; and has been rarely alluded to in the daily prints, except when
the income of a patient, his fitness for liberation, or the cause of his
death, have been made the subject of special inquiry, in the shape of a
legal or equitable question.

The present report of the commissioners furnishes us with ample
materials on some points, but is necessarily defective in others. This is
chiefly attributable to the limited and partial nature of their jurisdiction:
some large institutions for the insane not being subjected to their visi-
tations, and the precise definition of the term, " person of unsound
mind," not being by any means generally agreed upon.

Lunatics, in England and Wales, are dispersed about in various places.
Some dwell in private houses under the special care of a medical or other
attendant; others in houses especially licensed for their reception; while
the great mass reside in hospitals and workhouses, or county asylums
solely devoted to their accommodation. In forming an estimate of the
numbers of persons of unsound mind no very accurate data exist, as the
returns do not include a very numerous class of imbecile persons, whose
infirmity has been coexistent with life, or is the result of the decay of
natural powers. These persons should properly be included in our
estimate, as they are frequently on the verge of idiotcy, and being in-
capable of managing their affairs in an efficient manner, require the same
protection, if not the same restraint, as ordinary lunatics. Exclusive of
these, tliere appear to be more than 23,000 persons of unsound mind
scattered over the country; and of these, nearly 5,000 belong to the
higher and middle classes of society, and about 18,000 are paupers.
The estimate formed by the commissioners, for the 1st of January of
the present year, is to this effect :?

Persons.

1. In the County Asylums, Hospitals, and Licensed Houses, 3,574 private
patients, and 9,052 paupers ; together ...... 13,220
2. In I3ethlein, and in the Naval and Military Hospitals .... GOO
To these must be added,
3. Paupers in Poor-law Unions and places under local acts . . . 8,980
4. Paupers in Gilbert's Unions, and other places not in union . . . 170
5. Also 307 of 542 single patients, found lunatic by inquisition, (235
being in Licensed Houses) 307
0. Other single Patients in Private Houses, under the charge of persons
receiving profit 130
7. The excess of Pauper Patients in Workhouses, &c., estimated by the
Visiting Commissioners as, at least, one-third over the number
returned by Parish Officers ........ 3,053
8. Criminals in Gaols   32
20,510
When we add to this number the many thousands of persons of
various conditions of life, engaged in the care and protection of the
insane,?some as committees and visitors, others as proprietors of licensed
houses, and the rest as judicial officers, superintendents, matrons, clerks,
stewards, male and female attendants, and domestic servants,?we find
that there are, at least, 30,000 persons interested in the question of
insanity.

The expense of the maintenance of these lunatic patients is estimated
at near a million of money, according to the following table :?
1. The cost of 9052 Paupers in Asylums, estimated at an average
of eight shillings per week each . .... .?200,701 12 0
2. Ditto of 8980 Paupers in Union Workhouses, &c., and 173 in
Parishes not in union, (together, 9159,) estimated at an
average of three shillings per week each .... 71,440 4 0
3. Ditto of excess of 3053 Paupers on the number returned by
Parish Officers  23,813 8 0
4. Ditto of 3574 Private Patients in Asylums, &c., at an average
of twenty shillings per week each, (deducting the cost of
235, part of the 542 found lunatic by inquisition) . . 173,028 0 0
5. Income of 542 Private Patients found lunatic by inquisition . 280,000 0 0
0. Cost of 000 Patients in Bethlem, and the Naval and Military
Hospitals, estimated at ten shillings per week each . . 15,750 0 0
7. Cost of 120 other single Private Patients, taken charge of in
separate houses, at ?100 per annum each .... 12,000 0 0
8. Thirty-two Criminals in Gaols, estimated at three shillings per
week each ......... 249 12 0
?777,048 10 0

To this amount is added the expense of maintaining many families
cast upon the parish by the parents' insanity, the expense of supporting
many persons termed "imbecile," and the interest of the large sums
invested in the public lunatic establishments, (some of which are paying
interest on borrowed money,) which together will raise the above ex-
penditure of 777,648?. 16s. to little less than 1,000,000?. annually.
Thus the extent and importance of the subject should not be under-
rated, as the question affects, in one way or other, some 30,000 persons,
and a yearly administration of a million of money, independently of its
bearing upon the general liberty and welfare of the subject.

Beckoning 12,397 for Ireland, and 3413 for the pauper lunatics of
Scotland; add to these the private patients in each country, with the
various medical officers, attendants, etc., we find that the total number
of individuals, who in Great Britain are, directly or indirectly, involved
in the subject of lunacy, is little short of fifty thousand persons.
Except among a few benevolent individuals, the condition of the
insane has created apparently no interest or inquiry. It seems clear in
fact, that for a long series of years a large proportion of the lunatic poor
more especially, must have altogether escaped the observation both of
the government and the public. Their numbers were not known with
any degree of correctness, even in their own counties or parishes. It is
only of late years that any but the most scanty means have existed for
enabling persons to judge of their general condition.

A parliamentary committee in 1807 first investigated the state of
pauper lunatics. Other select committees investigated the condition of
madhouses in 1815 and 1816; upon which latter occasions evidence was
taken at great length as to the condition of Bethlem, St. Luke's, Guy's, and
the York hospitals, and of some private lunatic establishments receiving
paupers. And in 1827, another select parliamentary committee inquired
into the state of the "madhouses in the county of Middlesex." Yet so
late as the year 1827, the pauper lunatics of England, except such as
were in county asylums, Avere left without any effective enactment in
their favour.

We can infer the condition of the insane poor when left to the care
of their parish officers, or who otherwise were without any care or pro-
tection whatever except such as might be afforded by their own families,
by the dreadful condition of those patients who were confined in hos-
pitals or licensed houses, which had the benefit of some supervision,
and which became the subject of parliamentary inquiry and public com-
ment.

So little indeed was the question understood, even by the legislature,
that the first act which notices pauper lunatics (17 Geo. II. c. 5) enables
any two justices to cause them to be apprehended, and to be locked up
in some secure place, " and there chained;'''' and if the pauper's settle-
ment should prove to be in another parish, then he was to be forwarded
thither, and then "locked up and chained," by the justices of that district.
In fact, until the year 1828, no one was appointed to visit any of them,
except such as were in county asylums, or to see that any care was
bestowed upon them, or that they were not oppressed (as, in fact, they
often were) by the cruelty of the attendants,?to whose almost unre-
strained authority they appear to have been subject. Some of them,
indeed, passed under the review of certain members of the College of
Physicians, Avho visited the metropolitan licensed houses, a few of Avhich
included some pauper lunatics; but these visitors had, in truth, no poAver
to remedy any abuse tliat tliey might discover in the establishments
which they were directed to inspect.

It appears, by the evidence taken before the select committees, that
the act of parliament "for regulating madhouses," which in terms di-
rected visitations to be made to lunatics, was utterly useless as regarded
private patients; and that its provisions such as they were did not even
apply to the lunatic poor, who were sent to asylums without any medical
certificate, and indeed without any authority, except that of their parish
officers. Any person, whatever his character might be, was entitled to
have a licence to receive lunatics. The act (14 Geo. III. c. 49) directed
certain commissioners to meet for the purpose of granting licences;
which licences, in the words of the section, " they are hereby required to
grant to all persons who shall desire the same." The commissioners,
therefore, naturally complained that they had no power to effect any
good whatever by their visitations. They had no power to refuse a
licence, nor to control the person possessing one in any respect; nor,
unless he refused them admission into his establishment, to inflict any
punishment upon him. It was enacted indeed, that if the commissioners
should discover anything deserving of censure, they should report the
same to the College of Physicians (who itself had no power to punish
the offenders), and that such part of their report should be hung up in
the College, to be "perused by whosoever should apply for that purpose."
This was the only power which the legislature gave them to correct
abuses in madhouses. The commissioners knew nothing of removals,
nothing of deaths; they had no power as respected the patients, either
to liberate them when recovered, to remove restraint, to regulate the
supply of food, to compel proper medical attendance, or in fact to
enforce compliance with any suggestion which they might make, how-
ever important it might be for the comfort or even safety of the lunatic.
To remedy some of these defects,?to place some security round the
pauper, as well as around the private patient,?and to provide frequent
and efficient visitation to all,?a bill was framed and brought into the
House of Commons, by Mr. Robert Gordon, and passed (with some
amendments) on the 15tli July, 1828, as the act 9 Geo. IV., c. 41.
Important powers were given by this act. Amongst many other valuable
provisions, it empowered certain commissioners within the metropolitan
district and the justices in sessions throughout the provinces, to license
all houses receiving two or more lunatics, "if they should think fit;"
thus indirectly authorizing them, for the first time, to refuse a licence.
It directed the commissioners, and certain justices (in their respective
jurisdictions), to visit every house four times a year; and it made the
concealment of a patient a misdemeanour. It enacted, that no private
patient should be received without two medical certificates and no
pauper patient without one. That notices of every admission, removal,
and death, should be sent to the clerks of the commissioners and visiting
justices; by which means an account is now necessarily rendered of
every patient. That there should be a medical practitioner resident in
large asylums; and that every smaller one should be visited twice a week
by a medical attendant, who should report thereon and on the health
of the patients. And, finally, it empowered the commissioners and
justices to liberate patients who, in their opinion, were detained in any
house without sufficient cause.

Previously to this act, the commissioners had no means of ascertaining
the number of pauper lunatics, and had no authority to require any
account of them. " We ask the keeper how many patients there are. I
enter the names as he gives them to me; and if we come within a few
of the number, we think ourselves very well off" (Dr Powell's evidence,
Minutes, 1815.) This act was subsequently amended in some respects,
and was eventually remodelled, and reproduced as the Act 2 & 3
Will. IV., c. 107; which gave more extensive powers, and assigned addi-
tional duties to the commission.

Since the report made by the Metropolitan Commissioners in Lunacy
to the Lord Chancellor in the year 1844, two Acts of Parliament have
passed and are now in force: the one for regulating the care and treat-
ment of lunatics generally; and the other for the provision and regulation
of lunatic asylums for counties and boroughs, and the maintenance and
care of pauper lunatics therein. It is under these two acts that the pre-
sent powers of the commissioners are exercised, and their various duties
are imposed. A brief summary of these duties may be thus stated :?
By the first act (8 & 9 Vict., c. 100), the commissioners are authorized
to hold boards or meetings, for licensing houses receiving lunatics and
for other purposes connected with the commission, whensoever necessary.
To visit all the county and borough asylums, gaols (containing lunatics),
hospitals, and licensed houses in England and Wales; to inspect every
part thereof,?to see every patient therein,?and to make certain inquiries
relative thereto; the visitations to be made to the asylums, gaols, and
hospitals once a year,?to the licensed houses in the provinces, twice
a year,?and to the licensed houses within the metropolitan district, four
times in each year. To examine and make entries in the several books
kept at every hospital and licensed house throughout the kingdom;
showing the result of their inquiries, the condition of the establishment,
and the treatment of the patients therein at the time of each visitation;
and also to make reports to the board as^ occasion may require. To
visit all the parish and union workhouses^ in England and Wales, and
the patients therein; to make certain inquiries there, and to report to the
Poor-law Commissioners. Lastly, to inquire into the property of lunatics
and to report thereon to the Lord Chancellor, and to examine into the
cases of single patients.

The principal duties imposed upon the commissioners under the second
act (8 & 9 Vict., c. 126), appear to be as follows:?1st. To receive and
take into consideration all proposals and agreements for uniting counties
and boroughs, and for building and providing asylums, buildings, yards,
and other accommodation for pauper lunatics, and all contracts and plans
intended to be adopted; to make inquiries relative thereto, and to report
thereon to one of Her Majesty's principal Secretaries of State; and to
make the same inquiries and report relative to all contracts for the
maintenance of paupers in licensed houses. 2nd. To receive and make
yearly abstracts of the accounts of all moneys received and paid on
account of all county and borough asylums, for the purpose of the same
being submitted to both Houses of Parliament.

These are the chief duties of the commissioners under the two acts,
but there are still many obligations of a very onerous and multifarious
kind, which do not come under either of these heads. These consist in
reviewing and considering the sufficiency of all orders, medical certifi-
cates, notices, statements, and other returns transmitted to them upon the
occasion of the admission, discharge, death, removal, and escape of every
lunatic; the nature and sufficiency of every medical and other register
required to be kept by each of the above-mentioned acts; the correct-
ness of all licences granted in the provinces, and the suggestions of all
visiting justices; together with many other matters, having reference to
the condition of the various asylums receiving lunatics, the conduct of
the proprietors, medical officers, and servants in those establishments,
and the general welfare of all lunatic patients. Of course, all these
matters have involved the necessity of extensive correspondence, and the
frequent entry into long and difficult investigations.

It may be as well to add, that the present commission consists of Lord
Ashley; Lord Seymour; the Eight Hon. Robert Vernon Smith; Robert
Gordon, Esq.; Francis Barlow, Esq.; Dr Thomas Turner; Dr John
Thomas Hume; Dr James Prichard; Bryan Waller Proctor, Esq.;
James William Mylne, Esq.; and William George Campbell, Esq. To
this board, Lord Ashley has been elected permanent Chairman.
We do not propose to discuss at this moment the merits of these
acts, although relatively they are very great, but shall proceed at once
to point out the abuses previously existing, and the necessity there was
of speedy and vigorous legislation.

The enormities existing in asylums, public as well as private, pre-
viously to the parliamentary investigations of 1815, 1816, and 1827, can
scarcely be exaggerated. In the words of the Report, " they comprise
almost every species of cruelty, insult, and neglect, to which helpless and
friendless people can be exposed, when abandoned to the charge of igno-
rant, idle, and ferocious keepers, acting without conscience or control."
The management of these helpless beings was thus perhaps a little more
private, but scarcely less barbarous, than that of the Turks at the present
day; who fetter the poor maniacs up like wild beasts in public dens,
where the boys can pull the chains and make sport of their rage and
frenzy; or of the Peruvians, one of whose principal amusements it is
to visit the public asylums in Lima on holidays, to mimic and torment
the wretched inmates.

It is doubtful whether the fact of its being the interest of the pro-
prietors of establishments, appropriated entirely to the reception of pri-
vate patients, to satisfy the friends as to the treatment, operated suf-
ficiently to prevent great oppression and injustice. We know that
people were often actuated by cupidity and revenge in consigning their re-
lations to these institutions. Their care and treatment therein would there-
fore be frequently a matter of indifference, and they would be left to the
tender mercies of those who had their charge. Serious abuses doubtless
existed there, as great may be as those in the houses mainly devoted to
paupers.

The minutes of evidence taken before the several select committees
appointed by the House of Commons in the years 1815,1816, and 1827,
furnish us with ample details as to the condition of the large lunatic
establishments previous to the year 1828. From this source we learn
the following particulars respecting the York asylum. On a public in-
quiry- being instituted, it was found " that there were concealed rooms
in the hospital, unknown even to the governors of the asylum; and that
patients slept in these rooms, which were saturated with filth, and totally
unfit for the habitation of human beings. Thirteen female patients were
crowded in a room twelve feet by seven feet ten inches only: the keepers had
access to the female wards, and several female patients became pregnant.
One patient (a clergyman) was kicked down stairs by a keeper, while his
wife was insulted by the keepers with indecent language, in order to
deter her from visiting him. Another male patient disappeared, and Avas
never afterwards heard of; four patients were supposed to be burned to
death, (the asylum having been ' found to be on fire,' a few days after a
general investigation of it was directed;) and there were several other
patients ' of whom no account could be given.'"

At this time, the physician was " the sole physician, sole visitor, and
sole committee!" The food was bad; the asylum was bad throughout;
crowded, ill-ventilated, and most dirty and disorderly. One patient,
who had been kept for a week naked in a dark room full of filth, could
only obtain a shirt by promising a bribe of five shillings to the keeper
who was placed over him; and in fact the patients appear to have been
left altogether to the caprice of ignorant and brutal attendants.
When Bethlem Hospital was examined in 1816, " female as well as
male patients were chained to the walls, covered only with a blanket
formed into something like a gown. One man (Norris, whose case is
well known) was kept confined in chains for fourteen years, without the
smallest interval of liberty. Stout iron rings were riveted round his
arms, body, and neck, the latter being made to slide upwards and down-
wards on a massive iron bar inserted in the wall. And he was placed
under the care of a keeper who was almost constantly drunk, but who
nevertheless retained his situation several years. Patients were liable to
be chained, not merely for safe custody but as a punishment. It would
appear from the evidence that little or no medicine, with the exception
of a certain " powder," was administered to the patients, 122 in number,
and that the medical attendant did not reside in the hospital but came
once a day for an hour. The system of treatment consisted of bleeding,
purging, and vomiting, in the spring months. A certain day was ap-
pointed on which the patients were bled, another when they were purged,
another when they were vomited. They were bled in May, and again
in June: the precise time depended on the weather. All this had been
the practice for many years. The patients were, at one time, left for ten
years to the care of a surgeon, who was " generally insane, and mostly
drunk."

It would appear, from the evidence, that at St. Luke's Hospital in
1815, the dirty patients were without a change of clothes, inasmuch as
it was the custom to keep them in bed one day when " their things were
washed and put on again." At this time, the master stated that he was
never in the habit of keeping violent patients in bed above four or five
days at a time. When in May 1816 the hospital was inspected, it was
found that the walls were excessively filthy, not having been whitewashed
for five years; the day-rooms were crowded, ill ventilated, and highly
offensive; there was not half the proper number of attendants; there was
no classification, and no employment.

At House, in May, 1815, the dirty and clean patients were ?
intermixed. Twelve of the males slept two in a bed. The rooms were
crowded, wet, filthy, unventilated, and very offensive; some of the dor-
mitories were lighted and aired by apertures without glass; and the
patients themselves appear to have been altogether neglected, and to
have been without medical treatment, or any proper care. Some of the
patients had been there fourteen years, to whom a single grain of
medicine had never been administered for the cure of their insanity.
One poor object was exceedingly dirty, much emaciated from an affection
of the chest, and had a wooden bowl before him, with a few dirty
potatoes in it, but was without drink, medicine, or an individual creature
to give him the smallest assistance.

The horrors seem to increase as we proceed further. On inquiry
into the condition of two other asylums, it was discovered, that in
the month of December, " several of the paupers were chained to
their bedsteads naked, and only covered with a hempen rug;" and
that " some pauper men were chained upon their straw beds, with only
a rug to cover them, and not in any way defended from the external
cold." In 1816, it was stated in evidence before the committee, that
the patients were subjected to brutal cruelties from the attendants; that
they suffered very much from cold, (one patient having lost her toes
from mortification proceeding from cold;) and that they were infested
with vermin. In 1827, it was further stated in evidence, that dirty
patients were chained to their cribs, and confined without intermission
from Saturday night until Monday morning, in crowded, ill-ventilated
places; that the object of this was to give some of the keepers a holiday
on Sunday; that the patients lay in these cribs naked upon straw, with
nothing but a blanket to cover them, although the window was merely
an aperture without glass; that there were dirty patients insensible to the
calls of nature, yet that none of them were washed, and a few only of
them were " wiped," during this period; and that on the Monday morn-
ing, even in November, (and, as one witness stated, in frosty weather,)
they were rubbed down with a mop dipped in cold water, like so many
animals. It was further stated that there was no medical treatment for
insanity; that there was no system of employment or classification; and
that the patients were entirely at the mercy of their keepers. It appeared
(amongst other things), that for 170 male pauper patients there was
only one towel per week allowed and no soap; that there was no medical
resident; and that the house, although it contained nearly 500 patients,
was visited only twice or three times a week by an apothecary, who merely
prescribed strong doses of purgative medicines occasionally for the patients.
Pass we now from this truthful but repulsive picture to that more
agreeable one presented by the present condition of the same asylums.
The treatment of insanity is doubtless much better understood now than
it was formerly, but still much good has been effected by public attention
having been directed to them. There can be no question but that the
receptacles for lunatics in this country have undergone great though
gradual improvement during the last few years. The dwellings for the
insane are no longer the gloomy prisons in which they were formerly
confined; cleanliness, warmth, and ventilation, are insisted on; better
diet, clothing, and bedding, have been provided; personal restraint is
diminished, and even when still employed its severity is greatly miti-
gated and its application strictly watched. The health and mental condi-
tion of the lunatic are more carefully considered, occupation and amuse-
ment are more generally afforded to him, and in all respects better
treatment is secured, whilst an opportunity is periodically given him of
representing any hardship to which he may have been subjected.

Allowing, as we have said, for the better system of medical treatment,
it would scarcely be too much to affirm that the greater part of this evi-
dent improvement in the condition of these establishments is due to the
special supervision to which they are subject. It is the duty of the
commissioners to ascertain that the patient is duly confined; that he has
medical aid, fit attendance, and proper comforts, during his confinement;
that he is provided with employment and amusement; that his food is
good, and his place of residence healthy, clean, well ventilated, and in
good order; that he himself is not ill-treated, neglected, or improperly
restrained; and, finally, that he is liberated when fit for liberation.
Under a supervision of this kind, evils such as existed previously to the
year 1815 must necessarily be extinguished. The commissioners ac-
cordingly, in their report, speak favourably on the whole of the present
condition of both public and private asylums. In order to show what
good may be effected in an asylum originally bad in almost every re-
spect, by supervision carefully and regularly made, and where the
medical attendant is skilful and willing to attend to useful suggestions,
and the proprietor is liberal enough to carry them out at any reasonable
expense,?the following case may be cited from the report. It is also a
good specimen of a well regulated establishment for a large number of
patients. The various improvements that have been gradually going
on in this asylum since the last parliamentary inquiry are thus stated:?
" 1. An active and able medical superintendence has been established,
under which every suggestion of the commissioners for improving the
asylum and benefiting the patients, has been at all times readily at-
tended to.

2. The excessive use of mechanical restraint has been abolished, and
restraint itself reduced to the minimum degree consistent with the
safety of the patients. In place of there being seventy patients in irons,
the number now subjected to restraint is exceedingly small, there being
sometimes only one or two, and occasionally no patient whatever, under
any mechanical coercion.

3. From having no baths whatever, there are now warm and cold
baths and shower baths; and from cleanliness being utterly neglected
it is now studied carefully, with a view to the health as well as comfort
of the patients. There are conveniences (within doors) for washing at-
tached to every yard; as much soap and towelling as the attendants re-
quire is distributed; baths are used weekly, and every patient is washed
regularly every day.

4. The day-rooms and dormitories are now clean and of good size,
(the latter amply supplied with good bedding,) and there are large in-
firmaries, warm and well ventilated, for the sick and infirm. The whole
of the premises have been drained, every yard having a barrel drain of
two feet diameter with a constant run of water, and every water-closet
communicating with the drain.

5. From there being no library, it will be seen, first,?That books are
purchased; that these are placed under the care of a patient, and that all
the patients (pauper as well as private,) have access to them. In 1835,
it appears, that a library of 500 volumes had been collected ; in 1837 it
consisted of 600 volumes ; in 1844, of 1200 volumes ; in 1845, of 1500
volumes ; and at present, we understand that it consists of 2000 volumes
of books, which are accessible to all classes of patients and are much
used.

6. From possessing no amusements, the patients have now cards,
skittles, bagatelle tables, backgammon-boards, &c.; a billiard table has
also been provided for them, and a billiard-room has been erected for
their use. And from there having been little or no employment, the
patients of both sexes are provided with materials for occupation;?some
are placed in the garden; others in the laundry, in shops, or in needle-
rooms. A loom is erected; tailors', shoemakers', carpenters', and
papier-maclie shops have been established. The patients are encouraged
by small gratuities to employ themselves; and a considerable propor-
tion, fluctuating from time to time, but amounting sometimes to 150
or more of each sex (or nearly three-fourths of the patients), are em-
ployed in the asylum. And it is stated that this system of employment
diminishes the necessity for restraint.

7. From there having been three nurses only for 154 patients, being
at the rate only of one for fifty patients, there is now, reckoning the
entire establishment, one attendant for every fifteen patients.
8. The dietary is good and ample, and has never within our recollec-
tion been complained of. Good joints of meat, and good vegetables
only are purchased; and the attendants are ordered (as one of the
" General Rules" of the asylum,) to supply more food whenever a
patient asks for it, except only in cases of morbid appetite.
9. The entries will show that, at the suggestion of the commissioners,
rooms have repeatedly been disused, new rooms erected, and a variety of
improvements made; and that for promoting good classification the
whole arrangement of the houses has been altered. The whole of one
house has been taken down and rebuilt. The rooms are now spacious
and cheerful, and kept clean, warm, well ventilated, and comfortable.
Since the act passed in 1828, between 22,000?. and 23,000?. have been
expended in rebuilding and improving the establishment."

When it is added, that this account relates to certain houses, on
account of the wretched management of which the metropolitan
commissioners contemplated discontinuing the licence (the horrible
barbarities committed therein were previously alluded to), Ave can form
an idea of the change effected. In the other asylums^ also the chief
abuses have been corrected, and the course of reform is even still in
progress. In the York asylum, for instance, the governors at every
quarterly court appoint five members of their body, who inspect the
condition of the house and of the patients once every month; and they
also appoint a committee of eight visitors, four gentlemen and four
ladies. The special business of this committee is to make their rounds
systematically through every part of the house; to see and converse
with the patients, to listen to their complaints, and to inquire into all
things connected with the management or general arrangement of the
hospital, which may seem to require observation or correction. They
visit, not at any stated periods, but at all hours and seasons, sometimes
together and sometimes singly; and the result of their observations is
recorded in a report book which is laid before the governors at the next
quarterly court. This asylum is now in a most creditable condition.
At St. Luke's, and elsewhere, equal benefit has been effected. A
suitable number of medical and other attendants has been provided.
Various day-rooms, dormitories, infirmaries, and domestic offices, have
been erected; restraint has been in a great measure abolished and the
diet rendered plentiful and wholesome. As to Bethlehem Hospital also,
which is specially excepted from the visitations of the commissioners,
it is said that it now exhibits none of the barbarities which Avere formerly
practised within its walls. The patients are now placed under a regular
medical staff, and everything is well ordered.

These facts tend to show how advantageous, and indeed how neces-
sary, is the frequent visitation of all asylums. A careful and rigid
scrutiny has been found to contribute more than anything else to ensure
comfort and cleanliness in lunatic establishments, and good treatment to
the insane. Tlie aggregate amount of benefit derived by the patients,
from the amendment of the defects pointed out by the commissioners
has undoubtedly been very great.

Nor lias less good been effected in private asylums. The power of
withholding the licence from these establishments must operate and has
operated, as a powerful incentive to the proprietors to attend to the sug-
gestions of the commissioners. In some cases the licence has been with-
drawn, and the houses have consequently been discontinued. In others,
threats have been held out that such a measure would be resorted to,
and the hope of renewing it has always operated as a powerful moral
agent. The views of the commissioners on the subject of their visits to
these establishments are thus alluded to in their report:?

" It is indispensable that powers of supervision should exist in every case ; that they
should he vested in persons totally unconnected with the establishment; and that the
visitations should not be limited in point of number, and should be uncertain in point
of time; for it is most important to the patients, that every proprietor and superin-
tendent should always be kept in expectation of a visit, and should thus be compelled to
maintain his establishment audits inmates in such a state of cleanliness and comfort as
to exempt him from the probability of censure. We are satisfied from our experience, that
if the power of visitation were withdrawn, all or most of the abuses that the parliamentary
investigations of 1815, 1810, and 1827, brought to light would speedily revive, and
that the condition of the lunatic would be again rendered as miserable as heretofore."
In the whole of this we cordially agree.

In consequence of this careful supervision, the commissioners are able
to report that, upon the occasion of their recent visits to the various
asylums, they have found that, with some exceptions (which they are exert-
NO. i. D
ing themselves to rectify), the patients are humanely and sometimes very
judiciously treated. As they are in the habit of making frequent in-
quiries of the patients themselves, of listening to their complaints, and of
redressing them, if in their opinion they are well founded: they think
they may assert, from the infrequency of their occurrence and from the
result of their investigations, that there is no reason to apprehend that
the lunatic patient is now often subjected to cruelty or ill treatment.
Cases of neglect may undoubtedly sometimes occur, though seldom they
believe attended with serious consequences. Cases manifesting a high
degree of dereliction of duty have rarely come to their knowledge, and in
these instances prosecutions against the offenders have been instantly and
vigorously instituted.

They very properly remark:?
" As, however, lunatic patients are placed very much at the mercy of their attend-
ants, it is most desirable to secure, as far as possible, persons of humane and respect-
able character as attendants on the insane, in every asylum throughout the kingdom."
In order to promote this laudable object, they have established a
central register at their office, and requested the superintendent or pro-
prietor of every lunatic establishment to forward to them the names of
all male and female attendants employed by him, and to transmit notice
whenever any attendant shall be engaged or dismissed, or shall quit the
asylum, together with the cause of every dismissal. Such a register will
undoubtedly be the means of very useful reference, and by extending
the opportunities of ascertaining and verifying every attendant's cha-
racter, operate most materially to ensure good conduct on their parts,
and may eventually induce persons of superior qualifications to become
members of this very useful class.

After thus stating in general terms the condition of the insane, we
come now to investigate special subjects, and to see what improvement
has taken place in points on which the public may be supposed to take
an especial interest. Foremost among these is the article of restraint,
the diminution or total abolition of which forms one of the most strik-
ing features of modern improvement.

It would appear that, previous to the parliamentary investigation,
instances occurred where as many as seventy patients were under
restraint at one time at a single establishment. In one asylum thir-
teen out of fourteen were in fetters or handcuffs. So late as 1830,
there were twenty patients at an asylum in Sussex, of whom eleven
were under restraint by day and six by night. At another period
of the same year, of eighteen lunatics nine were confined; and in 1831
ten patients were under restraint out of twenty-tivo. So that it would
appear, that even after the act which passed in 1828 came into
operation and the asylum was regularly visited, mechanical restraint
was found to prevail to the extent of fifty per cent, in that establish-
ment. It is true that, at this period, the relative number was consider-
ably less in some other provincial asylums, but still the proportion was
in all enormous.

From an examination of the tables published in the report, we find
that the instances of mechanical restraint at the present day are very
few in number in the public asylum. Even in licensed houses the
practice of coercion is an exception to tlie general rule of treatment;
and tlie modes of restraint now adopted are such as to pain and irritate
the patient as little as possible. The massive bars, rings, and chains of
iron, formerly resorted to, are no longer seen. Long continued coer-
cion is not permitted. Coercion itself is scarcely ever allowed except
with the sanction of the medical officer, who is himself compelled by
the act of parliament to record every week in a journal framed for the
purpose, the name of every patient under restraint and in seclusion, and
the means by which such restraint is effected. Even the duration of
restraint must in some instances be specified. The journal is open to
the inspection of every commissioner or justice visiting the house, which
if in the provinces ought to be six times a year; and which if in
the metropolitan district is generally visited at least that number of
times if it contain paupers, or if there be reason to suspect that undue
restraint is had recourse to;?thus the safeguards against lunatic patients
being subjected to harsh or unnecessary restraint, from the cruelty, idle-
ness, or caprice of their attendants, have been multiplied, and the
chances of abuse reduced to a small amount. In those institutions where
the greatest abuses in this respect prevailed, wonderful amelioration has
been effected. The asylum in Sussex no longer exhibits instances of
such excessive coercion; and where, as above mentioned, seventy persons
were under restraint at one time, there are now to be seen but one or
two only.

The bocly-clotliing of the pauper patients is, according to the report
of the commissioners, sufficient for warmth, and on the whole tolerably
good; except in the cases of lunatics addicted to destroy tlieir clothes (a
frequent mark of insanity), and of dirty patients, in whom it is always
extremely difficult with the utmost care to preserve any appearance of
neatness.

The commissioners are also extremely particular in the inspection of
the bed-clotldng, which was formerly extremely scanty and insufficient
in cold weather. It is still observed to be insufficient. In order to
ascertain the quantity allowed to the patients as well as its condition in
point of cleanliness, it is the custom of the commissioners on visiting
the various asylums, especially in severe or damp weather, to cause the
bed-clothes of many of the beds to be thrown open; and in all cases
where a deficiency has been noticed, they have been most peremptory in
their directions that additional covering should be immediately supplied.
By the eighty-second section of the act 8 and 9 Vict. c. 100, the
commissioners are empowered to regulate the dietary of the pauper
patients. This is a most important matter and subject of anxious in-
quiry, as not only the bodily health and comfort of the lunatics are con-
cerned, but frequently the cure of his mental affliction is dependent on
a judicious and plentiful supply of food. On this subject, Ave believe,
the whole of the profession is agreed.

Much time and attention it appears has been devoted to this point,
and deep consideration has been paid to the usual habits of the poorer
classes, as respects the ordinary variety and abundance of their food,
and also the chance of some articles failing or becoming less abundant.
In order to avail themselves of their power if required, the commis-
sioners have applied for copies of all the several dietaries now in use in
establishments receiving pauper lunatics. On two occasions only have
they thought it necessary to interfere, but have generally found any
suggestions they may have offered promptly attended to. They therefore
express themselves generally satisfied.

In truth, considerable caution is required in interfering in such a
matter, as much must be left to the judgment and discretion of the super-
intendent. No general house-diet can be applicable to all the cases.
Those who are actively employed, or who are old or in infirm health,
require better and different food from those who are either unwilling to
work or are incapable of any occupation. In the best regulated esta-
blishments accordingly, Ave find large supplies of extra nourishment
given to those who require it. In one institution there is consumed by
the patients, over and above the ordinary dietary?

" Seventy-two gallons of ale, and seventy-two gallons of porter every week. Those
wlio work are allowed, in addition, tobacco and snuff and small gratuities in money.
The aged and infirm also have extra allowances and more delicate food, including
lunch daily, puddings, sago, arrow-root, &c., frequently; and, upon an average, 300
eggs, eighty-five fish dinners, and 210 ounces of wine and brandy weekly. Tea and
coffee are also allowed, both to those who work and to all those who are old or
infirm."

All this is as it should be. In fact, there appears to be no dearth or
stinting of the dietary on the part of the conductors of the asylums,
except such as is necessarily imposed by the present vile system, on the
part of the parish officers, of farming out the unfortunate paupers.
The amount of charge made at some particular house determines the
question but too frequently, whether the lunatic shall be sent there
or to some other establishment, without reference to the comparative
comfort and good treatment which the patient may expect at the dif-
ferent asylums. The sums expended in providing a comfortable house,
airing grounds, good food, and regular medical aid, (without which ad-
vantages the patient has small chance of cure,) and also a sufficient staff
of respectable attendants and domestic servants, must always be very
considerable, and entitles the proprietor to adequate remuneration. The
highest rate paid by the parishes for the maintenance of their pauper
poor is but eight shillings a week; and this to include board, lodging,
clothing, medicine, and attendance. Little enough one would think;
yet it appears that this sum is often considered extravagant. In one in-
stance, the parish of St. Denis, Walmgate in York, required that it
should be reduced to seven shillings; and on the proprietor's refusal,
their pauper was removed to a cheaper place. In another case, the
parish of St. Cuthbert, in York, objected to pay this sum: and finally
the mother of the patient (herself very poor) was obliged to contribute
one shilling weekly, in order that her daughter might have the comforts
of a respectable asylum. Two paupers belonging to the Porklington
Union were removed some little time back from the Dunnington-house
Asylum, because the proprietor declined to keep them and to provide
them with all necessaries for six shillings a week. The commissioners
justly observe that, considering the present price of provisions, this is
too bad; and have directed the attention of the yisiting justices to the
fact, requesting tliem to exert their influence with the guardians of the
union, to induce them to make a more liberal payment. We may add
our own opinion, that such endeavours to sail so close to the wind are
after all but a false economy, as the lunatics have not a fair chance of
recovery, and thus are likely to continue dependent much longer on the
funds of the parish.

The medical treatment of the patients is now most judicious, and fully
up to the present advanced state of science. There is ample evidence
to prove, that the number of recoveries from insanity is in proportion to
the degree in which these curative resources have been employed. We
are rather surprised however to find that so few, comparatively, are
under treatment at the asylums ; but suppose this is to be accounted for
by the large proportion of chronic cases dependent on organic change,
which hold out 110 prospect of cure.

Lastly, let us inquire to what extent lunatics are now benefited by their
admission into the asylums provided for their use. And this seems to
depend?for no doubt can exist as to the benefit of medical treatment in
many cases?on the removal of the patients to such establishments as
soon as possible after the commencement of their disease. The question
relates mainly to pauper lunatics, whose early or late admission into
proper asylums determines for the most part the number of cures and
the amount of mortality tliat occur in lunatic asylums. The number of
recent curable cases admitted into asylums is still comparatively small.
The majority consists either of chronic cases, of persons in a confirmed
and hopeless state of mental alienation, or of others who arrive in broken
down or feeble health, reduced by poverty and neglect or exhausted by
disease ; and thus the amount of cures becomes necessarily low, whilst
the rate of mortality is alarmingly increased. From abundant evidence
to this effect, it would seem that the amount of mortality from time to
time occurring in lunatic asylums, depends most materially 011 the con-
dition of the patients at the time of their admittance, (many of them,
often the greatest number, being received in a dying or hopeless state;)
and that the number of cures depends, not as might be supposed entirely
or even principally upon the skill of the medical attendant, or the com-
forts afforded to the patients while under treatment, but on the conduct
of the various officers of unions and parishes, whose duty it is to provide
promptly and efficiently for the welfare of the lunatics;?and whose want
of prudence and humanity has without doubt tended in numberless cases
to render the disease permanent, and has thereby increased the burdens
of their parishes more than all the accidental causes to which insanity is
referable. The following extract from the evidence of a medical super-
intendent of a county asylum, contains very sensible remarks on the usual
neglect of the symptoms of what has been properly styled " the incuba-
tion of insanity ?

" From tlie duration of the disorder previously to admission, it may be inferred that
either the premonitory stage was not understood or was altogether disregarded. Per-
haps in some cases from the insidious and obscure development of the symptoms, the
moral and intellectual changes noticed were not considered precursors of insanity. The
accession of the malady has been erroueously dated from some sudden outbreak of
violence, of incessant restlessness, or of extreme incoherence; whereas these symp-
toms, instead of merely announcing the commencement of some grave malady, may but
too frequently be regarded as tlie premonitory symptoms of a fatal issue, tbe termination
of a long continued series of changes originating in disease of the brain."
We fully concur with the commissioners that the office of visitor to a
public or private lunatic asylum is often an onerous and disagreeable task,
and that those who, from motives of benevolence, perform such a duty, de-
serve the thanks of the public. The necessity of such visitations is appa-
rent, from the great good already effected by them. That they have been
regularly made, both by commissioners and magistrates, Ave have every
reason to believe. These gentlemen are fully aware of the great power in
their hands, and we trust to their good sense to use it judiciously. The
discretion they have used in granting, withholding, and revoking licences
has tended to ensure well-situated, comfortable, and spacious premises,
and humane and intelligent superintendents and servants to the establish-
ments. Their exertions have been successfully employed in promoting
the comfort and forwarding the cure of the unfortunate lunatic, and
effecting his liberation when fit for discharge. On this latter point per-
haps there is less need of supervision in respect of county asylums, where
there is no inducement to detain a lunatic beyond the time requisite for
his cure, where committees regularly inspect the premises, and where
matters connected with the asylum are frequent matters of discussion in
open session. But in regard to other establishments, and more particularly
to licensed houses, the necessity of frequent visitations is obvious.
The judgment of the commissioners is nowhere more apparent than
in the pains they take that the proprietor of a proposed establishment
should not only be of good character and humane disposition, but also
that he should possess sufficient pecuniary resources. Poverty, they
are aware, leads often to the blackest crimes. Still, out of the nettle
the flower safety may be plucked. A good and Avortliy man from the
best and purest motives may undertake the management of the insane:
as he then has the poAver?the great, the philanthropic, the noble poAver
?of aiding the cause of humanity, by sympathizing Avitli tlie Aveak, re-
lieving the distressed, and, like his better angel, ministering to the
restoration of his wretched but sorely afflicted brother.
