Preface
========

The Editor begs to leave to introduce to the notice of his readers
the First Volume of the "Journal of Psychological Medicine and Mental Pathology." In doing so, he tenders his
thanks to those who have so kindly extended to him their literary assistance, in the furtherance of his effort to establish a
periodical devoted to the discussion of questions about
the Human Mind in its abnormal condition.

It has been the undeviating object of the Editor to address
himself more especially to the profession; and therefore, he has
carefully excluded from the pages of the Journal all articles
which might be considered ad captandum in their character.

It is often extremely difficult to control the minds and pens
of others; but the editor has been anxious, by a careful selection of topics for elucidation, and by judicious supervision of
papers are written for publication, to admit nothing into the Journal
which had not a practical bearing, and which did not inculcate some great truth in connexion with the important* subject of Psychological Medicine.

The Editor must leave his readers to form their judgment as to the success with which he has carried his design into
execution.


The Editor feels highly flattered at the many kind letters of
The encouragement which he has had the honour of receiving,
from some of the first and most distinguished members of the
profession.

He feels that the attempt to excite a deep interest in this the
most elevated department of the science of medicine is appreciated by those standing in the foremost ranks of the profession, men of the highest order of intellect. This encourages him
to proceed in his anxious and responsible undertaking. His
labour, as a brother editor observes, must be " a labour of love."
He is willing that such should be the case. If his object be
attained? namely, that of giving an impetus to that branch of
the science of medicine which is termed Psychological? he will
feel himself more than compensated for any humble exertions
he may have made to effect so desirable a consummation.

Sussex House, Hammersmith,
October 1848.
