Political and Epidemic Insanity 
===============================

Art. IV.?
L'ejfet cVEmotions politiques, dans la 'production de la Folie.
Par M. Belhojime. (Read at the sitting of the Academie de Medecine,
1848.)

When the Roman satirist, with infinite grace and humour, discussed
with Damisippus the paradox of the Stoic philosophy, that omnes pro-
pemodum homines insanire, he had in view the school and sect of
Chrysippus, which deemed every man mad whom vicious folly or wilful
ignorance drove blindly forward. Under this sweeping definition, what
kings, what conquerors, heroes,?nay, what whole tribes and nations
are included 1 And yet, when Ave consider the trivial agents that act
upon man's mind to destroy the balance, the influence of unworthy
impulses to give it an unhealthy bias, and make it run riot in folly and
extravagance, we are tempted almost to doubt whether sanity is a term
ever fit to be applied to the human intellect. Non omnes propsmodum
sed omnes homines insanire. Look to the page of history for a con-
firmation.

The pride of man induces him to believe that the whole arcana of
nature are revealed to him and him alone. That that Intelligence with
which he is endowed enables him to penetrate the secret springs of
action, and lay bare the laws of the Eternal. Alas ! the boasted light
of Reason, how feeble you become when you attempt to lead your master
beyond the confines of the physical! Your dim and flickering ray
serves but to make more visible the Cimmerian darkness, and to fill
the void with wild, imaginative spectres ! Yet would man's prerogative
be employed most usefully, were its powers equal to the task of grap-
pling with the world unseen. Powers are revealed to him daily through
the medium of his senses, of which he can take note and cognizance;
but assuredly, also, there are powers, mighty and mysterious powers !
beyond the appreciation of sense, which exert no inconsiderable influ-
ence on his present and his future destiny.

One of these powers is sympathy. A strange, mysterious instinct,
that binds man to man with a chain, not less secure because its links
are hidden. It accounts for the union of mankind into a social whole,
and while it is the basis of society, places self-independence in a very
doubtful light. From it originate the best emotions of the soul.
Compassion, pity, mercy, and benevolence, are among its genial off-
spring. But still it embraces with equal force, reason and folly, good
and evil; and thus, by its indiscriminating influence, it lessens the beauty
of virtue as well as the deformity of vice.

Closely allied to sympathy, and serving often as its exponent, we
have imitation. Present with the infant in the cradle, and aiding his
earliest intellectual efforts, it bears no mean or trifling sway throughout
the whole of life. In moderation and in health, it doubtless teems
with rich and goodly fruit; but in excess or in disease, abounds with
evils of great and fearful magnitude. When exerted in its highest
degree, it becomes a mental bondage. Then it is that the sensible im-
pression of a nervous malady fetters the will, and produces a condition

POLITICAL AND EPIDEMIC INSANITY. 407
like that of fascination. The mind is enchained by the serpent's eye
?the spell is irresistible. Reason is overthrown, the will opposed and
overpowered, and the soul given over to a strange and demoniacal in-
fluence. No skill of the physician, no menace of the magistrate, can
stay the foaming torrent?onwards, headlong it rushes, and the natural
impulse asserts and gains its supremacy?

" Naturam expellas furca,
Tamen usque recurret."

To morbid sympathy, and that demon of imitation to which we
have alluded, the diffusion of violent excitements is due, especially those
of a religious or political character, which have so powerfully agitated the
nations of ancient and modern times. These may, by habitual compliance,
pass into a total loss of power over the will and an actual disease of
the mind. Witness the immense increase in the number of the insane
that accompanies every great revolution. The secret springs of action
lie hidden in the inmost recesses of the soul: but truly the instinct of
imitation is often a key to man's most triumphant efforts for good or
evil. Sympathy lays bare his weakest and most vulnerable side.
But independently of political and religious excitement, which may
seem to be more or less based on reason and intelligence, we have an-
other class of affections which afford a deep insight into the workings
of the human mind in its social relationship. They are closely con-
nected with life in the aggregate, and are propagated on the beams of
light?on the wings of thought. They, as has been well remarked,
convulse the mind by the excitement of the senses, and wonderfully
affect the nerves, the media of its will and of its feelings. The whole
world is full of examples of this afflicting state of turmoil, which, when
the mind is carried away by the force of a sensual impression that
destroys its freedom, is irresistibly propagated by imitation, Those
who are thus infected do not spare even their own lives, but as a
hunted flock of sheep will follow their leader and rush over a precipice,
so will whole hosts of enthusiasts, deluded by their infatuation, hurry
on to a self-inflicted death. Such has ever been the case, from the
days of the Milesian virgins to the modern associations for self-de-
struction.

The intimate union of the mind and body is shown by their mutual
reaction on each other. When one is disturbed, the other is invariably
more or less out of order. The body being mortal is subject to disease.
The mind also has its peculiar ailments. Some of these corporeal
affections are single, isolated. Others again are endemic, epidemic.
Strange that in this respect the analogy between mind and matter still
holds good! Psychical affections are also frequently epidemic, and what
is more, are powerfully contagious. Sympathy and imitation appear to
be the subtle poisons that convey the infection from one person to
another, and those who are of a nervous, excitable temperament, are
most subject to their pernicious influence. They are enemies that enter
the brain through the senses and take the reason prisoner. Those who
are bitten by the mania,

" Play such fantastic tricks before liigli heaven,
As make the angels weep."
It is this contagious malady of the nervous system that we propose to
examine in this paper. We use the word contagious for want of a
better, although we are well aware of the objections that may be urged
against it. Contagion can, in a psychical sense, signify nothing but
pathological sympathy. The materials, unfortunately, are so abundant,
so replete is the book of history with their details, that our only diffi-
culty is in making a selection. It is Vembarras de ricliesses that troubles
us. Passing notices are to be found scattered in the writings of both
ancient and modern authors, but by far the richest store is that con-
tained in Hecker's " Epidemics of the Middle Ages,"?a valuable and
philosophic production.

Familiar illustrations of the effects of sympathy and the contagious
nature of imitation, are witnessed in the acts of sneezing, coughing, &c.
If one person coughs in a church, others will do so likewise. The act
of yawning, again, is irresistibly infectious. There is a well-known
story of a learned professor, in Modern Athens, who had suffered from
a dislocation of the jaw, which displacement always recurred whenever
he opened his mouth too wide. His more idle pupils used to take ad-
vantage of this circumstance, whenever they thought his lecture was too
prosy. One sitting in front of him would pretend to yawn. The pro-
fessor could not resist the fascination; he yawned too, and consequently
the bone was luxated. In the confusion consequent upon this accident
the roguish students made their escape from the lecture room.

The contagious nature of laughter must have been noticed by every
one. People frequently are half dead with merriment, who can assign
no reason for the impulse. They do not know what the joke is. They
laugh because others laugh. Sometimes the propensity to cacliinnation
is produced through the sense of sight, as when whole audiences have
roared at the first glance at Reeves, Liston, or Charles MatlieAvs. More
frequently it is through the portals of the ears that the poison is dis-
tilled. A lady states that she was lying ill in bed the other day, in a
chamber next to one in which a merry company Avas assembled.

Although she could not catch a Avord of the conversation, she, in spite
of herself, laughed heartily every time her neighbours laughed, although
the act gave her great agony. The emotion observed in mobs and
other great assemblies is of the same nature. The most trifling acci-
dent will turn the tide one way or the other. Hence all observers have
noticed the fickleness of the multitude, and Iioav easily it is SAvayed to
good or evil.

These are familiar illustrations of mental and emotional contagion.
We will noAV proceed to investigate the subject in its historical and
moral bearings.

Caspar, Esquirol, and Pinel, have established the important fact, that
moral predominate over physical causes in the production of insanity
among civilized people. The proportion is as nearly tA\To to one. And
what greater proof of this can Ave desire than the reigning absurdities
and extravagances of each country and each epoch'? The political crises
which strike at the root of social order, the remarkable events Avhicli
stand out in bold relief and give a feature to the age, belong not solely
to history. They come Avithin the department of medicine, which by
their means could form a striking picture of human vicissitudes. Thus,
when a political catastrophe has occasioned the ruin or death of a great
number of persons, the apparent victims are not the only indications of
the disaster. The blow is felt at a much greater distance. It reacts on
the minds of a multitude of silly persons, who are only too ready for
the infection. In fact, there always exists on the surface of society a
large floating mass of individuals, devoted by their organization to
mental alienation. Weak minded, wild, and conceited, frequently the
issue of eccentric parents, their brain receives, like softened wax, every
impression that is offered; and their reason, perverted by a vicious
education and defective organization, not being able to withstand the
shock, is permanently overthrown. These people are easily recognised
by their manners, their gestures, and conversation; their excessive
gaiety without motive; the rapid succession of their ideas; the facility
with which they form and as readily abandon a hundred wild projects.
Irritability of disposition, wildness of the eyes, eccentricity of conduct,
certain nervous actions or movements, looseness and feebleness of ideas,
want of force and connexion in ratiocination, are all pathognomonic
signs which presage their future destiny. In fact, it is possible to
foretel by the physiognomy, and we mean by that the whole exterior,
that such and such a man will become insane, as we should say of
another that the probability is he will die of apoplexy or consumption.
The influence of predominating ideas and example upon these indi-
viduals is really astonishing. Thus it was in ancient Greece, when
religious festivals, and especially the celebration of the mysteries of
Bacchus upon the heights of Parnassus, gave rise to the strangest dis-
orders of the intellect. Then were seen whole hosts of frantic women,
half naked, and with dishevelled hair, rushing like maniacs through
towns and provinces, giving utterance to savage and demoniac yells.
The slightest spark would enkindle the blaze. Some of them, suddenly
seized with delirium, fancied themselves gifted with divine inspiration,
and infected their companions with the hallucination. The excesses of
the Athenian matrons will not surprise those who know how easy it is
to excite the lively imagination and ardent temperament of the female
sex. How far they were influenced by wine is another question.
The course and progress of the epidemic is well shown by the fury of
the mother and aunt of Pentheus, in Ovid's Metamorphoses?
" For now, through prostrate Greece, young Bacchus rode,
While howling matrons celebrate the god.

All ranks and sexes to his orgies ran
To mingle in the pomps, and fill the train."
The Theban king determines to see with his own eyes the mystic
ceremonies. He approaches?
" A spacious circuit on the hill there stood,
Level and wide, and skirted round with wood;
There the rash Pentheus, with unhallowed eyes,
The howling dames and mystic orgies spies.
? * * " * * * *
In vain does Pentheus to his mother sue,
And the raw bleeding stumps present to view.
NO. III. E E
His mother howled, and heedless of his prayer,
Her trembling hand she twisted in his hair.
' And this,' she cried, ' shall he Agave's share.'
When from his neck his struggling head she tore,
And iu her hands the ghastly visage bore,
With pleasure all the hideous trunk survey,
Then pulled and tore the mangled limbs away,
As, starting in the pangs of death it lay.
With such a sudden death lay Pentlieus slain,
And in a thousand pieces strewed the plain."
This story of the Theban king having been torn in pieces by his
nearest relatives, does not seem wholly fabulous, when we consider the
maniacal fury of those suffering from epidemic infatuation.
In the latter days of the Roman republic, under the emperors,
epidemic suicide was frequent in consequence of the continual proscrip-
tions, executions, and tyrannical decrees. Through fear and despair,
immense numbers of senators and other distinguished individuals put a
period to their existence. For self-murder is a frequent resource
among people who are depressed, and are not sustained by religious
faith. Death then appears a sure refuge from trouble. The irruption
of the barbarians, by increasing the terror, desolation, and ruin, in all
parts of the empire, necessarily increased the tendency to mental aliena-
tion. The persecution of the early Christians had the same effect.
What other result could be expected from the blazing faggot, the rack,
and combats with ferocious animals 1 Such spectacles either heat the
imagination to the highest degree, or chill it by terror; and such are
the fittest states for the access of lunacy. Imitation, that true moral
contagion, completed the work, and rendered the disorder epidemic.
In following the chronological order of periods, we come to the grand
era of the middle ages, which furnishes astonishing examples of imita-
tive mania, in all its variety, in all its intensity. But here, before
entering into a description of this strange moral malady, let us cast
our eye at the state of the public mind and the situation of Europe at
that epoch.

Perpetual foreign wars and intestine commotions, irruptions of bar-
barians, priestly intervention, profound ignorance of both high and low,
and the love of the marvellous which is its natural consequence, had
developed to an extraordinary degree the passion for arms, religious
enthusiasm, and superstitious faith in supernatural visitation. Alchemy
and judicial astronomy had contributed to turn the heads of men.
Thus, the moment the voice of Peter the hermit was heard, a universal
delirium seized upon the mind. Old and young, men, women, and
children, followed in the footsteps of the monk. It appeared as if the
western world had been heaved from its foundations, in order to be
precipitated upon the east. Can this infatuation be accounted for in
any other way than by imitation and morbid sympathy? Abundant
instances were then afforded of disturbance of the intellect. The
annals of the crusades are filled with apparitions of angels and of
saints?of divine revelations and fabulous exploits. Hallucinations of
the sight and hearing were also extremely common. In the first two
crusades the type of aberration was of a religious and warlike character.
In the third, the Franks changed the epic character of their warrior
manners for that of the romantic. Hence the reign of troubadours
and chivalric knights, who, directing the imagination of the public
towards love and glory, gave another tint to the mental alienation.
Erotomania, nymphomania, several varieties of hysteria, and the mania
for warlike exploits, were the distinctive features of that epoch. Roland
and King Arthur were types of the period. It would be wrong, there-
fore, to refer their strange and eccentric actions exclusively to madness,
when they may, in a great measure, be traced to the prevailing religion,
manners and customs, laws, and superstitions of the times. You may
define a lunatic to be one who sets out from a false, exaggerated, fan-
tastic, or imaginary principle, and reasons upon it as if it were true.
It Avas in the eleventh century, so celebrated for the first crusade,
that the earliest signs of the epidemic Dancing Mania made their ap-
pearance. During its access, the patients fought with each other like
madmen, leapt with savage gestures to an enormous height, and wounded
themselves and others. They fancied they heard strange sounds and
voices in their ears. At the slightest breath of music they abandoned
themselves to convulsive dancing, till they were exhausted by fatigue.
These dangerous maniacs were regarded as forming part of the legion
of Satan. Possibly a similar malady was prevalent at the time of the
foundation of Christianity. Persons were then said to be tormented by
devils, and were cured only by miracle.

If we regard the events succeeding each other from the twelfth to
the close of the fourteenth century, Ave shall perceive ample physical
causes to account for the increase of the dancing mania. If the body
Avould ever react on the mind, this Avould be the time to perceive its
agency. Nearly all the countries of Europe Avere ravaged by horrible
epidemics. The measles and small-pox took off" tens of thousands.
St. Anthony's fire Avas the terror of toAvn and country. The domestic
hearth supplied innumerable victims to the leprosy. Finally, the plague,
or as it Avas called, the Black Death, made its appearance (1350) and
SAvept aAvay millions of persons. The consternation and misery pro-
duced by this succession of evils kept the mind in a continual tension,
and exasperated the symptoms of the moral ailment. Every thing
tended to a disturbance of the nervous system, and Ave shall see to Avhat
a fearful extent this AAras carried.

As our inquiry is much facilitated by the labours of the learned
Hecker, Ave cannot do better than let him speak for himself. He says,
at the commencement of his description of that variety of the dancing
mania called the " St. John's Dance":?

" The effects of the black death had not yet subsided, and the graves
of millions of its victims Avere scarcely closed, Avhen a strange delusion
arose in Germany, which took possession of the minds of men, and in
spite of the divinity of our nature, hurried aAvay body and soul into
the magic circle of hellish superstition. It Avas a conATulsion which in
the most extraordinary manner infuriated the human frame, and ex-
cited the astonishment of contemporaries for more than tAvo centuries,
since Avhich time it has neArer re-appeared. It Avas called the dance of
St. John, or of St. Vitus, on account of the Bacchantic leaps by Avhich it
E E 2
was characterized, and which gave to those affected, whilst performing
their wild dance and screaming and foaming with fury, all the appear-
ance of persons possessed. It did not remain confined to particular
localities, but was propagated by the sight of the sufferers, like a de-
moniacal epidemic, over the whole of Germany and the neighbouring
countries to the north-west, which were already prepared for its recep-
tion by the prevailing opinions of the times.

" So e&rly as the year 1374, assemblages of men and women were
seen at Aix-la-Chapelle, who had come out of Germany, and who,
united by one common delusion, exhibited to the public, both in the
streets and in the churches, the following strange spectacle:?They
formed circles, hand in hand, and appearing to have lost all control
over their senses, continued dancing, regardless of the by-standers, for
hours together, in wild delirium, until at length they fell to the ground,
in a state of exhaustion. They then complained of extreme oppres-
sion, and groaned as if in the agonies of death, until they were swathed
in cloths, bound tightly round their waists, upon which they again re-
covered, and remained free from complaint until the next attack. This
practice of swathing was resorted to on account of the tympany which
followed these spasmodic ravings; but the by-standers frequently re-
lieved patients in a less artificial manner, by thumping and trampling
upon the parts affected. While dancing, they neither saw nor heard,
being insensible to external impressions through the senses, but were
haunted by visions, their fancies conjuring up spirits whose names they
shrieked out; and some of them afterwards asserted that they felt as if
they had been immersed in a stream of blood, which obliged them to leap
so high; and thus, during the paroxysm, saw the heavens open and the
Saviour enthroned with the Virgin Mary, according as the religious
notions of the age were strangely and variously reflected in their ima-
gination. When the disease was completely developed, the attack com-
menced with epileptic convulsions. Those affected fell to the ground
senseless, panting and labouring for breath. They foamed at the
mouth, and suddenly springing up, began their dancc amidst strange
contortions."

In a few months this demoniacal disease spread from Aix-la-Cha-
pelle over the neighbouring Netherlands. In Liege, Utrecht, Tongres,
and many other towns of Belgium, the dancers appeared with garlands
in their hair, and their waists girt with cloths, that they might, as soon
as the paroxysm was over, receive immediate relief 011 the attack of the
tympany. This bandage was, by the insertion of a stick, easily twisted
tight; many, however, obtained more relief from kicks and blows, which
they found numbers of persons ready to administer; for wherever the
dancers appeared, the people assembled in crowds to gratify their
curiosity by the frightful spectacle. Some objects appeared to have
great effect in increasing the excitement. Thus they were greatly
irritated by the sight of red colours, the influence of which on the dis-
ordered nerves might lead us to imagine an extraordinary accordance
between this spasmodic malady and the condition of infuriated animals.
There were some of them who were unable to endure the sight of per-
sons weeping, and others who manifested such a morbid dislike to the
pointed shoes which had come into fashion immediately after the great
mortality, that the authorities were obliged to issue an ordinance against
the manufacture of any but those with square toes.

The number of these fanatics must have been great, for they frequently
assembled in multitudes, and menaced the magistrates and priests with
destruction. The mass of the people was intimidated, and had no
doubt of the demoniacal origin of the disease. Everywhere horror
and astonishment were created. Processions were everywhere instituted
on their account, while masses were said, and hymns were sung, to dis-
pel the evil spirit. Exorcisms were also a favourite remedy with the
priests.

The frenzy broke out at Cologne a few months after its appearance
at Aix, and the number of those possessed amounted to more than five
hundred. In Metz, the streets were said to have been filled with eleven
hundred dancers. Peasants left their ploughs, mechanics their work-
shops, housewives their domestic duties, to join the wild revels; and this
rich commercial city became the scene of the most ruinous disorder.
Girls and boys quitted their parents, and servants their masters, to
amuse themselves at the dances of those possessed, and greedily imbibed
the poison of mental infection. Above a hundred unmarried women
were seen roving about in consecrated and unconsecrated places, and
of course the consequences Avere soon perceptible. Gangs of idle vaga-
bonds, also, imitating the convulsions of the possessed, spread the dis-
gusting spasmodic disease like a plague; and roving from city to city,
provoked scenes as strange as they were detestable. For in maladies of
this kindj the susceptible are infected as easily by the appearance as by
the reality.

Another variety of the " Dancing Plague " visited the town of Stras-
burg in the year 1418. This was called the " St. Vitus's Dance," and
must have been somewhat similar to the chorea of the present day.
Then, however, it was epidemic, and produced the same infatuation
among the people as the St. John's Dance in the towns of Belgium and
the Lower Rhine. Those who from curiosity followed the swarms of
dancers were visibly affected by the sight, and evinced more or less
confusion and absurdity in their behaviour. Speedily, unable to resist
the frenzy, they joined in the mad revels, and passed days and nights
in the streets, capering to the sound of the bagpipes and other instru-
ments. Strange it must have been to have seen hundreds of men and
women dancing and jumping in the public market-places, the streets
and lanes, and continuing the exertion until completely exhausted. Over
stools, forms, and tables, sometimes purposely put in their way, even
women far advanced in the family-way would dance until they could
stir neither hand or foot. The consequences of this mental plague
were a fearful loss of life, and the visitation of thousands with incur-
able aberration of mind, and disgusting distortions of body.
It would appear that this dancing mania was a phenomenon well
known in the middle ages, previous to its great accession in 1374.
Thus, in the year 1237, upwards of a hundred eliildren*are said to have
been suddenly seized with this disease at Erfurt, and to have proceeded,
dancing and jumping, along the road to Arnstadt. When they arrived
at that place, they fell exhausted to the ground, and, according to
an old chronicle, many of them, after they were taken home, died, and
the rest remained affected to the end of their lives with a permanent
tremor. Another occurrence was related to have taken place on
the bridge at Utrecht, on the 17tli day of June, 1278, when two
hundred fanatics began to dance, and would not desist until a priest
passed, who was carrying the host to a person that was sick, upon which,
as if in punishment of their crime, the bridge gave way and they were
all drowned.

If we endeavour to fathom the causes, the fons et origo of this strange
malady, we shall find that these were deeply laid in the misery and
physical sufferings of the people. We shall comprehend how despair
sought relief in the intoxication of an artificial delirium. At the an-
niversary of St. John, bones and other rubbish were heaped together to
be consumed in smoke, while persons of all ages danced round the
flames as if they had been possessed, in the same way as at the Palilia,
an ancient Roman lustration by fire, whereat those who took part in
it sprang through a fire made of straw. " There is good ground for
supposing," says Hecker, " that the frantic celebration of the festival of
St. John, a.d. 1374, only served to bring to a crisis a malady which
had been long impending; and if we would further inquire how a
hitherto harmless usage which, like many others, had but served to
keep up superstition, could degenerate into so serious a disease, we must
take into account the unusual excitement of men's minds, and the
consequences of wretchedness and want. The bowels, which in many
were debilitated by hunger and bad food, were precisely the parts which
in most cases were attacked with excruciating pain; and the tympanitic
state of the intestines, points out to the intelligent physician an origin
of the disorder which is well worth consideration."

That the St. John's and St. Yitus's dance was propagated or com-
municated by sympathy, there can be no doubt. The great medical
reformer, Paracelsus, was clearly of this opinion. Sensual impressions,
he says, find their way to the heart?the seat of joys and emotions;
they overpower the opposition of reason; and whilst " all other quali-
ties a-nd natures" are subdued, incessantly impel the patient, in conse-
quence of his original compliance and his all-conquering imagination
to imitate what he has seen.

It may naturally be imagined, that occasionally the frenzy was feigned
from interested motives. Doubtless. But the evidence is all powerful
as to the absence generally of all motives for imposture, and the too
sad reality of the infliction. The severest punishments of the magi-
strate were useless. Those possessed often continued to dance without
intermission, until their very last breath was expended. Their fury and
extravagance of demeanour so completely deprived them of their senses,
that many of them dashed their brains out against the walls and corners
of buildings, or rushed headlong into rapid rivers, where they found a
watery grave. Roaring and foaming as they went, the bystanders could
only succeed in restraining them by placing benches and chairs in their
way, that, by the high leaps they were thus tempted to take, their
strength might be sooner exhausted. Music was the only thing that
had any effect upon the transports, although the paroxysms were as
often brought on and increased, as mitigated by it. On account of its
influence the magistrates hired musicians for the purpose of carrying
the St. Yitus's dancers so much the quicker through the attacks, and
directed that athletic men should be sent among them in order to com-
plete the exhaustion, which had been often observed to produce a good
effect. One instance of the persistence of the frenzy is so curious, that
it deserves repetition. It is related by Felix Platir, that he remembered
in his youth the authorities of Basle having commissioned several
powerful men to dance with a girl who had the dancing mania, till she
recovered from the disorder. They successively relieved each other,
and this singular mode of cure lasted above four weeks, when the
patient fell down exhausted, and being quite unable to stand, was car-
ried to an hospital, Avhere she recovered. She had remained in her
clothes all the time, and entirely regardless of the pain of her lacerated
feet, she had merely sat down occasionally to take some nourishment or
to slumber, during which the hopping movement of her body
continued.

Nor were the mischievous propensities of the dancers always con-
fined to themselves; they were not always solely their own enemies.
The peaceable inhabitants were prohibited wearing red garments, be-
cause, at the sight of this colour, those affected became so furious that
they flew at the persons who wore them, and tried to injure them. The
more opulent, therefore, employed confidential attendants to accompany
the maniacs to see they did no mischief.

We cannot pass over this period of history without alluding to lycan-
thropy as a true mental epidemic. The delusion spread in proportion
to the efforts made to suppress it. Lycantliropy was an extraordinary
species of insanity, depending doubtless upon a morbid condition of
the body, as it was observed that the maniacs were hollow-eyed, pale,
and forlorn; their tongues were dry, and they Avere troubled with im-
moderate thirst. These poor souls fancied themselves metamorphosed
into wolves, and therefore lay hid all day, and at night went abroad,
howling and barking, and tearing open dead men's graves. This disease
originally existed in the province of Arcadia, in Greece, a country
abounding in forests, morasses, and pasture lands; and in process of
time spread over Europe, afflicting not only the Roman, but the German
and Sarmatian nations. This hallucination is now, happily, banished
from the earth, if we except the disorder which is said to occur among
the aborigines of Brazil. After the Indian has wandered about for a
time, pale, silent, reserved, with a confused, fixed stare, he suddenly
breaks loose in the evening after sunset, runs raving through the village,
howls, turns up the graves, and rushes into the woods.'"

Turn Ave now to another and an opposite part of Europe, and we shall
observe that, coeATal A\rith the outbreak of the St. John's dance in Ger-
many, a malady having a close similitude to it, and equally extraordinary
in all its phenomena, made its appearance in Italy. This affords a most
instructive subject for contemplation, as the simultaneous ATisitation of a
moral pestilence in distant countries leads us to infer some common
though mysterious cause. The disease was called " tarantism," from the
belief that it arose from the bite of the tarantula, a ground spider
common to certain parts of Italy. For some centuries tarantism pre-
vailed as a great epidemic, having originated in Apulia and from thence
spread over the whole peninsula. Isolated cases of this malady are
still occasionally met with, and the dance called the " Tarantella" must
be familiar to every one who has visited the land of the Caesars.
Hecker, after enumerating the disasters which ravaged Italy even more
than other countries, gives the following lucid explanation of the origin
of tarantism:?

" Men's minds were everywhere morbidly sensitive; and as it happens
with individuals whose senses, when they are suffering under anxiety,
become more irritable, so that trifles are magnified into objects of great
alarm, and slight shocks, which would scarcely affect the spirits when in
health, give rise in them to severe diseases, so was it with this whole
nation, at all times so alive to emotions and at that period so sorely
pressed with the horrors of death. The bite of venomous spiders, or
rather the unreasonable fear of its consequences, excited at such a
juncture, though it could not have done so at an earlier period, a violent
nervous disorder, which, like St. Yitus's dance in Germany, spread by
sympathy, increasing in severity as it took a wider range, and still
further extending its ravages from its long continuance. Thus, from
the middle of the fourteenth century, the furies of the dance brandished
their scourge over afflicted mortals; and music, for which the inhabitants
of Italy, now probably for the first time, manifested susceptibility and
talent, became capable of exciting ecstatic attacks in those afflicted, and
then furnished the magical means of exorcising their melancholy." But
we must proceed with a description of the malady.

Tarantism was a true nervous disorder, tending to show the great
influence of the imagination in the production of disease. Although
females, from their more excitable nature, were excessively prone to the
infection, yet the strongest men of all classes in society were subjected
to its power. Nor Avas the complaint confined to the natives of Italy
alone. Foreigners of every colour and of every race, negroes, gipsies,
Spaniards, Albanians, were in like manner affected by it. Neither
youth nor age afforded protection against the effects of the bite or the
sight of the sufferers; so that even old men of ninety threw aside their
crutches at the sound of the tarantella, and as if some magic potion,
restorative of youth and vigour, were flowing through their veins, joined
the most extravagant dancers. It is said that even deaf people were
not exempted, catching the disorder through the eye.

The whole mania of tarantism may be said to have been founded in
the belief, which the strongest and healthiest could not withstand, that
the bite of the ground spider was certain death. If those who were
bitten escaped with their lives, they were seen pining away in a des-
ponding state of lassitude. They felt they were doomed, and therefore
gave way to hopeless melancholy. The mental malady was progressive
in its nature. Unaccountable emotions, strange desires and morbid
sensual irritations, ushered in the attack. Then followed loss of voice,
occasional blindness, vertigo, and sleeplessness. The body, sympathizing
with the mind, became weak and disordered. The digestive apparatus
especially suffered. Finally, complete insanity supervened, and the
poor sufferers either ended their miserable existence by suicide, or pro-
longed it away from the haunts of men among the tombs of the dead.
The Tarantati, it appears, had their fancies and antipathies, but in a
much more marked manner than their phlegmatic brother dancers of
Germany. Their excitement was great at the view of anything with
metallic lustre.

This suggests a comparison between those bitten by a mad dog in this
country and those stung by the tarantula in Italy. But here the sight of
water generally increases the patient's sufferings. The spider-bitten, on
the contrary, had a most ardent longing for the limpid stream. The
greatest pleasure was afforded them by the sight of clear water. They
held glasses of it in their hands while dancing, and took every oppor-
tunity of bathing their arms and heads in the pure element. Their
love for the sea was most extraordinary. The boundless expanse of the
blue ocean had irresistible attractions, and they lost themselves in its
contemplation. Some in whom this susceptibility was carried to its
highest pitch, cast themselves into the waves with blind fury, in a
transport of pleasurable excitement.

Nor should Ave omit making allusion to the agreeable sensations pro-
duced by certain colours. Unlike the dancers of St. John who detested
red colours, these poor lunatics delighted in it, and carried about a red
handkerchief for their gratification. Some, it appears, preferred yellow,
others black, while others were enraptured with green; but whatever
was the tint chosen, their rage for it was most extraordinary. At the
present day we can hardly suppose it possible that such a scene could
have occurred as the following. "No sooner did the patients obtain a
sight of the favourite colours than, new as the impression was, they
rushed like infuriated animals towards the object, devoured it with their
eager looks, kissed and caressed it in every possible way; and gradually
resigning themselves to softer sensations, adopted the languishing ex-
pression of enamoured lovers, and embraced the handkerchief, or what-
ever other article it might be which was presented to them, with the
most intense ardour while the tears streamed from their eyes, as if they
were completely overwhelmed by the inebriating impression on their
senses. Their rage Avas equally excited by colours Avhich they disliked.
On this strange malady it AAras found that nothing had the slightest
effect but music, and this only of a particular kind. Hence tarantellas
Avere composed expressly for the purpose. However hopeless the cases
might haAre appeared, the patients, tortured Avith pain or collapsed from
exhaustion, at the first note of their favourite melodies sprang from
their couches Avith new life and spirit, and danced for hours toge-
ther without apparent fatigue, until, covered Avitli a kindly perspiration,
they Avere sensibly relieved from their sufferings. If the music stopped
but for a moment before they Avere exhausted, all the previous symp-
toms returned, and they relapsed into a deeper state of dejection and
oppression. One thing very strange Avas noticed at these exhibitions.
The most uneducated boors moved to the tunes with grace and elegance,
and seemed suddenly to have acquired, as if by inspiration, a refined
musical ear, detecting every false note, although they had previously
never in their lives manifested any perception of the enchanting powers
of harmony.

It is difficult to determine, at this distant day, how far deception and
fraud may have been mixed up with tarantism. Cases of imposture
must have occasionally occurred. But when Ave consider the real bodily
sufferings the dancers endured, and the cruelty with which they were
generally treated by the spectators, we cannot reasonably doubt the
genuineness of the malady. Tarantism was a disease of the imagina-
tion, fostered and propagated by sympathy and imitation. A true
mental epidemic. It may be very much doubted whether a remedy
could be found, even in these days of enlightenment, were we visited by
such a dancing plague. It is difficult to minister to a mind diseased.
But music, although undoubtedly serviceable in bringing on a crisis in
those bitten by the mania, must have greatly aided the spread of the
complaint. Andral, in noticing these epidemic dances of the middle
ages, says they reminded him of the experiments of Fleurens on the
section of the peduncles of the cerebellum in pigeons and rabbits, which
immediately after the operation commenced to move in circles or in a
retrograde direction until completely exhausted. Many of the symp-
toms, especially the tympanic state of the bowels, suggest the idea of
hysteria. But independently of the fact that on the whole more males
than females were troubled with tarantism, there is abundant evidence to
prove that, although frequently complicated with that proteiform malady,
it yet ran its own course uninfluenced by it.

That hysteria is itself a distinct contagious nervous affection, every
medical practitioner can bear testimony. Its epidemic nature in hos-
pitals is well known. Zimmerman, in his work on " Solitude," tells us
that in a large convent in France a nun one day began to mew like a
cat. Shortly afterwards other nuns did so. At last all the nuns mewed
together every day, at a certain time, for several hours together, to the
great scandal of the neighbourhood. There was also in Germany a still
more remarkable convent epidemic, described by Cardan. A nun in a
German nunnery fell to biting her companions. In the course of a short
time all the fair sisters fought together with their teeth. The news of this
infatuation among the nuns soon spread, and it now passed from con-
vent to convent throughout a great part of Germany, principally Saxony
and Brandenberg. It afterwards visited the nunneries of Holland, and
at last the nuns had the biting mania even as far as Rome.

Following the course of history, we find that in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries other errors had taken the place of those exploded.
This was the epoch of magic and belief in compacts with the devil?the
time of magicians, sorcerers, witches, and demonomaniacs. These were
real delusions of the mind, and were propagated like other contagious
affections. The thousands of poor wretches who expiated in flames
and torments the misfortune of having lost their reason, served but to
spread the epidemic malady. The confessions wrung from the victims
were sincere. They thoroughly believed they had communications with
the Evil One, and even held intercourse with him of a sexual character.
Martin Luther himself could not escape from the influences of his age.
He fought with the devil, seized him by the horns and overthrew him.
At another time, the demon conquered in his turn, and the reformer
came out worsted from the combat. It is well known that, having
failed once to convince his Satanic majesty by his arguments, he threw
the ink-bottle at his head.

A species of mental epidemic was predominant at the beginning of
the eighteenth century, in various parts of Hungary, Moravia, Silesia,
and Lorraine. It was called Vampirism. Those who laboured under
the malady, believed that the souls of their enemies after death would
appear to them in various disguises, and even injure them and their
cattle, unless their bodies were burnt. Many dreamt that these mali-
cious spectres took them by the throat, strangled them, and sucked their
blood. Others swore they saw these cruel goblins do so, and thus the
malady became general. The terror occasioned by these visions was
ordinarily so great, that after having experienced it two or three times,
the person was exhausted, and died in a state of syncope. The evil
was carried to that extent that, not being able to check these flights of
imagination, the magistrates were obliged to allow the sanctuaries of
the dead to be violated in order to save the living.

Passing over the numerous instances of epidemic disorders of the
mind occurring in factories and other crowded and ill-ventilated assem-
blies, from causes altogether insignificant, we come to those occasioned
by the excitement of the feelings during the act of devotion. Religion
is of all other enthusiastic infatuations the most fertile in mental de-
rangement, and the infection spreads with the greatest facility by sym-
pathy. No otherwise can we account for the frenzied actions of the
followers of Mahomet and other Eastern propagandists. The history of
our own church furnishes innumerable proofs. None more prominent
among these than the eccentricities of the Convulsionnaires in France,
in the year 1731. The origin was thus. Those who visited the tomb
of the Deacon Paris, in the cemetery of St. Medard, spread a rumour
that miracles took place there. Votaries were seized with convulsions
and tetanic spasms, rolled upon the ground like persons possessed,
had violent contortions of their head and limbs, and suffered the
greatest oppression, accompanied by quickness and irregularity of
pulse. This novel occurrence excited the greatest sensation all over
Paris, and an immense crowd of people resorted daily to the cemetery,
in order to see so wonderful a spectacle. The disorder soon increased,
until it produced in nervous women clairvoyance?a phenomenon till
then unknown. One female especially attracted attention, who, blind-
fold, and, as it Avas believed, by means of the sense of smell, read every
Avriting that was placed before her, and distinguished the characters of
unknown persons. The very earth taken from the grave of the deacon
was soon thought to possess miraculous power. It was sent to nume-
rous sick persons at a distance, whereby they were said to have been
cured; and thus this nervous disorder spread far beyond the limits of
the capital. At one time, it was computed that there were more than
eight hundred decided Convulsionnaires. The disorder itself assumed
various forms, and augmented by its attacks the general excitement.
Many persons, besides suffering from the convulsions, experienced
violent pain, which required the assistance of their brethren of the
faith. On this account they, as well as those who afforded them
aid, were called by the common title of Secourists. The modes of
relief adopted were remarkably in accordance with those which were ad-
ministered to the St. John's dancers and the tarantati, and they were
in general very rough ; for the sufferers were beaten and goaded in
various parts of the body with stones, hammers, swords, clubs, &c.; of
which treatment the defenders of this extraordinary sect relate the
most astonishing examples, in proof that severe pain is imperatively
demanded by nature in this disorder, as an effectual counter-irritant.
The Secourists used wooden clubs, in the same manner as paviors use their
mallets ; and it is stated that some Convulsionnaires have borne daily
from six to eight thousand blows thus inflicted, without danger. Some-
times, however, the patients died from the effects of the Grand Secours.
One Secourist administered to a young woman who was suffering under
spasm of the stomach the most violent blows on that part. Sometimes
the patients bounded from the ground, impelled by the convulsions, like
fish when out of water; and this was so frequently practised at a late
period, that the women and girls, when they expected such violent con-
tortions, not wishing to appear indecent, put on gowns made like sacks
closed at the feet. The female sex especially was distinguished by all
kinds of leaping, and almost inconceivable contortions of body. Some
spun round on their feet with incredible rapidity, as is related of the
dervishes; others ran their heads against walls, or curved their bodies
like rope-dancers so that their heels touched their shoulders. All this
degenerated at length into decided insanity. The most absurd prac-
tices were resorted to by the fanatics. Some had a board placed across
their bodies, upon which a whole row of men stood ; and as, in this
unnatural state of mind, a kind of pleasure is derived from excruciating
pain, some too were seen who caused their bosoms to be pinched with
tongs; while others, with gowns closed at the feet, stood upon their
heads, and remained in that position longer than would have been pos-
sible had they been in health. Pinault, the advocate, who belonged to
this sect, barked like a dog some hours every day; and even this found
imitation among the believers.

That sect of English Methodists called the Jumpers, surpass, if pos-
sible, the French Convulsionnaires. It is difficult in their case to
draw the line between religious ecstacy and a perfect disorder of the
nerves. By the use of certain unmeaning words they work themselves
up into a state of religious frenzy, in which they seem to have scarcely
any control over their senses. They then begin to jump, with strange
gestures, repeating this exercise with all their might until they are ex-
hausted ; so that it not unfrequently happens that women, who, like the
Msenades, practise these religious exercises, are carried away from the
midst of them in a state of syncope, whilst the remaining members of
the congregation, for miles together on their way home terrify those
whom they meet by the sight of such demoniacal ravings. There are
never more than a few ecstatics, who by their example excite the rest to
jump, and these are followed by the greatest part of the meeting, so
that these assemblages of the Jumpers resemble for hours together the
wildest orgies, rather than congregations met for Christian edification.
Most of our readers will remember the strange scenes exhibited in
the chapel of the late Mr. Irving. It is hardly too much to affirm that
the reverend gentleman himself and nearly all his followers were the
subjects of monomania of a contagious nature, and this without
throwing the slightest shadow of suspicion on their sincerity. -
Mrs. Trollope, in her " Domestic Manners of the Americans," and
other writers, give us ample details of the same kind of aberration, but
carried to a still greater pitch of absurdity, in the New World. At the
camp meetings, at which thousands assemble for divine worship, every
folly and absurdity is committed calculated to bring their religious faith
into disrepute. Hundreds have swooned away, worn out by raving
and jumping. In the state of ecstacy into which they are thrown,
women have publicly stripped themselves and plunged into the rivers,
whilst others have miscarried during the fits of convulsion. A sect
called the Barkers manifest symptoms of complete aberration of intellect.
Whole bands are seen moving on all fours, barking and growling, and
otherwise indicating the degradation into which they have fallen. This
mad infatuation is readily communicated by sympathy to the bystanders,
especially those of a tender age or nervous constitution.

We think that, in the investigation of the causes of mental epidemics,
we should always bear in mind the influence of internal organic changes
on the intellectual disorder. The opipion of M. Broussais is valuable
on this subject. He says:?"A point well worthy of our notice is the
frequent manifestation, through the deranged perceptions of the insane,
of the seat of the abdominal lesion existing simultaneously with the
mental derangement. Thus some are tormented by a dread of poison;
others, by a strange and bizarre hallucination, believe in the existence
within them of some extraordinary creature, some savage animal, per-
petually gnawing, rending, and biting their intestines. All these sen-
sations exist specially in those whose intestines are affected. It is a
real feeling badly interpreted; but it is also a valuable guide in the
treatment of the disease."

What better illustration of this can Ave desire than the anecdote
narrated by Andral in one of his lectures 1 He calls it the history of
the epidemic monomania of St. Souard, and never was there a history
more curious and extraordinary. A battalion of French soldiers, during
the toils and dangers of a campaign, were marching 011 a certain point
on a hot and overcoming day, and at double the usual speed. Their
strength was 800, all hardy, seasoned, and courageous men, careless of
danger, despising the devil, and little occupied with thoughts of ghosts
and phantasmagoria. On the night of the occurrence in question, the
battalion was forced to occupy a narrow and low building, barely calcu-
lated to accommodate 300 persons. Nevertheless they slept, but at
midnight one and all were roused by frightful screams issuing from all
quarters of the house, and to the eyes of the astonished, affrighted
soldiers, appeared the vision of a huge dog, which bounded in through
the window, and rushed with extraordinary heaviness and speed over
the breasts of the spectators. The soldiers quitted the building in
terror. Next night, by the solicitations of the surgeon and ehef-de-
battaillon, who accompanied them, they again resumed their previous
quarters. "We saw," says the narrator, "that they slept; wide awake
we watched the arrival of the hour of the preceding panic, and mid-
night had scarcely struck when the veteran soldiers for the second time
started to their feet. Again they had heard the supernatural voices; again
the visionary hound bestrode them to suffocation. The chef-de-battaillon
and myself heard or saw nothing of these events." Here, gentlemen, pro-
ceeds Andral, is a curious fact, and it is perhaps more worthy of attention,
as it seems to point out the especial operation of physical causes in the pro-
duction of monomania, and in the direction of the delusion towards the
organs, namely those of respiration, which had chiefly suffered in the pre-
vious marches, and in the suffocating atmosphere of the den in which
they slept.

From this epitome of most voluminous evidence we have here
brought forward, Ave believe it may be considered established that there
are certain species of insanity of a contagious nature, and of a tem-
porary duration, consisting of a suspension of the healthy action of
the intellectual functions: that the infection is capable of being
spread as an epidemic through the media of example, sympathy, and
imitation.

Nor should it be supposed that these strange details marked only the
errors and darkness of by-gone times. We have only to look around
us to observe, that such indications of human weakness are of daily
occurrence among the most civilized nations of the earth. In this
country the commission of a great and extraordinary crime produces,
not unfrequently, a kind of mania of imitation in the district in which
it happens. In this way we account for the infatuation of several weak
persons shooting at the Queen in succession, and when a foolish girl
threw herself from the Monument, others were found silly enough to
follow her example.

In a neighbouring state the same spirit of mischievous sympathy has
been repeatedly evinced. Thus, a supposed miracle having been per-
formed before the gate of the convent of St. Genevieve, such a number
of similar occurrences happened on the same spot in a few days, that
the police were compelled to post a peremptory notice on the gate,
" prohibiting any individuals from working miracles on the place in
question." A few years since, at the Hotel des Invalides, a veteran
hung himself on the threshold of one of the doors of a corridor. No
suicide had occurred in the establishment for two years previously; but
in the succeeding fortnight five invalids hung themselves on the same
cross-bar, and the governor Avas obliged to shut up the passage. Here
is a case exactly similar to the London Monument-mania. During the
last days of the empire an individual ascended the column in the Place
Vendome, and threAV himself off, and Avas dashed to pieces. The event
excited a great sensation. In the course of the ensuing Aveek four
persons imitated his example, and the police were obliged to proscribe
the entrance to the column.

Instances of a similar kind could be cited ad infinitum, but Avhy
should we look for them Avhen we ourselves are witnesses of mental
disturbance on a scale of fearful magnitude? The demon of revolution
is a veritable mania, that is now stalking with giant strides over the
peace of Europe. A dreadful epidemic, spreading by sympathy and
imitation around the focus from whence it started, and involving in its
toils, subduing by its pestilential breath, all those whom previous phy-
sical suffering or mental incapacity had predisposed for victims.
Onwards it will tend, creating horror and dismay among the unin-
fected, until, like the dancing plague, it has worn itself out by its
vagaries, or is checked by the united good sense of the community.
But who can tell what horrors may ensue ere this takes place1? It
is useless for those with whom the storm has originated, to attempt to
stop its progress. Downwards it will thunder, crushing everything
that impedes its progress. The floodgates once removed, all must go
with the stream or be overwhelmed in the roaring cataract.

There is such a thing as murder-madness, which springs up insensibly.
Those who are cursed with this mania desire to spill blood?nay, more,
to drink it, to slake their thirst with it with all the carnivorous longing
of tigers. Horrible to think too, this atrocious taste spreads by imitation
among multitudes of people, becomes an epidemic murder-madness, only
ceasing when it has no more victims to immolate. Ancient Rome and
every other city of revolutions has chapters of this character in its
history, and such was the origin of the carnage of the Septembrizers in
the first French revolution. Absolutely drunk with blood, they persevered
in their butcheries for days together. At this present day the slightest
spark may fire a magazine of equal terror.

Many circumstances tend to show that this political crisis was the
result of impulse much more than reason. Doubtless the first leaders
were of sound, and perhaps strong minds, and some cause existed for
the revolutionary movement; but as soon as the feelings of the people
were excited these men sank into insignificance. The accidental firing
of a gun set all in commotion, and immediately innumerable maniacs,
led on by the morbid principle of imitation, were to be found among
the crowd. Fortunately the delirium was allowed to subside partially
from being unopposed, or it would most probably have hurried its
victims.into the most fearful excesses. Still a sufficient number of acts
of madness were committed to show that the poison was working.
Great must have been the genius of that man who was able to " ride
on the whirlwind and direct the storm,"?who was able with his eye to
control the raging mass around him, and, like another Orpheus, tame
by his persuasive tongue the wild hyenas at his feet. The man, La-
grange, who presented a pistol at his head, and was immediately after-
wards carried away raving mad to an asylum, was, we are assured, but
an ordinary specimen of the political maniac.

Another and a strong proof that the revolutionary spirit is a moral
epidemic is, that it is taking the same course in all essential points as it
did on a former occasion. The instinct of imitation completely baffles and
overpowers reason. So fully are we impressed with the truth of this obser-
vation, that we would venture to predict that the whole will be the same
scene acted over again, not with the same rapidity as before, because the
lunacy is not at the same height, but with the same certainty. No
other mode of cure presenting itself to the mind, it may even be a
matter of question whether, as was practised by the authorities of Italy
and Germany, it would not be better to administer suitable stimulants
in order to hasten the crisis, provided always some guardian angel
could be present to see that the maniacs neither injured themselves or
others. If we are to judge by the experience of the past, to form our
opinion from the annals of the large institutions devoted to the insane,
we can readily determine the specific nature of the ailments that will have
to be treated for the next few years. Political revolutions and republican
governments are ever most fruitful in mental aberration, so that there
will be numberless cases of violent mania from extraordinary excitement,
ambitious monomania from dreams of impossible wealth and glory, and
hopeless melancholy from disappointed ambition and ruined plans and
prospects.

There are certain grave reflections that will naturally suggest them-
selves to those who have the care of the alienated, in considering the
epidemic nature of certain mental states and affections. They will see
the necessity of repressing the very slightest eccentricities of manner or
conduct among their patients, and of carefully separating from the
rest those who exhibit an infectious nervous disorder. Their own con-
duct must be especially steady and sedate, without infringing on that
cheerfulness or even gaiety of disposition calculated to infuse hope and
confidence in the afflicted. Finally they would do well to guard all
persons of a nervous or excitable temperament, f/om seeing 01* more par-
ticularly from associating with the insane. In these days, when the
humane and enlightened system of management is cai'ried to its furthest
limits, this caution is not needless. Constant association with lunatics may
prove, to a certain class of minds, extremely dangerous. Sympathy and
imitation are beyond the control of the will, and are not to be com-
bated by reason. In the histories previously detailed we have seen that
healthy and powerful men have been drawn into the vortex of epidemic
mania, and we have ourselves known several instances of persons
whose minds have become impaired, from being constantly asso-
ciated with lunatics. All those, therefore, who are brought in contact
or personal communication with the insane, should exercise a vigilant
and careful control over their own thoughts, feelings, and conduct; and
those who from hereditary taint or mobile temperament are predisposed
to diseased mental emotion should avoid their society altogether. This
remark of course applies more particularly to those whose sympathetic
nature and peculiarity of organic structure peculiarly dispose them to
every variety of derangement of the nervous system.

Since the above remarks were written, we have perused an abstract
of a paper on the effect of political emotion, communicated to the
Academie de Medicine, by M. Belliomme. It appears that in 1830,
M. Belliomme communicated to the Societe Medico-Pratique several
cases of insanity brought to his establishment, in which the exciting
cause had been the events of July. In 1832, some new cases, reported
by M. Belhomme to the same society, went to prove that the emeutes,
which disturbed Paris in 1831 and 1832, had given rise to a great
number of acute alienations. In 1848, we have a fresh report of ten
cases, which show that the fright caused by the state commotions has
given rise to several attacks of mental derangement. After having
presented the preceding facts in detail to the Academy (whose members
seemed extremely interested in the paper), M. Belhomme concluded by
the following reflections:

All the patients who have come under his notice were very strongly
predisposed to insanity; they had either had previous fits of mania, or
were born of insane parents, or else were remarkable for eccentricities
and irrational habits. The cases were mostly acute, went rapidly
through their phases, and had a favourable termination. Of the above-
named ten patients, eight were cured, one was declared incurable, and
the last died. The treatment was of a sedative character. In twenty
such cases, which were observed at different periods, the affection pre-
sented the same symptoms, progress, and termination.

The author thinks, on the whole, that the politic^ events which have
successively shaken the social system in France for the last fifty
years, have notably increased the number of the insane, and he quotes
Esquirol and Pariset, who entertained the sarjie opinion. Pariset, in
particular, acknowledges that any considerable and rapid change, either
in the physical or moral state of things, is pernicious both to health and
intelligence.

We subjoin M. Belhomme's conclusions:?
1. One of the moral causes which act on the development of mental
derangement is the perturbation resulting from revolutions.
2. That insanity, in such cases, singles out predisposed individuals,
who are, in some degree, on the brink of an attack.
3. That it assumes an acute form, and is therefore more susceptible
of cure than otherwise.
4. That the sedative treatment is the best, particularly long-continued
warm baths, with cold affusions on the head.
5. That derivatives towards the intestinal canal and the skin generally
bring the disease to a favourable termination.
" 6. And, lastly, that a well-regulated moral treatment powerfully aids
the cure.
