The Treatment of the Isane
==========================

Art. III. An Essay on the Use and Abuse of Restraint in the
Management of the Insane, including some Remarks on tlie
Origin and Nature of their Disease; with copious Notes.

:Author: Hamilton Labatt, A.B., T.C.D., Fellow of tlie Royal College
of Surgeons of Ireland, &c. Hodges and Smith. Dublin, pp. 7C.
Amongst physicians and philanthropists, no subject connected with
insanity has deservedly occupied so much attention as the important
inquiry respecting the use and abuse of mechanical restraint in the
treatment of the insane.

We are delighted that this most interesting question has been so
fully?nay, enthusiastically, discussed; and although some may perhaps
think that exaggeration, according to their view of the controversy,
has occasionally characterized the arguments advanced by the ad-
vocates for the total abolition of all kinds of mechanical restraint, in
every form of insanity, still, the injurious consequences resulting
from its indiscriminate employment are so very evident, obvious,
.and palpable, even to a casual observer, that we think there cannot
be any doubt entertained respecting the fundamental principle?that
the system of non-restraint ought to be the established ride in all
asylums for lunatics: whilst the exceptions to such an axiom should
be indeed of very, very rare occurrence.

Before entering specially on an examination of the publication now
before us, it may be interesting to cast a retrospective glance upon
the defective condition and management of some of the asylums in
England and elsewhere, during the olden, if not more recent, times;
in order to contrast their present improved state with the horrifying
accounts contained in authentic documents, which describe occur-
rences unfortunately then too common; and that no longer back than
the commencement of the present century. It will be also instructive
to advert briefly to the barbarous treatment the insane are still
subjected to in many parts of the world, where the doctrines ot
non-restraint, and the modern more humane method of treating the
insane, have unfortunately not yet been adopted. Even in France,
so much psychologically in advance of other countries, we are told by
writers of the day, that it was formerly not uncommon tor French
physicians to travel to England in order to gain information on this
important subject, so as to improve the system formerly pursued in
their own badly-regulated establishments. Such were the motives that
induced the benevolent Tenon, towards the end of the last century,
to visit London, expressly to sec the provincial and two metropolitan
hospitals for the insane. This excellent physician was one of the
first individuals who, in France, proposed to remove all the lunatic
patients, then confined in the ill-ventilated and unhealthy wards of
the Hotel Dieu, of Paris, to an asylum specially appropriated for their
reception; which soon led to the foundation of those noble institutions
for the insane, where Pinel, Esquirol, and other physicians well
known to fame, have laboured in the cause of science and humanity.
In Italy, Germany, and in Holland, the march of improvement
has likewise proceeded, as every person can testify, who has visited,
within these few years past, the asylum at Aversa, near Naples; Son-
nenstein, in Saxony; Siegburg, in Rhenish Prussia; and the madhouse
of Utrecht : even at Vienna, in which capital, many years ago, we
witnessed in the old and circular asylum, sad scenes and modes of
treating the insane inmates which are now no longer pursued. In some
of the Italian asylums, especially at Genoa, we also saw many of the
patients chained by the hands and feet. Fortunately, matters are now
much improved, as well in Italy as Germany; and at Vienna, a new
hospital for lunatics is being constructed upon improved principles,
in order to correct the defects of the ancient and badly-arranged
building; as also to carry out the more humane method of treating
the insane, at present adopted by the psychological physicians of
England and France. Again, throughout North America, much has
likewise been accomplished in the same benevolent cause, as shown
by tlie many recent valuable reports emanating from various asylums
of that country. But in other parts of the world, and even in places
where Christians rule supreme, the condition of the poor maniac is
still sometimes most deplorable, and often very little removed from
barbarism; thus proving, that the modern doctrines of non-restraint,
and improved moral treatment of mental maladies, have not yet
penetrated into these benighted regions, still less into countries like
Spain, Egypt and Turkey.

That such condemnatory asseverations are not made without proof
of their existence, it is only necessary to make one or two references
to recent observers, who, from personal knowledge, obtained during
their travels, describe the treatment to which afflicted lunatics arc
actually subjected in these countries, and the management of the
asylums wherein they are confined. For example, Mr. Ford, in his recent
learned and remarkable publication,""' states, that the lunatic asylum
at Toledo is no honour to Spain. There is no attempt at classifica-
tion. The inmates are usually crowded together in one confusion of
dirt and misery, where they howl at each other, chained like wild
beasts, and treated even worse than criminals; for the passions of
the most furious are augmented by the savage lash. There is not
even a curtain to conceal the sad necessities of these human beings,
now reduced to animals; everything is public, even unto death,
Avhose last groan is mingled with the frantic laugh of the surviving
spectators. In some rare cases, the maniac is confined in solitary
cells. Of these, many, when first sent, were not mad, but put out
of the Avay by friends and relatives. This establishment is a shame
to Toledo; and in 1843, the keepers always conducted any visitor to
the cage, or den, in which the wife of a celebrated Captain-General
of Catalonia was shown, as a special object of cruel curiosity, and
made a public shoio, although permitted to wallow in naked filth.
Again, in the lunatic asylum at Granada?the oldest establishment,
we believe, of the kind in Europe, having been founded by Ferdinand
and Isabella?matters are by no means in a better condition, its filth
and mismanagement, according to the authority of Mr. Ford, being
scandalous.

In the New World, or South America, the asylums are quite as
bad as in Spain; and we arc informed by Yon Tschudi, when
describing his rccent visit to Lima, that the lunatic hospital of St.
Andre in that capital is opened on every 30th November, on St.
Andrew's day, for the admission of the public into the wards occupied
* " The Handbook of Spain."

by the insane patients. On that occasion, one of the favourite
amusements of the inhabitants of Lima, fashionable as otherwise, is
to go to St. Andre's Hospital, to see the lunatics. It is melancholy
to observe, according to Yon Tscliudi's narrative, these unfortunate
beings thus made the object of public exhibition, and irritated by the
idle throng who go to stare at them. The collection of alms from
the numerous visitors, who come to see this revolting show, was
doubtless the motive for keeping up so exceedingly reprehensible a
custom. This reminds us of a similar and equally injurious practice,
which prevailed almost daily in a London madhouse till towards the
end of the last century ; when, according to an account of Betlilem
Hospital, published in 1783, by the Rev. Thomas Bowen, the chap-
lain to the institution, a revenue of at least 400/. per annum was
obtained from the unlimited admission of visitants to the hospital,
whom very often an idle and wanton curiosity drew to that region
of distress; and as each person paid about one penny, according
to the finding of the committee of the 12th March, 1742, about
ninety thousand visitors were sometimes admitted in one year. The
crowd was often so great, that to prevent disturbances, the porter
Avas annually made a constable, and attended with the other servants
to keep order. However, this abuse became so general, and the
injury inflicted upon the patients Avas so apparent, that in 1770 all
indiscriminate permission to visit the hospital Avas very properly
forbidden. The same improper licence of visiting the inmates Avas
also formerly permitted at many continental asylums for the insane;
where the lunatics Avere confined in cages, through the bars of which
food and straAV were thrust in, as if to Avild beasts. In this con-
dition, these unfortunate human beings Avere publicly exhibited to
visitors, avIio paid a certain sum to see them, as at a menagerie.
Happily such barbarous proceedings are not iioav to be Avitnessed,
Ave believe, in any part of civilized Europe, and even in those dark
barbarian regions Avhere such injurious customs still prevail, they
must inevitably give Avay before the sure but certain advance of
knowledge and civilization.
Amongst Mahomedans and Turks the treatment adopted toAvards
lunatics, and the cruelties they are often subjected to, is even much
Avorse than in those Christian countries to Avhich allusion has just
been made. For instance, at Grand Cairo, when Yon Orlicli visited,
only the other day, the lunatic hospital of the Egyptian capital, he
found, as related in his "Travels to India," that a narroAV yard, sur-
rounded by lofty buildings, the loAver rooms of Avhicli contained
small cells or cages, like those for Avild beasts, contained at the time
244 ON THE USE AND ABUSE OE RESTRAINT IN
of his visit between twenty and thirty inmates, most of whom Avere
in chains, almost naked, and covered with filth. The keeper told
Yon Orlich that the method of cure usually adopted towards these
poor creatures was scanty food, a shower-bath three times a day,
and corporal punishment! ISTo description could be more graphic,
however harrowing it proves to the feelings of a humane spectator
when visiting such a receptacle, whilst it truly indicates the deplor-
able condition to which these poor victims of insanity have been
reduced in this country, although bordering on Syria, where Turks
also rule, and in which lunatics appear even favoured beings, being
there known by the name of Santons.

Again, at Constantinople, according to Dr John Davy, who re-
sided some time in that metropolis, the management of lunatic asy-
lums, and the treatment of the inmates, seem equally as deplorable
as in Egypt, In the madhouse of the Turkish capital, the lunatics
are kept in cold cells in the winter, although snow is 011 the ground,
with unglazed windows. The poor men are chained by the neck to
the wall, with a heavy iron chain six feet in length, being the space
to which their exercise is limited. jSTo medical aid is afforded them.
The inmates are open to the public gaze, and subjected to irritation
of an aggravated kind, from mischievous boys and lads, who torment,
and even strike the violent and furious. The asylum is near a
menagerie, and the visitor must pass through the yard containing
cages, in which a few wild beasts are exhibited, in order to enter
that containing the cells of the lunatics; and payment for both ex-
hibitions is the same. Miss Pardoe, in her recent " Tour to Constan-
tinople," fully confirms the account given by Dr Davy ; indeed, other
authors have published similar statements; whilst it has been re-
marked, that the most painful object, connected with the scenes
witnessed in this den of iniquity, was the heavy chain and collar of
iron worn by each of the lunatics confined.

The disclosures revealed by the parliamentary investigations at
the early part of the current century, show that, in this country, the
management of asylums was very defective, and the treatment of the
lunatics immured therein most objectionable; whilst transactions
then took place, in some English insane establishments, almost as
bad as the atrocities just described to be still common in Spain and
Turkey. In France, Pinel fortunately commenced his philanthropic
crusade against the antiquated system pursued towards insane
patients, before the period now alluded to; and although Samuel
Tuke had also laboured much in aid of the same benevolent object,
even so early as 1792, it is only of late years that the broad.prin-
ciple of doing away with all mechanical restraint whatever in the
management of lunatics lias been laid down and acted upon by
those English physicians who, along with other philanthropists, now
take the lead in this humane movement.

Among the various publications which have recently appeared bear-
ing upon so interesting a subject as the treatment of lunatics without
restraint, we have selected the one whose title is placed at the head ot
this article. The volume, although of small dimensions, Ave have chosen,
from the circumstance of its being an advocate of the doctrine of non-
restraint, and one which deserves perusal. If allowed to perpetrate a
pun, without giving offence, where none is really intended, our feeling
being quite otherwise, the book now under review may well be desig-
nated "LaBatt-w amongst the coercionists." Speaking metaphorically,
in the language of sportsmen, the game is plentiful, and the result
satisfactory; whilst looking 011 as by-standers or critics, we do say
the feats performed in the good cause are creditable, and merit
approbation. Preliminary to entering upon an examination of some of
the important points discussed in the volume before us, we would
take the liberty of remarking, that to our comprehension at least,
some obscurity envelopes the circumstance alluded to in the author's
preface, the whole merits of which we do not so fully understand as
to venture upon giving any judicial opinion. We therefore afford the
writer an opportunity of stating the case and arguments in his own
words:?

" The cause, then, for the publication of this Essay, is at once
declared. Under other circumstances, it might probably have rested
in that oblivion, to which the selected manuscript has been hitherto
unfortunately consigned. And much, indeed, is it to be regretted,
that the object originally contemplated by the learned founder of
the Prize should be frustrated by the non-appearance of that Essay?
a production which, if published, would have afforded an opportunity
for canvassing arguments designed to uphold physical restraint as a
remedial agent in insane cases. And, 011 this account, the author
entertains peculiar reasons for anxiety, inasmuch as opinions directly
at variance with the views put forward in that manuscript are
advocated in the following pages."

The allusion made in the above quotation would seem to imply
that some irregularity had been committed in the adjudication of a
puze requiring an explanation. This appears the more necessary, if
it be wished that persons at a distance should understand all the
pros and cons of the cause which is thus submitted to their judg-
ment by way of appeal. If otherwise intended, it would be much
better, in our humble opinion, to let the matter now rest in
oblivion, especially seeing some time lias elapsed since the occurrence
took place; the more so, as the Irish College of Surgeons, according
to the author, " well may congratulate itself on the significant and
vigorous manifestation of spirit and determination which, to the
honour and credit of our body be it stated, has been evinced to dis-
countenance such means of superseding fair and unimpeachable com-
petition." This " fiat" of so high a court seems conclusive.
Notwithstanding the reader may fairly entertain a feeling of in-
credulity and amazement, when perusing the details, recorded on
indubitable authority, of the mode in which many unfortunate victims
of mental alienation were formerly treated in some asylums, there
cannot exist any doubt whatever, as the author states at the com-
mencement of his Essay, that " to the system of cruel and un-
mitigated restraint, recorded as part of the treatment formerly
adopted in lunatic asylums, we may attribute that reaction in public
opinion which lias -happily terminated in the very rapid and almost
universal revolution in the management of the insane."

Unquestionably, the many instances reported in books of the
afflicted maniac's sufferings, his madness exasperated, and his disease
confirmed by the lash or chain, are by far too well authenticated
now to require any further proof or illustration ; whilst learned pro-
fessors, able physicians, and even individuals, otherwise humane,
formerly sanctioned?nay, did not hesitate to inculcate upon their
pupils?measures which would be now considered, and very justly, as
harsh and cruel treatment. Thus Dr Cullen recommended the
medical practitioner to endeavour to produce a constant impression
of fear upon the insane patient, and to inspire awe and dread in his
weakened mind, in order to cure the existing mental disease. In
fact, as was well said by De la Rive, of Geneva, when speaking of
the great evils formerly existing, and the improper practices then
prevalent in some English asylums for the insane, " one would think
madmen were employed to torture madmen."

No impartial person can well deny but much reprehensible treat-
ment, at one time, took place in many receptacles for the insane;
nevertheless, the great majority of institutions for the reception and
cure of lunatics, more particularly in the metropolitan districts, are
now of a very different character to the description handed down to
us in reports of similar places, during former days of darkness, when
chains, belts, and straw were but too frequent appliances to control
excited patients, and to relieve lazy attendants. A complete revolu-
tion has fortunately taken place, thanks to an enlightened public
opinion, backed by philanthropy and medical science. Such being
tlie fact, and as no good would supervene now to reproduce to
our readers tlie details of cruelties, abuses, and frauds wliicli were
many years ago perpetrated in madhouses, according to the authority
of Mr. J.. S. Rogers, a surgeon in London, and to whose statements
the author makes frequent reference, Ave think it will he much better
to pass them over in silence, believing confidently that proceedings
of a similar kind can very seldom or never again occur. The facts
recorded by Mr. Rogers then belong to history, and attracted, cer-
tainly, much attention at the time they were brought forward; but
as it could serve no beneficial purpose at present to recal the par-
ticulars to recollection, they well may be consigned to forgetfulness.
The first impetus in this country towards an improved system of
treating lunatics Avas undoubtedly given by Mr. Tuke, about the
end of the year 1793, as already stated, Avhen a piece of ground, near
York, Avas purchased by the Society of Friends, of which body he
Avas a distinguished ornament. In the aboVe-named locality, the
now justly-celebrated Retreat Avas erected as an asylum for the insane.
During the same year, but subsequent to the proceedings just men-
tioned, Pinel commenced his useful and never-to-be-forgotten labours
in aid of the unfortunate maniacs confined at Bicetre. Having first
obtained the sanction of the reATolutionary gwernment, then domi-
nant in France, Pinel immediately began those important reformatory
measures in the treatment of lunatics Avhicli liaATe since immortalized
his name. As Ave cannot better illustrate this, the culminating
point in Pinel's brilliant career, or place the matter more clearly or
instructively before our professional brethren, Ave transcribe the
statement made by the author in the subjoined paragraph:?

" There were about fifty Avliom lie considered might, Avithout
danger to the others, be unchained ; and he began by releasing
tAvelve, Avith the sole precaution of having previously prepared the
same number of strong waistcoats, Avith long sleeves, Avhicli could be
tied behind the back it necessary. The first man 011 Avliom the ex-
periment Avas to be tried Avas an English captain, Avhose history no
one knew, as he had been in chains forty years. He Avas thought to
be one of the most furious among them. His keepers approached
him Avith caution, as he had, in a fit of fury, killed one of them on the
spot Avith a blow of his manacles. He Avas chained more rigorously
than any of the others. Pinel entered his cell unattended, and calmly
san to him, ' Captain, I will order your chains to be taken ofl, and
giA e } on liberty to Avalk in the court, if you Avill promise me to be-
have Avell and injure no one.' ' Yes, I promise you,' said the mania-?;
but you are laughing at me; you are all too much afraid of me.'
' 1 have six men,' ansAvered Pinel, ' ready to enforce my commands,
it necessary. Believe me, then, on my Avord, I Avill giA'e you your
liberty if you will put on this waistcoat.' lie submitted to this wil-
lingly, without a word. His chains were removed, and the keepers
retired, leaving the door of the cell open. He raised himself many
times from his seat, but fell again on it, for he had been in a sitting
posture so long, that lie had lost the use of his limbs. In a quarter
of an hour, lie succeeded in maintaining his balance, and with totter-
ing steps came to the door of his dark cell. His first look was at
the sky, and lie cried out, enthusiastically,' How beautiful!' During
the rest of the day he was constantly in motion, walking up and
down the staircases, and uttering short exclamations of delight. In
the evening he returned, of his own accord, to his cell, where a better
bed than lie had been accustomed to had been prepared for him, and
he slept tranquilly. During the two succeeding years which lie
spent in the Bicetre, lie had no return of his previous paroxysms,
but even rendered himself useful by exercising a kind of authority
over the insane patients, whom he ruled in his own fashion."

Although frequently quoted, indeed, scarcely a book on insanity
is now published without some reference being made to this interest-
ing proceeding on the part of Pinel, we nevertheless consider the
facts cannot be too frequently repeated, or their importance too much
exaggerated. For ourselves, we always feel gratified in the highest
degree, when reading this most instructive illustration of the bene-
ficial consequences of the humane treatment of lunatics, then so
different from all previous methods. This interesting account of
Pinel's proceedings at Bicetre possesses besides, to our mind,
especial value, from the circumstance that it represents the benevo-
lent Frenchman kindly treating an unfortunate Englishman, with a
degree of confidence to which he had, hitherto, been long a stranger;
owing, doubtless, to the erroneous notions till then prevalent
respecting the proper treatment of lunatics. It also gives, at the
same time, an instructive and moral lesson to all mankind. In this
country, the example of Pinel was zealously followed up, and the
application of his principles has even been carried further than by
many of the successors of that able physician on the other side of
the English Channel. This we can assert from personal observation;
for however much may have been otherwise accomplished in France,
towards improving the condition of the victims of insanity, by
amusements, occupation, and other auxiliaries, both moral and
medical, personal restraint is certainly much more frequently em-
ployed by French, than by the generality of modern English practi-
tioners. Besides, truth compels us to state distinctly, that even in
some Parisian and provincial asylums for the insane we ourselves
visited not long ago, the strait-waistcoat, or camisole, is by no means an
uncommon appliance, especially to females labouring under excite-
ment. This we witnessed in several instances, and tlie practice was
even defended on tlie grounds of humanity, besides being considered
beneficial to the patient.

Anxious to give the author an opportunity of expressing his sen-
timents respecting the question under discussion, we make the fol-
lowing quotation to show the object he wishes to illustrate by his
treatise. How far the writer proves the position he has taken up,
the reader will afterwards be able to judge.

"Notwithstanding the great weight of authority opposed to us,
we have long been of opinion that it has been productive of the
worst consequences; that under it every influence of a moral tendency
is endangered, if not destroyed ; and that its adoption has led, in
many cases, to a forfeiture of that confidence so essentially necessary
in our treatment; and which, under different circumstances, the
patient would have reposed in his attendant. Such is the position
we would maintain, and we entertain a sanguine hope of being able
to prove, assisted in no slight degree by the statements of even the
adopters of restraint, that whether we view its effects morally or
physically, its use ought to be completely excluded from the pre-
cincts of a lunatic asylum."

Subsequently, a case is quoted in which a middle-aged man, labouring
under great maniacal excitement, was placed under bodily restraint.
While in this state, the medical officer in attendance removed the
restraint, when the patient gradually became calmer, shook hands
with the author, saying, " He would fight for him against any man,"
yet continued most indignant towards those who had imposed the
coercion. Since Ave are not told whether the maniac was perma-
nently benefited, or ultimately cured, the history of the case is
therefore imperfect; although it is certainly an illustration, as stated
by the author, of the necessity of gaining an ascendancy in the confi-
dence of the patient, and of sympathizing with him in his feelings.
The author next proceeds to the consideration of the first measure
of restraint which is usually adopted, preparatory to remedial treat-
ment of the insane?namely, the separation of the patient from
friends and relatives, by removal to a suitable place of residence,
where new trains of ideas will arise, and former associations may
be removed from the mind as much as possible. On this point
the author agrees with most other physicians who have investigated
the subject; and we coincide with him, as also other authorities, in
thinking that the presence of strangers often suspends the dilirium of
insane patients, either by the influence of new impressions, or from
a seciet feeling of self-respect, which induces even lunatics to exert
some control over themselves. For it has been remarked that indi-
viduals have, in the midst of tlie most violent maniacal excitement,
suddenly become tranquil on the appearance of their physician, ac-
companied by a stranger. Respecting this point in the treatment of
the insane, the author remarks?

" The separation, to be effectual, must be absolute and early in
its adoption. Absolute, because even a single visit at an unseason-
able period, is calculated to renew associations and ideas in which,
probably, the disease originated; and, consequently, may be the
cause of as much evil as one conducted at the proper and fitting
period, and with discretion, may be productive of advantage. Of
this we have the strongest evidence adduced by Willis and Esquirol;
the former states that in England he found the treatment of
foreigners, who had so few opportunities of seeing their friends, was
much more successful than that of the English; and the latter
authority experienced greater success amongst strangers coming to
Paris for treatment. Indeed, M. Georget objects to private asylums
on the distinct grounds that the patient is more likely to see his
friends in such institutions. Besides, Ave are to recollect that there
is no class of persons more likely to be betrayed into injudicious
observations than those so deeply interested as relatives must natu-
rally be; and it is quite impossible they can possess that address
which we shall hereafter see is of so much moment, and so difficult
to be acquired."

Indubitably, the removal of insane patients from former
scenes and localities, when their mental malady first makes its
appearance, is often of the greatest benefit; and also, the sooner
they are placed under proper treatment and surveillance, the more
likely will their recovery be accomplished. This opinion, entertained
by the author, is fully borne out by experience. Dr Willis, for
instance, declares that nine out of ten of the lunatics who were
placed under his care recovered during the first three months.
Dr Finch reports the proportion, in his experience, amounted to
sixty-one in every sixty-nine; whilst, at the York Retreat, accord-
ing to Mr. Tuke, the ratio of recoveries was seven out of every
eight patients admitted. Indeed, the advantages of early treatment,
in all cases of mental disease, is so well established, that every
day's delay, after the first manifestations of insanity, is not only so
much valuable time lost, but the evil consequences thereby occasioned
become also greatly augmented. The importance of this truth
cannot be too strongly impressed upon the minds of friends or re-
latives; and however painful it may seem to their own feelings, the
idea of sending an afflicted relation to a public or private asylum,
there to remain under the care of strangers, the proceeding is real
kindness to all parties interested, whilst it gives a much greater chance
of recovery. Of course, the institution to which the insane patient
is consigned, should be a well managed asylum, and under the
superintendence of trustworthy and experienced individuals.
Subsequently, the author discusses the pathology of mental dis-
eases; upon which point he acknowledges considerable difference of
opinion is still prevalent amongst medical men; but he neverthe-
less hopes that future investigations will clear up the present diffi-
culty. In our opinion, this important question is not so unsettled
as the author would seem to imply; and we might appeal to many
recent dissections, made both by continental and English patholo-
gists, illustrative of this most interesting branch of medical science.
No necessity, therefore, exists for attempting to gloss it over by any
ingenious or plausible theory. However, let the writer speak for
himself:?

" According to Franck, Guislain, and Nasse of Bonn, with others,
insanity is essentially a disease of the organic structure of the body;
whilst, on the other hand, there are many (chiefly German autho-
rities) who assert that madness is essentially a disease of the mind,
and at the same time they adduce cases where no organic disease
could be found. But, recollecting the utter impossibility of appre-
ciating the first trace of organic disease,^ as also the very minute
alteration in structure which may produce most serious symptoms,
we ought certainly to be slow in acceding to such views. Pro-
fessor Heinroth declares it to be a moral depravity; this theory
we have quite sufficient arguments to controvert."

But even amongst those physicians who consider insanity to be
a disease of organic structure, there prevails also, according to the
author, a variety of opinions :?

" Some?as Georget, Foville, Cox, Cullen, and Haslam?assert
that it is an idiopathic affection of the brain, and that the diseases
found in other parts of the body are merely accidental, and con-
sequent thereon. Others regard the primary disease to be in the
stomach, as Broussais and his followers, who affirm that it always
consists in irritation of the trisplanchnic apparatus. Pinel describes
it as spreading from that organ as a centre. Lastly, we may refer
to the views, in some respects peculiar, of Maximilian Jacobi, as
first brought forward in his ' Collections for the Treatment of Dis-
orders of the Mind,' (Sammlungen fur die Heilkunde der Gemiith-
s trankheiten,) and more fully enlarged on in his subsequent works.
ns lstinguished author, altogether opposed to the doctrine that
ou 1 e";r insanity to causes purely mental or moral, asserts that
m ever\ instance it is the consequence of functional or organic
disease 111 some part of the system."

Aftei several additional observations, being unwilling, unaided
by visible proofs, to argue on a bare gratuitous assumption of its
positive presence, the writer acknowledges?

"For our own part, in tlie absence of all theoretical bias, Ave
cannot adhere exclusively to any of the views proposed respecting
the cause of the disease in question. A very limited experience
teaches us the influence of various organic changes over the opera-
tions of the intellectual principle; whereas, on the other hand, it is
equally certain that cases of insanity do occur, where no lesion of
internal organs can be discovered, and the disordered mind is pre-
sented as the sole and prominent malady."

The author, in a subsequent page, also remarks?" Whatever may
be the primary seat of the disease, or whatever its cause, be it phy-
sical or moral, we are fully convinced as to the pernicious tendency
of bodily restraint in the treatment of the insane." We full}' coin-
cide in such opinions, although the author does not speak so de-
cidedly in another paragraph, when he says, in allusion to the prac-
tice pursued at the Han well Asylum?" We unhesitatingly affirm,
there would be more humanity in having recourse to even an un-
qualified system of restraint, than to attempt, with insufficient
means, what might only lead to scenes of suicide and bloodshed."
We do not altogether understand the meaning intended to be con-
veyed by the above remark in a work whose express object is appa-
rently to point out to the profession the evil consequences of em-
ploying personal restraint in the treatment of lunatics. We are by
no means advocates of a dogmatic or authoritative style when dis-
cussing scientific subjects, especially disputed questions of pathology
and medical practice; nevertheless, we like to hear the opinions
of any writer, whose work it may be our lot to peruse, distinctly
yet freely expressed; as likewise the principal facts detailed, and the
chief arguments succinctly stated, upon which the conclusions pro-
mulgated are virtually founded. Now, with every respect for the
learned writer, we confess, both in regard to the pathology of mental
diseases and the employment of restraint in the treatment of in-
sanity, there still remains, on our mind at least, after reading the
volume before us, some degree of ambiguity respecting the exact
opinions entertained by the author. That he is a conscientious
opponent of personal restraint, Ave doubt not for a moment; but, in
regard to the pathology of insanity, whether he is a vitalist or a
decided follower of the anatomists, Avlio consider mental alienation
as always connected Avitli diseased changes of structure in the brain
and membranes, does not appear sufficiently explained, CA'en after
a Arery careful perusal, on our part, of the publication under review.
Before taking leave of the author, Ave Avould remark, Avith all
respect for his literary labours, while we approve of the earnestness
exhibited for the cause he advocates, in our opinion, the writer has
not done full justice to himself, or the important subject discussed
in his pages. Instead of giving copious notes illustrating the views
of other authorities, a better method, and certainly more instructive,
would have been, if the author had detailed, at greater length, the
results of his personal experience, and particularly the accumulated
facts which he must have collected from his own extensive obser-
vation. There is 110 deficiency whatever, either in the character 01*
variety of the floating opinions prevalent amongst medical men, at
the present time. Indeed, we have now rather an abundance of
speculative doctrines in medical literature, especially since the many
recent German importations. But in an utilitarian age like the nine-
teenth century, and still more so, in such a matter-of-fact country as
England, which may truly be called the land of cui bono philosophers,
the essential requisites which students and critics most value in
books written to illustrate particular doctrines, are, above all, a strong
array of data, statistical or otherwise, and verified by ample expe-
rience ; so that correct conclusions may be thereby legitimately
deduced. Opinions can be often controverted, and, besides, are
sometimes erroneous; but well-established facts are most important,
always useful, and can never be set aside by any reasoning, however
plausible. In the treatise before us, there are undoubtedly many
interesting statements, illustrated by data, both original, and derived
from other sources; at the same time, that several of the conclusions
enunciated by the author, are judicious, and fully borne out by the
premises he has brought forward. Nevertheless, we candidly avow,
instead of reading as a postscript, at the end of the publication now
in our hands, the intimation that the writer "had omitted three
statistical tables, which were in the original MS.," we should have
been much more gratified by the perusal of these documents, before
closing the volume just read, which we finally do with every good
feeling towards the author, whilst acknowledging his zealous advocacy
of the humane cause he has undertaken to defend before a jury of
our professional brethren.

So much for the volume under review. Previous, however, to
laying down our critical pen, we purpose, as stated in a former page,
to make a few general observations respecting the recent progress
and piesent position of the non-restraint doctrine in England. The
subject is highly interesting, and, if space permitted, it would be easy
to enlarge thereon at great length. Still, we must resist temptation,
and therefore will confine our present notice within narrow limits?
NO. VI. s
the more so, as perhaps Ave may seem to have been already somewhat
discursive.

In Great Britain, the non-restraint system of treating insane
patients undoubtedly originated at the Lincoln Asylum; and to the
authorities of that establishment, notwithstanding the difficulties they
encountered at the commencement of their benevolent labours, belongs
the honour of proclaiming, as well as of carrying into practice, that
great principle; and they well deserve our thanks for their efforts in
the cause of humanity. The example thus set at Lincoln was
speedily followed in other lunatic institutions; and now, it may be
justly said, the application and carrying out the doctrine of non-
restraint has become so universal throughout the country, that in
public, as also in private establishments for the reception of persons
labouring under mental disease, the exceptions to this humane axiom
are quite as rare as it was formerly uncommon to place confidence in
lunatics, or treat them Avith kindness and consideration. Fortunately,
the obsolete and erroneous notions, at one time prevalent respecting
the mode of managing excited maniacs, alike injurious to the afflicted
victims of insanity, as they were revolting to the best feelings of our
nature, have all passed away, and given place to a much milder, and
far more appropriate method of practice.

Amongst the leaders of this philanthropic movement, indeed the
chief promoter and advocate, who has done so much for the holy
cause, is indubitably Dr Conolly ; to whom belongs the credit, not
certainly of inventing, or first applying the practice of non-restraint
in the treatment of lunatics, but of reducing the measure to a prac-
tical system, and enforcing the principle on a large scale. To us who
are spectators, chroniclers, and the critics of passing events having
reference to the economy of lunatic asylums, and the treatment of
the inmates therein confined, it is most gratifying to perceive that
the eyes of the medical profession, and indeed of the whole civilized
world, are now fully opened to the perfect practicability of treating
lunatics upon the principles laid down by the enlightened advocates
of non-restraint; whilst its great superiority over former systems?
unfortunately characterised by harshness and physical confinement
seems so well established by ample experience, that it is every day
gaining converts from former opponents, and will Ave hope soon have
no enemy to contend against, at least in this country.

Considering it must be interesting to describe shortly the progress
recently made in the path of improvement, in order to exhibit the
marked diminution in the use of physical means of coercion, that
has taken place in many lunatic asylums; Ave Avould refer, by way
of illustration, to the reports published by several of these institutions,
in which formerly restraint was frequently had recourse to during
the treatment of insane patients. At the Lincoln Asylum, where
the first impetus was given to the new views respecting the disuse
of restraint, it appears that, in the year 1830, from forty to seventy
patients were reported to be under restraint; the average number of
inmates being about one hundred. Subsequently, more decided
alterations in the system pursued at this institution were established,
both in regard to the kind of instruments adopted, and the number
of patients under restraint; until, at last, the total abolition of all
physical means of coercion was announced, with the most beneficial
consequences.

At the Retreat, near York, so early as 1813, when detailing the
means of personal restraint then employed in the institution, Mr.
Tuke observed, in his report, with regard to the necessity of coercion,
he had no hesitation in saying, that it would diminish or increase,
according as the moral treatment of the patient was more or less
judicious. In 1841, although the officers of the Retreat had not
hitherto thought it right, in every case, to dispense with the use of all
mild and protecting means of personal restraint, it was very much
diminished, notwithstanding, in some instances, they may have
regarded its application as the least irritating, and therefore the
kindest method of control. Two years afterwards, Dr Thurnham,
the experienced resident medical officer of the institution, stated, in
one of his reports, that, in practice, personal restraint had, by degrees,
been almost entirely abolished. Afterwards we are informed, that
no instance of its application had occurred since January, 1843.
These are most gratifying facts, and clearly show the advances
made at the celebrated institution in which Mr. S. Tuke first com-
menced his philanthropic labours, and where the use of coercion may
be now regarded as virtually abolished.

Other establishments might easily be quoted to prove the progressive
advances recently made in the right direction; but we can only afford
sufficient space at present for a few additional references, previous to
giving our own opinion on the subject of restraint, which may still be
considered, in some degree, although less so than recently, the qucestio
vexata of the psychological branch of practical medicine. In Ireland,
according to competent authority, the asylums are said to be as well,
if not better, managed than many of those in England. At the Rich-
mond Lunatic Asylum, in Dublin, for instance, according to the Irish
Inspector-General's Report for 1843, personal restraint, as a part of
the discipline of that hospital, had very much diminished for several
previous years, and, as a general rule, was then clone away with,
although exceptions might occur. In the subsequent report for
1845, by the same public authorities, it is stated, that this asylum
has fulfilled in every respect the liumatie and charitable intentions
of the government; whilst at St. Patrick's Asylum, also in Dublin,
the non-coercion system is pursued with success throughout the
entire establishment. Again, at the Londonderry District Asylum,
the non-coercion system is also practised successfully; and at the
Maryborough Asylum, Dr Jacob, in a recent report, announces that
instrumental restraint has not been had recourse to, in a single
instance, during the past year and a half; whilst several of the
attendants have not even seen any apparatus for such a purpose.
From the lunatic asylums of Scotland, which are admirably con-
ducted, and reflect much credit on the officers and superintendents, as
well as honour upon the northern division of the United Kingdom,
testimonies of a similar character might be easily produced. We,
however, refrain from doing so, lest our remarks should, perhaps,
appear to have extended to a greater length than some readers may
approve. Nevertheless, Betlilem Hospital, the oldest establishment
for the reception of lunatics in England, and whose history affords
ample ground for comment; as, likewise, Hanwell Asylum, the most
extensive institution of the kind in this country, and the locality
where the practical application of total non-restraint is carried out
most successfully, cannot be passed over in silence; we, therefore,
make a few remarks upon each of these institutions.

To the condition of Betlilem Hospital at the early part of the
present century we need not now refer, further than to state, that
respecting the employment of restraint as an ordinary means of
treating the inmates, nothing could well be worse, as demonstrated
by the investigations of parliamentary committees. Since that
period, matters have progressively improved, especially after the new
hospital was erected; and still more so during recent years. In 183G,
the number of patients at various periods under restraint in Betli-
lem Hospital amounted to 108, being nearly one-fourth of the whole
number of lunatics confined; whilst the instances of restraint reported
in the register amounted altogether to 495, the duration varying as
much as the causes. In 1839, the average ratio of restraint fell
to eleven patients per week, or 3-53 per cent. In 1842. the number
became still more diminished, being three patients per week, or 0-81
per cent. In 1845, the proportion was only 1^ patient per week, or
0 33 per cent.; whilst in 1848, the instances were so insignificant,
that the rate fell to one-fifth?that is, about one patient in a month
being under restraint; thus making tlie smallest ratio ever recorded
in the annals of that institution, and proves incontrovertible that
any opinions of an opposite description, which may elsewhere pre-
vail, arc erroneous. These facts are taken from the reports pub-
lished by the authorities of Betlilem Hospital; and in support oi a
similar view, we would also refer to a communication made by Dr.
Webster, in the number of the "Law Review,' published last
February, addressed to the committee on equity, in which it is stated
that frequently not one patient among upwards of 400, treated at
Betlilem Hospital, is under even temporary restraint of any kind.
In the same document, Dr Webster also remarks, in order to prove
the evils of the former system, that in old Betlilem, when personal
coercion was so common, and the mode of treating the insane
patients was very different from the present method, suicides were,
unfortunately, often met with. For instance, lie states, during 20
years, ending the 31st December, 1770, out of 3G29 patients ad-
mitted, 18 committed suicide, or one suicide in every 202 admis-
sions. On the other hand, during 20 years, ending the 31st Dec.,
1842, in 4G7G admissions, only five suicides occurred, or one in
every 925 insane patients. Again, during the first named period of
20 years, 55 patients " ran away" from the hospital, being one
escape in every G6 patients admitted; whereas, during 20 years,
ending the 31st December, 1842, only 16 patients escaped, or one
in every 292 admissions, being one-fourth the previous amount;
although the strait-waistcoat is now never employed, and the treat-
ment of patients at new Betlilem is very different from what it was
in the olden time; amusements, occupation, and much greater free-
dom, in addition to medical treatment, being often put in requisition
to aid their recovery. The above statement forms a very agreeable
contrast to the times when the unfortunate patient, Norris, with his
iron collar, his double chain attaching him to the wall, and the
trough, in which he lay on straw; as also to the miserable condition
of almost every lunatic confined in the old institution, at Moor
Fields. This was well depicted by the two celebrated statues of Cains
Gabriel Cibber, which formerly figured upon the outer gate of the old
hospital, but are now placed in the entrance hall of the new building
in George's Fields; with the view, most likely, of showing how
poor frail humanity was tortured in a former generation, compared
with the treatment insane patients happily experience in these days
of advanced civilization.

Unlike the establishment just mentioned, Hanwell Asylum has
few reminiscences over which the authorities need wish to draw the
veil of oblivion. Being a new institution, its annals are, therefore, of
recent date; and as tlie modern system?thanks to the energy and
zeal of Dr Connolly?was there soon introduced, and fully carried into
practical operation; the story is soon told respecting its efficacy in
benefiting the patients, and the great influence its success exerted upon
other asylums, and the medical profession, as, indeed, upon the whole
community throughout the civilized world. Whatever doubts or
fears previously prevailed upon the subject, in the minds of sceptical
or timid individuals, have all now given way before well founded
conviction, supported by ample experience. Upwards of eight years
ago, Dr Conolly decided upon making the apparently hazardous, but
humane experiment of abolishing at once all kind of mechanical
restraint from the Hanwell Asylum. The attempt was a bold one,
but it lias been eminently successful; and we are told, according to
subsequent reports, up to the present time, that nothing has oc-
curred to shake the confidence entertained respecting the efficacy or
applicability of the system, amongst the authorities of that establish-
ment, which now contains upwards of 1000 inmates, suffering under
every form of mental disease.

Notwithstanding the experience thus acquired at Hanwell, the
Commissioners in Lunacy considered it their duty to call attention,
in their official Report of 1844, to tlie fact?by way of caution,
doubtless, to the medical profession and the public?that since the
autumn of 1842, two attendants had been killed, and three or four
seriously injured, by dangerous patients, some of these injuries
having happened in asylums where restraint was practised, and in
others where non-restraint prevailed. In the same document, the
Commissioners seem to approve of the system which admits occa-
sional restraint, although they do not openly avow this to be their
opinion. However qualified the notions then entertained at head
quarters may have been respecting the important question of restraint,
it is most satisfactory to find, by the last printed Report of the Com-
missioners in Lunacy, that they, like some authorities in other
departments, march with the times, and announce progressive im-
provement. In the official document just quoted, the Commissioners
state, that the instances of mechanical restraint in the public asylums
are very few. Even in licensed houses, the practice of coercion is an
exception to the general rule of treatment, which disavows it; and
the modes of restraint now adopted are such as to pain and irritate
the patient as little as is possible. The massive bars, the rings, and
chains of iron, formerly resorted to, are no longer seen. Long con-
tinued coercion is not permitted; at the same time, the safeguards
against lunatic patients being subjected to liarsli or unnecessary re-
straint from the cruelty, idleness, or caprice of their attendants have
been multiplied, and the chances of abuse reduced to a small amount.
In short, the triumph of the non-restraint principle is almost accom-
plished, the number of opponents having dwindled down to insignifi-
cance ; and in a few years more, as likely no combatants will be so
bold as to take the field, or all parties being agreed, there must be
an end of the controversy.

According to our views respecting the treatment of lunatics, the
nearer we approach the principle of managing insane patients as if
still rational beings, consistent with the safety of others and of
themselves, so much the more likely will that system prove satisfac-
tory. Kindness, conciliation, and the inspiring of confidence in the
weakened mind of the poor sufferer towards the medical practi-
tioner and attendants will frequently materially assist remedial mea-
sures. Three points Ave have always thought were of the utmost
importance: 1st, never to deceive a lunatic, however insane; 2ndly,
always to keep any promise when once made; of course being very
cautious not to raise expectations which it would be wrong to
gratify; and 3rdly, never to compromise the authority very properly
inherent in the attending physician and superintendents.
Being decidedly in favour of the principle of non-restraint, we
consider temporary seclusion in a darkened apartment, or the
judicious confinement in a properly padded room, to be often of great
benefit, when the patient is under violent excitement. But in such
cases, the seclusion must only be had recourse to with the sanction
of the medical officer; it should be carefully watched, its duration
recorded, and the reasons distinctly stated why the restraint was
employed. Some would, perhaps, consider seclusion in a padded
room as a species of restraint, on similar grounds as the presence of
one or more attendants in the same chamber with the maniac, to
prevent his injuring himself and to calm his excitement, might be
viewed as analogous; but the cases are not exactly parallel.

Padded rooms, made with strong waterproof ticking properly
stuffed, or lined with Kamptulicon?a composition of cork and
caoutchouc?ought to be constructed in every asylum for the insane,
into which noisy, excited, or furious patients may be placed during a
iolent paroxysm. Experience has amply verified the utility of such
apartments. At Hanwell, they are in frequent use when occasion
requires, especially for epileptic patients; and we can speak from
pcisonal observation, there and elsewhere acquired, that rooms pro-
perly padded prove of great advantage in tranquillizing the patient
in those kind of cases, which were formerly confined with hand-cuffs,
ligatures, chains,and such like atrocities. Indeed, it is often remarkable
how soon an excited maniac, or one who refuses food, will speedily
become calm, or take nourishment, after being in temporary seclu-
sion in properly padded rooms. One objection has been made to
cells lined with Kamptulicon?viz., that in cold or frosty weather, the
walls are sometimes not sufficiently clastic to obviate injury to the
excited maniac, when lie flings himself against them with violence,
or knocks his head on the sides of the apartment. This incon-
venience may, hoAvevcr, be very easily remedied by placing on the
floor previously, either a chafing-dish with a hot iron plate; or, if the
economy of the asylum permits, by introducing warm air into the room,
a short time before admitting the patient. With this qualification, we
consider padded cells thus constructed, or in the other mode, as indis-
pensable, and they will be found most useful adjuncts to every asylum
for the insane; indeed, none should be without similar apartments.
Numerous examples, illustrative of the highly injurious effects of
personal coercion upon insane patients during the early stages of
the attack, might be easily quoted. The experience of physicians
conversant with the malady could easily furnish many instances of
the kind, in which restraint was improperly employed; owing chiefly
to the fears of relatives, or the erroneous notions entertained of what
was proper; but oftener to the ignorance of attendants. From
the cases recorded in the reports of public asylums, we only select
two, as both are highly instructive, and show, in a marked manner,
the effects of restraint. The first case is taken from the Bethlem
Hospital Report for 1843; being that of a male patient brought
for admission in a very violent and excited state, having, in addition
to a strait-waistcoat, his arms bound with cords, his wrists secured
by a belt, and his legs confined with strong webbing. In extenuation
of such severe measures, a relative, who accompanied the lunatic,
assured the steward that the restraint was absolutely necessary,
" as he Avas very difficult to manage, and that it had even required
as many as six men to place him under coercion."' The first thing
done ou admission was to release the patient from all restraint; and
although, as might be expected, he remained for some days in a
highly excited state, so as to require the constant watching of one,
and sometimes two attendants, no personal coercion was afterwards
used during the whole time lie remained under treatment. In a
few days, symptoms of an inflammatory affection of the clicst ap-
peared, from the effects of which, combined with great cerebral ex-
citement, he died, in a fortnight after admission. A post-mortem
examination of the body proved tlnit the breast-bone and one rib
were fractured; the interior of the chest was also found much af-
fected, in consequence of the irritation which the broken bones
produced 011 the lining membrane, and it can hardly be doubted,
that these severe injuries occurred in the struggles which took place
when so much restraint was imposed.

The second case is copied from Dr Conolly's Report to the Mid-
dlesex Magistrates for 1841, and is that of " a male patient admitted
011 the 23rd of June, when he was reported to be dangerous to those
about him. It was averred, that in the asylum from whence lie
came, lie had been kept almost constantly in instrumental restraint
for three months. He laboured under some religious and other
delusions, was almost always talking, and somewhat restless in his
habits, and it was not practical to keep him among the quiet and
feeble patients. He was placed, on that account, in a ward assigned
to more troublesome patients, but he was, of course, never subjected
to restraint; and although fidgety, and always in action, he occa-
sioned so little solicitude to attendants trained to habitual vigilance,
that he was never once even put in seclusion." I11 September, this
patient begun to work in the garden, was placed in one of the
quietest wards, wrote affectionate and rational letters to his wife;
and latterly, he partook of the sacrament in the chapel, at his own
request. The instances now recorded, are only samples of many
others of a similar description, which we could easily detail, but
forbear, lest our readers' patience should be exhausted with what
might perhaps appear supererogation.

But we must now take leave of the whole subject, however easy
it would be to enlarge upon the many interesting and important
topics, which have now passed under review. Devoid of all pre-
judice, desirous of acquiring information from other observers,
yet most anxious for the diffusion of sound practical knowledge,
we have thrown together, in the previous pages, those general con-
clusions which we have adopted after considerable, if not careful
reading of various authors, verified by our own experience, and also
from personally observing the practice pursued by different prac-
titioners in British as well as in continental asylums for the insane.
Supported by many convincing proofs of the injurious effects of the
old s} stem, sustained by the daily accumulating evidence of expe-
rienced and trutli-sceking physicians against its employment, and
encouraged by the numerous conversions from the ranks of active
opponents of non-restraint into that of advocates of the new doctrine,
our convictions arc confirmed. Seeing likewise 011 almost every side,
the great benefits which have been conferred upon afllictecl lunatics,
by adopting the more humane and non-coercive plan of management,
aided by moral means and appropriate medical treatment, we hesitate
not a moment to proclaim/amongst the many philanthropic move-
ments so characteristic of the present age, none stands more pro-
minently forward, or deserves higher praise, than the modern system
of treating those fellow creatures who have unfortunately become
attacked by the saddest of all diseases?mental aberration. The cure,
or even the alleviation of this truly calamitous malady, which often
reduces the sufferer, for the time, to an apparently lower scale in
the animal creation, although hitherto endowed with the highest
intellectual attributes, and inspired with life and feeling by his
Divine Maker, is indeed real charity, notwithstanding it may be only
possible to mitigate the patient's severe afflictions. Honour and
thanks are therefore most justly due to the illustrious and humane
combatants in the glorious cause of suffering humanity, who have
bravely fought the great fight, have persevered through bad report
or good report, have never flinched from asserting the high principle
for which they pledged their faith, risked worldly fortune, and
perilled their future fame.
