Bibliotlieque du Medecin Practicien
======================================

534
Art. III.?
; ou, Resume General
de tous les Ouvrages de Clinique Medicate et Chirurgiccdes, de
toutes les Monographies, de tous les Memoires de Medecine et
de Chirurgie Practiques, Anciens et Modernes.

Publies en
France, et a l'Etranger par une Soci6te de Medecins sous
la direction du Docteur Farre, Auteur " Du Dictionnaire des
Dictionnaires de Medicine," Redacteur-en-chef de la Gazette des
Hopitaux : ouvrages adopte par l'Universite. Tome Neuvieme.
Traite de Maladies du Cerveau, Maladies Mentales, Maladies
Nerveuses. A Paris: cliez J. B. Bailliere;?a, Londres: Bailliere,
1849.

The Encyclopaedias, Bibliothecas, and Dictionaries, which are
published in France are universally esteemed works of high reputa-
tion; the most able and learned men of the age are contributors to
them, and although the stream of knowledge flows rapidly onwards,
the progress of science does not invalidate their authority. They are
monuments of the epoch in which they appeared. The Encyclopcedie
de Medecine, the Bibliotlieque Medicale, the Dictionnaire de Mede-
cine, are valuable and instructive records. Every article is a mono-
graph from some distinguished pen ; they therefore remain standard
works of reference, and each constitutes, as it were, a library in itself.
To this high class of scientific literature the Bibliotlieque du Medecin
Practicien eminently belongs; it presents us with an elaborate ac-
count of the present state of knowledge in every department of
medical science, and as the ninth volume, which has only just ap-
peared in Paris, embraces the consideration of cerebral, mental, and
nervous diseases, we hasten to lay before our readers a summary of
that portion of its contents which relates especially to cerebral and
mental pathology, and the general characteristics of insanity.
The volume comprehends, 1st, a description of those diseases of
the brain which are characterized by anatomical lesions always, or
nearly always, present; 2nd, an account of those diseases which
have their probable seat in the nervous centres, and which leave
behind them no anatomical lesion, or traces of lesions, so uncertain
and slight as not to present us with any adequate cause for their
existence; 3rd and lastly, mental diseases which in their anatomico-
pathological relations come under these categories.

Here, then, we come at once to the vexata questio, whether organic
lesions of the brain, either in the relation of cause or effect, are uni-
formly present in all cases of mental aberration 1 It is obvious, says
the author of the article before us, that the simple functional de-
rangement of any organ does not warrant us in expecting change
of structure; hence he argues that hysteria, chorea, tetanus, epilepsy,
and many idiopathic diseases leave no pathological appearances
behind them; but then it is observed that insanity when prolonged,
whether in an acute or chronic form, bears little or no analogy to
these diseases, and it is reasonable to believe that in such cases the
delicate texture of the brain will, however it may escape observation,
be in some way or other organically affected. Were it not so, the
disease might be pronounced purely mental, besides which experience
proves that all functional disturbances lead to derangement of
organic structure, and it becomes, therefore, a matter of profound
interest and importance to determine what organic changes or lesions
occur in the grey or white substance of the brain in cases of in-
sanity which are well declared and of long standing.

Authorities on this subject, ancient and modern, in the pages
before us are rapidly reviewed. Morgagni observed, in cases of in-
sanity, induration and softening of the brain, and effusion into the
ventricles. Greding noticed thickening of the cranial bones, fetid-
ness and softening of the brain, and atrophy of the tlialami nervorum
opticorum. Haslam described adhesion of the pericranium to the
bones, and their thickness and attenuation, as well as the consis-
tency, and firmness or softness, of the cerebral substance. Prost
endeavoured to prove that insanity was the effect of inflammation of
the intestines. Rush ascribed its cause to the state of the blood-
vessels in the brain; and next to him appeared two physicians of
indisputable merit, Pinel and Esquirol, who maintained that ana-
tomico-pathological causes have only a secondary influence in pro-
ducing mental aberration. Thus Pinel positively affirms that cerebral
lesions are the effect and not the cause of mental disease, and that
they are often altogether wanting. So also Esquirol, after opening
the head and examining many hundred brains, came to the con-
clusion that the morbid appearances he discovered were similar to
those which he had found in persons who had died of other diseases;
therefore he inferred that insanity was not to be ascribed to them,
and although he has since somewhat modified this opinion, he has
not described the character of those lesions which in such cases
should be expected. M. Leuret, in an erudite and critical disquisi-
tion upon the alterations to which the brain is subject, asserts posi-
tively, that in a sufficient number of cases to determine the point
under discussion, not the slightest morbid alteration has been per-
ceptible. M. Baillarger and M. Brierre de Boismont, both high
authorities, have adopted the same opinion. Other very eminent
anatomists, however?MM. Foville, Delaye, Pin el, Grandchamp,
Bayle, and Calmeil?have arrived at an opposite conclusion, and
maintain that appreciable lesions may always be found in the brain,
and that these bear a relation to and correspond with the character
of the mental derangement. Here it may be well to remind our
readers that the recent discoveries which have been made in the
development and minute structure of the vesicular or grey matter
have induced some physiologists to believe that this vesicular matter
is the source of nervous power, and that mental operations are
associated with or may be ascribed to certain changes which take
place in the convoluted surface of the brain. This is the popular
theory of the day. It therefore follows that in cases of insanity
this vesicular structure, which is the presumed seat of the intellect,
will undergo certain physical changes, and many who have adopted
this hypothesis?which is, however, open to many serious objections
?have not failed to discover minute lesions of this vesicular matter,
to which all the phenomena of mental disease may be ascribed.
These pathological appearances are as follows:?In the acute stage
of insanity, the surface of this grey matter presents a certain degree
of discoloration, which is more or less deeply tinted, slight effusion,
general or partial redness, its consistency is sometimes increased and
sometimes diminished, and the bloodvessels are frequently dilated;
these morbid appearances decrease as we proceed from the anterior
to the posterior region of the brain. In the chronic state of insanity,
the grey substance detaches itself into two layers, with sometimes
numerous little flesh-like processes. In some cases there is complete
ramollissement. The volume of the convolutions maybe diminished;
in that case, there sometimes exists serous effusion, filling every
depression and cavity; atrophy in the frontal region is more frequent
than in the middle or posterior regions. The grey substance, too,
although it may increase in consistency, sometimes entirely disap-
pears. The cornu ammonis (hippocampus major) also presents a
certain change in appearance. The white substance, or according to
recent views, the fibrous or tubular portion of the brain, which is
supposed to transmit the impressions originating in the vesicular
matter, and connect the nervous centres with other organs and tex-
tures, is more exempt from any morbid appearance than the grey
matter; but sometimes such alterations occur. It may appear to be
injected or indurated, it may present a pearly colour, and sometimes
the fibres will appear contracted and adhering among themselves.
The morbid changes which the membranes of the brain undergo,
such as vascularity, opacity, increased thickness, adhesions, &c., are
well known; as are also those malformations which, by diminishing
the capacity of the skull, interfere with the healthful development
and action of the brain. The great objection, however, which may
be urged against these different pathological appearances being
esteemed significant of any particular form of mental derangement
is that every one of these abnormal conditions has been found in the
brains of persons who have died of other diseases, and who have
never manifested a single symptom of insanity. Last year, M. Emery
was called in to see a person of high rank, in Paris, who hitherto had
enjoyed excellent health: " I feel very feeble," said the patient, as he
supported himself against a piece of furniture in the room, and, not-
withstanding the adoption of the most active means to support life,
he almost instantly expired. The autopsy revealed a very extensive
ramollissement in one of the cerebral hemispheres. In the present
year, M. Eayer attended a young woman who for twelve days exhi-
bited symptoms of cerebral affection; some considered it meningitis?
others, acute delirium; but after death the brain was found to be
only slightly injected. Injection, effusion, redness, or discoloration
of the cerebral tissue may be the result of sanguineous congestion
produced in the last moments of life by convulsions, epilepsy, apo-
plexy, interrupted circulation, and the difficulty of respiration, which
may take place in the dying struggle. Then, again, proceeding to
other well-marked organic changes, opacity, thickening, adhesion of
the membranes, atrophy, and induration of the brain, as well as con-
traction and adhesion of the white fibres, with serous effusion have
been considered to be the result of chronic inflammation; but all
these alterations have been found in the brain of persons who never
exhibited any signs of mental derangement, and whose delirium, when
it existed, did not resemble insanity. M. Lelut discovered in the
brains of twenty-five criminals, opacity and thickening of the arach-
noid membrane. Such lesions are constantly found in extreme old
age, although no symptoms whatever may have occurred at all
analogous to or significant of mental derangement. The results of
M. Lelut's induction upon the value which should be attached to
alterations of the enceplialon in acute delirium and in insanity are as
follow:?" In acute delirium one half of the cases exhibit in the
brain and its membranes, vestiges of inflammation; in acute mania,
three at most out of twenty insane persons die from meningo-ence-
phalic inflammation; and in the other cases, neither the brain nor
its investing membranes present a single lesion explanatory of the
maniacal symptoms. 2nd. In one half of the cases of chronic
mania and simple dementia, no appreciable change is discoverable
either in the brain or its membranes; in the other half, lesions are
found. 3rd, and lastly, in none of these cases are the alterations
which are presented either constant or exclusive, and the lesions
which are met with from inflammation may be the results or effects
of mental alienation, just as physical disorders result from nostalgia,
succeeding to the grief which afflicts persons who are banished from
their native country."

The absolute weight and specific gravity of the brain have also
been subjects of investigation in France as in other countries.
Meckel affirmed that the brain of the insane was lighter in weight
than the brain of persons of sound mind. M. Leuret and Mitivie
found that the mean specific gravity of the brain of an intelligent
individual was l-028, while that of an insane subject was 1 *031.
Parchappe came to the same conclusion. The weights of M. Lelut
and M. Brierre de Boismont, present no appreciable difference. Last
year (31st July, 1848), M. Parchappe presented the Academy of Sciences
with a memoir on the gradual shrinking of the brain, consequent
upon the progressive degradation of the intellect, in a state of in-
sanity. It resulted from his observations in 498 cases, that the
mean of the two categories?that is to say, acute and chronic in-
sanity, presented a difference in weight equal to 89 grammes for the
men and 85 grammes for the women,- being a proportion equal to
77-1000 for the men and 67-1000 for the women. This difference
is still more marked in that category which comprehends the mean
of cases between the acute and last stage of chronic insanity, when
the proportion reaches to 152 grammes for the men, or 114-100, and
135 grammes, or 100-1000, for the women.

There is, however, one form of mental disease in which anatomical
lesions will be found both frequent and uniform, and that is in
dementia, complicated with general paralysis. But with reference to
the morbid appearances described by the authors referred to, they
consist successively in adhesion of the membranes or chronic menin-
gitis, diffuse encephalitis, a ramollissement of a layer of the grey
matter, an adhesion between the white fibres, induration of the white
substance, and ramollissement from the circumference to the central
parts of the system. Lastly, to refer to the configuration of the
skull, it is true that, in some cases of madness, it presents signal
deformities; but it is also true, as was stated by M. Georget, that
the heads of the insane are often found as well-shaped as those of
sane and sensible people.

In the work under review, the inquiry is made whether the dif-
ferent forms of insanity which come under the designation of mono-
mania, and which are characterized by the predominance of certain
passions and desires, are accompanied by any corresponding organic
development. Observation, says the writer, in cases of insanity,
does not appear to justify the conclusions of Gall and Spurzheim,
for he maintains patients are found exalted by ambition, fanaticism,
love, &c., in whom there is no corresponding cranial development,
and the region or site ascribed to these faculties is sometimes even
unusually depressed. The editors of the Bibliotheque before us had
under their care a distinguished literary man, who had the organ of
language very prominent, but never manifested any taste for the study.
There was the case also of the mad woman, mentioned by Lelut in
the Salpetriere, who, in the last stage of dementia, exhibited so
strong a feeling for music, that she would repeat any air she inci-
dentally heard, yet the organ of tune was extremely deficient.
M. Combette presented to the institute the brain of a young
girl, who had manifested intense sexual desire; and in her case the
cerebellum was entirely wanting. The cast of the head of a young
Indian girl was exhibited by M. Souty to the Academy of Medicine,
which presented a very singular conformation; but no corresponding
peculiarities were observed in her intellectual and moral character.
We might also refer to the artificial flattening of the head of certain
savage tribes, which does not impair the manifestations of the
faculties ascribed to the subjacent organs. M. Lelut has endeavoured
to establish, in a recent memoir on the subject, that the organ of
destructiveness does not exist! The advocates of phrenology, it is
true, affirm that excessive development of an organ is not necessary,
because inflammation may give rise to a preternatural degree of its
activity. The examination, says the writer, of the brain of persons
who have died under monomania, has revealed the appearances which
are common in general delirium. Sometimes the autopsy of persons,
who have died under delirium, has presented circumscribed vestiges
of inflammation, corresponding with the exact isolation of certain
organs, which nevertheless manifested during life no characteristic
activity of function. There are insane persons who occasionally
exhibit protuberances of the supposed organs of veneration, acquisi-
tiveness, amativeness, &c., who seek to conceal the exaggeration of
their desires.

The great question of phrenology is of too important and too
comprehensive a character to be thus cursorily discussed. The
anatomico-pathological causes of insanity, neither the scalpel nor the
microscope, have yet unveiled. What, then, is the nature of insanity?
In what does the disease itself consist? Pinel attributes mental
alienation to an excessive exaltation of nervous energy. Cox ascribes
it to an excessive afflux of blood through the brain. Fodere supposes
that there is some alteration in the essence of the vital principle which
he conceives to reside principally in the blood. Gall and Spurzheim
presume that insanity consists in an inflammation?acute, then chronic
?of the enceplialon. According to Broussais, it is the result of
irritation. Frank does not consider that insanity is a disease distinct
from other diseases of the brain, but that it is developed in conjunc-
tion with an inflammatory, gastric, arthritic, rachitic, scrofulous, car-
cenomatous, or nervous diathesis. M. Delaye and Foville attribute
mental alienation to inflammation of the superficial grey substance
of the brain. Many authors imagine that mental derangement
arises from sympathy with the abdominal viscera. Thus Dufour has
endeavoured to prove that it depends upon an affection of' the
nervous plexuses in the abdomen, and that the brain is not impli-
cated in the malady. Pinel states that it would appear in general
that the cause of mental alienation is in the region of the stomach
and of the intestines. Prost in particular conceives that the cause of
insanity is to be found in the affection of the mucous membrane of
the gastro-intestinal canal, and that its presence may often be traced
to the existence of worms in the bowels. Esquirol affirms that it is
derived from the different nervous centres of sensibility distributed
through the different regions of the body, and not always from the
brain. However, Gall, Georget, and many other eminent writers,
have incontestably proved that the seat of insanity is in the brain,
whatever may be its functional or organic condition; and most of
the above views are reconcilable enough with the fact that the brain
sympathizes with, and may be symptomatically affected by, various
diseases of the intestinal canal, the uterus, and other organs. We
must not, however, omit to notice the opinion of M. Leuret, and
.that also of the celebrated Heinroth, which may startle the spiritualist,
and excite, perhaps, the risibility of the materialist. M. Leuret does
not seek for the cause of insanity in any alterations of the cerebral
structure. After examining and discussing various facts and well-
known opinions, he comes to the conclusion that insanity may exist
independently of any physical symptoms, and is an aberration of the
mind itself?an affection purely moral. Hence it can be cured by
moral treatment alone, and the method of cure should consist in
substituting one mental impression for another mental impression?
one passion for another passion. This doctrine that the mind only
is the seat of the disease is also adopted by Heinroth, and involves
many interesting and important points for consideration.

However doubtful may be the anatomico-pathological causes of
insanity, and however obscure the seat of the disease, the secondary
causes which modify and determine the forms of its development
admit of clearer demonstration. These comprehend hereditary trans-
mission, sex, age, temperament, civil state, professions, season,
climate, atmospheric influence, and various moral causes connected
with the intellect, affections, and passions, and the state of society as
affected by political and religious commotions. It was observed by
Esquirol that hereditary predisposition to insanity was six times
more frequent among the rich than among the poor. In 1375
patients at Charenton, 337 were noted to be cases arising from
hereditary transmission. In different parts of Europe the influence
of this cause varies considerably. At Saint-You it prevails in 1 out
of 6-55 cases; at Turin, 1 out of 8*32; at Palermo, 1 out of 15*30.
According to M. Baillarger, who has paid great attention to the
subject, out of 453 persons affected with insanity from direct here-
ditary transmission, 271 derived the disease from the mother, and
182 from the father. The conclusions which M. Baillarger arrives
at are?1st, That insanity in the mother is a severer disease than in
the father, not only because it occurs more frequently, but because
she transmits it to a greater number of her children; 2nd, The dis-
ease transmitted direct from the mother is more likely to attack the
girls than the boys, while transmitted from the father the boys are
more likely to be attacked; 3rd, The mother may as well as the
father transmit the disease to boys, but the attack is more to be
feared in the girls when the mother is afflicted with it. The re-
searches of M. Brierre de Boismont prove that the influence of here-
ditary transmission may be traced in about one-half of the lunatics
he has seen in France, and in a great number examined by him in
Italy, Germany, Belgium, Holland, and England. It may also be
traced among the catholics in England, and the quakers; in most of
the old Scotch families, among the Jews, and among princes. There
is scarcely an old aristocratic family in France that does not number
among its members an insane person, an idiot, or an epileptic. It
was long since observed by the historians of Rome that the eternal
city would have been destroyed in the third generation, had not the
provinces, which were the veritable arteries of the empire, poured
into it a supply of purer blood.

"We cannot," observes M. Brierre de Boismont, " too strongly
recommend that every inquiry should be made concerning the sanity
of the two families before any marriage is contracted. Insane,
epileptic, scrofulous, consumptive persons, ought never to intermarry;
nay, we will go further," he observes, " the married couple should
not be both natives of tlie same town, and still less of the same
capital?" Vamelioration des races est a ce prix."

The proportion that exists between the sexes in cases of insanity,
has been the subject of considerable research?some authors main-
taining that females, and others that males, are more liable to the
disease. In different localities, the proportion would appear to vary:
thus, Pinel made the proportion between men and women so affected
as 2*1; Esquirol, as 7'5; Earle makes a return from the United States
of 4510 insane men, and 2480 insane women. Out of 76,526 cases,
Esquirol found 38,825 males, and 37,701 females, giving a consider-
able preponderance on the women's side. When M. Brierre visited
Italy in 1830, there were in the asylums there, 3442 patients, and
adding to them 407 cases which he found in Sicily, he made a total of
3848 insane persons, of whom 1960 were men, and 1888 women. The
preponderance here being in favour of the men. In the asylum of
Sonnestein, at Pyrna, near Dresden, Dr Klotz informed M. Brierre
that he had 90 insane men to 60 women; in the hospital at
Frankfort-on-tlie-Maine, he found 60 patients, and as many women
affected as men. At St. Petersburg, on the 1st of January, 1832,
there were 113 patients, of whom 54 were men, and 59 women. In
the asylums in Belgium, Holland, and in England, M. Brierre, during
his recent visit, found the proportion between the sexes to be nearly
equal. Recently, Dr Tliurnam has also investigated the point,
and from his statistical inquiries comes to the conclusion that men
are more subject to insanity than women. The Report of the Com-
missioners in Lunacy, (London, 1845,) also on the 1st of January,
1844, return 36,044 insane males, and 31,832 females. The authors
of the Compendium, upon the data afforded by numerous statistical
returns, found that out of 60,318 cases, 31,580 were men, and
28,738 women. We must, therefore, come to the conclusion that men
are more liable to insanity than women?an opinion which is enter-
tained by M. Boutteville, and Parchappe, and other eminent physicians.
The age at which persons are most likely to be affected with
insanity next claims attention. Infancy is not altogether exemj)t
from this disease. M. Brierre states the case of a child ten years of
age, who became maniacal after receiving a blow upon the head.
He also gives that of a young lady, seven years of age, who saw
angels in the skies, and was under various hallucinations. The
insanity which occurs in early life most frequently assumes a
maniacal or else a melancholic form. Two years ago, the public
journals recorded ten suicides by children between nine and thirteen
years of age. About the age of puberty, new desires and passions
spring up, which become imperious, and frequently give rise to
mental alienations. This is the epoch for erotic and religions aber-
ration ; and the desire to commit suicide is often at this age strongly
manifested. Before, however, the age of twenty, insanity is certainly
not of frequent occurrence; it is, indeed, scarcely to be anticipated
before the brain has attained its maximum development. The fol-
lowing table, by Esquirol, exhibits the proportion of the sexes, and
the ages of 12,869 patients observed by him in Paris:?
Before 20 years, 43G men, 348 women, 784 total.

From 20 to 25 ? 624 ? 563
? 25 to 30 ? 635 ? 727
? 30 to 40 ? 1,441 ? 1,607
? 40 to 50 ? 1,298 ? 1,479
? 50 to 60 ? 847 ? 954
60 and upwards 875 ? 1,035
1,187
1,362
3,048
2,777
1,801
1,910
6,156 6,713 12,869
In the following table, by Parchappe, which comprises 14,267
individuals, the ages and sexes are given thus:?
Below 20 years of age, 469 men, 518 women, 987 total.
From 20 to 29 years, 1,451 ? 1,418 ? 2,869 ?
30 to 39
40 to 49
50 to 59
60 to 69
70 to 79
1,847 ? 1,782 ? 3,429
1,340 ? 1,647 ? 2,987
694 ? 1,110 ? 1,804
519 ? 723 ? 1,242
247 ? 448 ? 695
80 and upwards 27 ? 27 ? 54
6,594 7,673 14,267

The conclusions to be derived from these tables are sufficiently
obvious: 1st, it is clear that the disease increases from twenty to
thirty years of age; 2nd, from thirty to forty it attains its maximum;
3rd, from forty to fifty it diminishes, and after fifty years of age the
diminution goes on still decreasing. The maximum admission for
the two sexes is between thirty and thirty-nine years of age: the
period from the age of twenty to thirty-nine furnishes the greater
number of men, and from thirty to forty-nine the greatest number
of women. From a table comprising 21,333 admissions, it is calcu-
lated that there is a decennnial progression and retrogression in the
attacks of this disease. Thus?

From 10 to 20 years of age, we find 1161 admissions, or 5-4 per cent.
20 to 30 ? 5389 ? or 25-3
30 to 40
40 to 50
50 to 60 ? 2715 ? or 12*7
60 to 70 ? 1264 ? or 5-9
70 to 80 ? 321 ? or 1-6
80 to 90 ? 30 ? or -15
5621 ? or 26-3
4811 ? or 22-6

Hence it appears that the predisposition to insanity is not so
great between twenty and thirty, as it is between thirty and forty
years of age; and the decennial periods above forty mark its
gradual retrogression. We must, however, remember, that climate
and the different habits and manners of a country will very mate-
rially modify such returns: thus, in the United States, the greater
proportion of cases occur between the age of twenty and thirty,
which American physicians attribute to the nature of their institu-
tions, and the circumstance of the young being sooner emancipated
from their collegiate studies to participate in the business of the
world. In Pennsylvania, out of 100 patients, 44-87 were attacked
between twenty and thirty years of age, and only 18-9 between
thirty and forty. So also in Ohio, the returns show, 43'97 .between
twenty and thirty, and 24 52 only between thirty and forty years of
age. In France, however, it appears certain that persons are more
liable to insanity between thirty and forty years of age than at any
other period of life.

The influence of temperaments in modifying different forms of
insanity, does not appear to be sufficiently well marked to lead to
any result of practical importance; but it is observed, generally, that
persons of a bilious temperament are predisposed to lypemania;
those of a sanguine and nervous temperament to mania; and those
Avho are of a lymphatic temperament to imbecility and dementia.
With reference to the civil state, it appears pretty well ascertained
by the investigations of Esquirol and Parchappe, that insanity occurs
more frequently among unmarried than among married persons.
Celibacy in both sexes seems to have an equal influence in predis-
posing to the disease. Widows are more liable to insanity than
widowers; and the married state protects men from it more than
it does women.

The different seasons of the year are said to influence the develop-
ment of insanity. At the Salpetriere, it has been observed that the
admissions are more numerous during the months of May, June,
and July, than during the autumn and winter months. They dimi-
nish perceptibly between September and December, and still more
in February and March. The maximum of admission is in June
and July; the minimum, in January and February. It is also said
that mania occurs more frequently in hot than in cold weather; and
that damp and foggy seasons predispose to melancholia. Esquirol
relates the case of a rich inhabitant of Holland who was subject to
intermitting insanity, which attacked him regularly every autumn.
He recommended him to travel into Italy, when this season ap-
proached, and by this means effected his cure. Epidemic insanity
has been known to arise from certain conditions of the atmosphere:
thus, Ramazzini relates, that during a very hot summer, the inha-
bitants of Abdera had, upon an extremely sultry day, assembled to
witness a tragedy of Euripides, when all of a sudden a number of
the spectators were seized with a cerebral fever, which terminated
by profuse perspiration and nasal haemorrhage about the seventeenth
day; but during its access, they ran about the streets, shouting
verses from Euripides, in a wild and frantic state. The soldiers who
served under Napoleon in Egypt and Algiers were many of them
seized with hallucinations, and some became maniacal, melancholic,
and suicidal. In the disastrous retreat from Moscow, many officers,
paralyzed with cold, became deranged, and were afterwards received
into lunatic asylums. There would also appear to be certain local
influences which favour the development of insanity. In Italy, a
peculiar form of insanity occurs, which M. Brierre has described
under the name of Pellagra, which is characterized by a strong
desire to commit suicide, and an homicidal species of mania, in
which individuals appear urged by an impulse they cannot resist, to
kill their own children.

The moral causes of insanity are so various and so numerous, that
we shall not here attempt to recount them; nor shall we enter into
the question which appears to have been warmly contested by
MM. Leuret and Parcliappe, whether mental alienation increases as
an effect of advancing civilization or not; we prefer dwelling upon
the more practical portion of the volume before us, and proceed to
consider the symptoms which characterize the invasion of the disease.
These are often extremely obscure. The period of incubation may
last for many days, weeks, or months, or even for a longer period.
Pinel cites one in which this primordial stage lasted fifteen years.
The attack will remain impending until on a sudden, more fre-
quently during the night than the daytime, delirium will break out.
This is, properly speaking, the period of its invasion. In some
cases, however, insanity breaks out suddenly, the individual having
up to the very moment of the outburst enjoyed the full possession
of his intellectual faculties. An unexpected calamity, a political
revolution, a reverse of fortune, at once destroys the equilibrium of
the mental faculties; there may, however, be a derangement of the
intellect so slight, as to render the recognition of the disease ex-
tremely doubtful and difficult. This state, which is not one of sound
rationality nor yet of positive insanity, has been well described by
M. Lelut. It is characterized by excessive sensibility, and among
other symptoms may be observed, a difficulty of fixing tbe attention
upon any given subject. It is in this, the early stage of insanity,
that medical treatment will be found most availing; but it is always
difficult to persuade the friends and relatives at this period that so
terrible a malady is impending. The symptoms which now gradually
develop themselves assume an almost infinite variety of character;
it is indeed difficult to classify them. In the volume before us they
are ranged under four heads: lesions of the intellect, lesions of
sensibility, lesions of motility, and lesions of organic life. The
intellectual faculties may individually or collectively be all more or
less affected. The memory in particular, manifests remarkable
peculiarities: it sometimes retains an extraordinary pertinacity in
recalling past events, while those of recent occurrence are utterly
obliterated. Occasionally, it would appear to be suspended at the
very moment of the attack. Thus, Bergmann relates the case of an
old man, aged ninety, who became insane when he was eighteen,
and always believed that he remained at that age. The memory,
however, of many remains perfectly unimpaired, and they have a
vivid recollection of every incident that occurred during the attack,
however maniacal they may have been. In other cases, however, it
is utterly obliterated. A maniac who had been cured by prolonged
baths and irrigations, told M. Kayer that the moment he was placed
in the bath his memory left him. " I knew," said he, " that they
put me into water for a long time, but all my sensations were con-
fined to the impression that all around me was dark, then it became
clearer, then the obscurity reappeared, after which I can remember
nothing, it seemed like the tints of night, then day, and then
evening." Sometimes, when a patient has been cured, the sight of
certain objects will cause a relapse: thus, Professor Friedreich, of
Wurtzburg, relates the case of a young man whose theological
studies brought on a state of profound melancholia, for the cure of
which he was removed to an asylum. He became convalescent, and
upon his returning home, his father gave a fete in celebration of his
recovery; upon leaving the table, he walked into the garden, and
saw the asylum at a distance; instantly he became riveted, as it
were, to the ground?his eyes fixed in the distance. In vain they
attempted to remove him; he at length darted forwards towards the
house in a state of mania, and seizing a leaden vase which was near
him, and addressing his father in an infuriated tone, struck him on
the head and killed him on the spot. The imagination is often
affected in a very extraordinary manner. Insane persons have sup-
posed themselves to be made of glass and of butter, and have taken
extraordinary pains to prevent their being broken or melted. Every-
body has probably read the case of the mad man reported in the
Revue Brittanique, who imagined himself to be a teapot, and in
order to simulate the handle, curved one arm round his body, resting
his hand upon his hips, while to imitate the spout, he held the other
out extended. This attitude he persisted in retaining. The gram-
marian Arthemidore was so frightened at the sight of a crocodile,
that he became mad, and insisted that the animal had eaten away
his foot and his left hand. In some cases, the intellectual faculties
assume, during insanity, a preternatural activity, and talents are
developed which were unknown in the normal state of the mind.

Hence, some patients manifest an extraordinary taste for music,
poetry, and painting; and sometimes they improvise verses with
remarkable fluency and ability. Not unfrequently they take a par-
ticular dislike to persons they have never before seen, which occurs
especially in dementia. It is also a curious fact, that upon recovery
the disposition, taste, and habits often undergo a complete change.
Another very remarkable circumstance which deserves the attention
of psychologists, is the return of reason before death. M. Brierre
relates the case of a young man who was for fifty-two years in his
establishment in the Rue Neuve Saint Genevieve, and Avho had not
spoken for thirty years. When perseveringly interrogated, he gave
a kind of grunt and ran away. About fifteen days before his death,
this patient, who had lost the habit of speaking for so long a time,
and whose ideas were extremely circumscribed, recovered the use of
his tongue, and answered perfectly well questions put to him.
Yery many such cases, even of a more remarkable kind, have come
under our observation, and remind us of the beautifully-written dis-
sertation of Aretieus on the clearing up of the mind before death.
A very common symptom of insanity is the total perversion of the
affections, and a feeling of antipathy and hatred against those who
were previously beloved; but sometimes, on the other hand, the insane
attach themselves pertinaciously to persons who were utter strangers
to them. We remember an insane young woman who appeared to
be devotedly attached to a sick friend; day and night for above a
week she sat upon her bedside, ministering to her wants and com-
forts; but as soon as the object of her care died, she appeared to
forget her entirely, and never spoke of her again. Many of the
insane, however the intellect may be impaired, entertain a strong
sense of right and wrong, justice and injustice; and their evidence
upon matters of fact may often be implicitly relied upon.

Next to the lesions of intellect, the lesions of sensibility require
to be noticed, and these are of two kinds?special, in which the
functions of certain senses only are perverted, and general, in which
the sensibility is generally impaired. Under the first category come
hallucinations and illusions, and here it should be observed that
M. Brierre insists upon a division of great importance,?viz., the
separation of hallucinations into, 1st. Physiological hallucinations,
and 2ndly, Pathological hallucinations. The former ? physiolo-
gical hallucinations ? occur in dreams, and with children, and
men absorbed and pre-occupied with a single idea or pursuit. In
such cases, cerebral disease, we presume, will not be predicated.
As examples of physiological hallucinations, we may refer to the
history of Socrates, Plato, Luther, Joan of Arc, Ignatius Loyola, and'
many other celebrated enthusiasts. The latter species?pathological
hallucinations ? are very common among the insane who fancy they
see strange figures, hear mysterious noises, and touch, taste, and
smell things which exist only in their own imagination. Hallucina-
tions frequently prompt to unusual, absurd, and sometimes dangerous
actions,?even suicide and murder result from this perversion of the
senses. Ravaillac, who assassinated Henri IV., imagined that he
smelt fire and brimstone exhaling from his feet; he beheld figures
dancing before him, and saw the host coming down through the air
and sitting beside him; his voice resounded upon his ear like the
sound of a trumpet, and one day he fancied that he saw a death's
head upon a statue, all which, with many other hallucinations, in-
duced him to believe that his victim had been sentenced to be
damned, and that it was necessary that he should perish by his
hand. The details of the cruel execution of this hallucinaut need
not here be recapitulated. During the Huguenot civil Avar, simi-
lar hallucinations led, as probably they do in all religious wars and
civil commotions, to the most hideous barbarities. Hallucina-
tions may be confined to a single, or affect many senses. Illusions
differ from hallucinations, inasmuch as they are based on some visible
and sensible object, while hallucinations are purely imaginary. The
square tower appears to be round?the river seems to fly?the shapes
of bodies are transformed?the identity of individuals is mistaken
?these, and a variety of other illusions, are constantly met with
among the insane. The above examples illustrate the perversion of
one or more special sensations; but the general sensibility of the
body may be exalted, deranged, or abolished. There is an old soldier
in the asylum of Saint-You, named Lambert, who believes that he
was killed at the battle of Austerlitz. When he speaks of himself,
he says, " This machine, which they thought to make like me, is very
badly made." When he speaks of himself, he does not use the per-
sonal pronoun, I, but the demonstrative pronoun, that, as if speaking
of some inanimate object. In him the general sensibility is extin-
guished, and he may be pinched or pricked without perceiving it.
This loss of sensibility (excepting in cases of paralysis) is never per-
manent, it passes away, and then excessive sensibility sometimes
supervenes. It is generally supposed that insane persons can bear
with impunity the extremes of temperature; there are some, it is
true, who can endure a very great degree of cold, but this is not fre-
quently the case. In winter we find them always crowding round
the fire, and exposure to cold constantly produces pains in the limbs,
bowel complaints, and discoloration of the extremities. Unless kept
warm, the feet will often exhibit symptoms of mortification; and
occasionally great attention is required to keep up the circulation.

The insensibility above described is sometimes local?e. g., Dr.
Burrows relates the case of a patient who put both his feet into a
strong fire, which he made with the leaves of a book he had torn up,
and who did not appear to suffer any pain from the flames. Another,
without any apparent suffering, swallowed a glass of boiling water.
An insane lady imagined that she was the daughter of the sun, and
when it shone forth unclouded in the heavens, she would fix her
eyes intently upon it for many hours, without being in the least
dazzled; when clouds obscured its disk she became sad, and shut
herself up in her apartment. The insensibility from the surface of the
body would appear to extend to a certain degree internally?hence
the intestinal canal is often insensibly to the action of common doses
of medicine. Mutzel relates the case of an insane patient, who re-
quired for an emetic seventeen grains of emetic tartar; the practice,
however, of M. Brierre, is to give antimony and calomel in small
doses, repeated several days in succession, which is attended with
good effect.

Lesions of motility, or the functions of the muscular system, in-
volve many important points for consideration in the diagnosis and
treatment of insanity. Sometimes the insane appear to be endowed
with preternatural strength?they walk to and fro with great vehe-
mence, and gesticulate incessantly; at other times they are agitated,
and their movements appear to be irregular and independent of their
volition. There are patients who may be observed constantly
throwing out their limbs, exercising the flexor and extensor muscles of
the arms and legs, and striking the trunk of the body backwards
against a post or a wall. These are frequently epileptics, and their
disease is very often complicated with paralysis, the precursory
symptoms of which are sometimes very obscure. The symptom
which is generally first observed, is an unusual embarras of speech,
the patient hesitates and stammers, and obviously has a difficulty in
the articulation of certain letters and words. The tongue, when
protruded, is tremulous; this hesitation of speech, however, will
occasionally disappear for hours, particularly if he become excited,
and he will then speak with great precipitation and rapidity; we
may at the same time frequently observe an immobility and want of
expression in the features,?the countenance is inexpressive, the
muscles of the face seem relaxed. This hesitation and difficulty in
speaking gradually increase, the words are no longer connected with
each other, and a prolonged emphasis is placed upon each syllable.
The articulation finally becomes unintelligible. In the meantime the
functions of the muscular system fail, and here an interesting question
suggests itself,?viz., Avhether this failure of muscular power pro-
ceeds from above downwards, or the reverse? M. Iiodrigues has
concluded, from his observations, that it begins with the tongue;
thence extends to the superior limbs, and arrives gradually, or with
more or less rapidity, at the lower extremities. M. de Crozant calls
our attention to the insensibility of the skin, as indicating the ap-
proach of general paralysis. The liability of the two sexes to para-
lysis differs. Among 580 paralytic patients at Charenton, Saint-
You, Antiquaille M. Iiodrigues found 435 men, and 145 women,
paralytic?that is to say, the proportion in favour of the men was
as 4 to 1.

The diseases of organic life observed in insanity, comprehend those
which are, under other circumstances, incident to the thoracic and
abdominal viscera. The insane complain, upon the accession of the
disease, of excessive thirst; sometimes they loathe their food, or else
eat voraciously, and the tongue may be observed slightly coated of a
white, or slightly yellowish, or brown colour. There is frequently
pain in the epigastrium, and a general torpor of the digestive func-
tion, superinducing habitual and obstinate constipation. The heart
is frequently, perhaps more frequently than any other vital organ,
found diseased; ossification of the valves, and hypertrophy, are com-
monly met with. In many cases insanity is complicated Avith various
neuralgic affections, and often Avith phthisis. The case is related of
Madame B., Avho Avas suffering from phthisis Avlien she became insane.
During the several years that her insanity continued, the symptoms
of the chest complaint disappeared. The disease of the mind being
cured, the symptoms of phthisis again became developed; aftenvards
she relapsed into a state of insanity, and again the chest complaint
was suspended. Eventually this lady recovered possession of her
mental faculties, and the progress of phthisis then became so rapid,
that she died soon after the recovery of her senses. This alternation
of certain diseases with insanity has frequently been remarked, and
only verifies the axiom of Hippocrates, that two distinct and acute
diseases cannot co-exist in the same body.

When we consider the different forms under which insanity appears,
it is obviously difficult to reduce them into any specific classification;
hence the different divisions and sub-divisions which have been sug-
gested, are all more or less unsatisfactory. The classification adopted
by Esquirol, which he modified from Pinel, comprehends, 1. Lype-
mania, or Melancholia; 2. Monomania; 3. Mania; 4. Dementia;
5. Imbecilitas. This division, however, does not comprehend the
" delire aigu," which establishes a transition between cerebral and
mental affections; neither does it distinguish between hallucinations
and illusions. The classification proposed by M. Brierre de Bois-
mont, is considered to be the most comprehensive, and is as follows:?
GENERAL DIVISION.

(Simple, accidental, congenital.
With lesion of sensibility.
With lesion of motility.
SUBDIVISION.
Form. Six Classes.
1st Class  | Hallucinations.
(Illusions.
2nd Class, Coherent general delirium . J^CUt.e deHr|um' (pyrexia.)
I Mania, with or without furor.
to one idea (rare)   Monomania.
a small number of ideas ... Oligomania.
to one or more ideas,'
which change in the
course of the disease
to a few ideas, without'
any external manifesta-
tion
3rd Class, Coherent delirium, gay, sad,
or limited
Trepomania.
Stupiditas.
4th Class, Coherent delirium, general or
limited, with or without disturb-
ance of motility
Delirium of drunkards.
5th Class, Incoherent delirium.
Acute dementia.
Chronic dementia.
Progressive paralytic dementia.
Epileptic dementia.
.Senile dementia.
{Imbecility.
Idiocy.
Cretinism.
The delire aigu, which forms the basis of this classification, is the
phrenitis of the ancients, and the febrile delirium of the moderns;
and is thus placed in accordance with the psychological phenomena
exhibited in the different forms of insanity referred to. The sub-
division of monomania suggests many very important considerations.
M. Foville, and some other physicians, deny the existence of that
species of monomania which is restricted to a single idea; but M.
Baillarger has well argued that it is not to be assumed that the mind
in such cases has not any other idea present to it; all that is meant
is, that the reasoning faculties occupy themselves with one pre-
dominant idea, to which all other ideas are only accessory. He
refers to the case of a patient, who, for upwards of twenty years,
entertained the idea of killing one person! So also a magistrate
of high probity and honour, conceived himself to be lost in conse-
quence, of having committed a criminal act, and so strongly was his
mind possessed of this single idea, that in his more cheerful moments
he could ridicule himself for the very act he believed that he had com-
mitted. In that species of monomania in which several ideas occupy
the mind, (oligomanie), the patient is cheerful (amenomanie), the eyes
are bright, the countenance expressive of gaiety, and the conversation
is thoughtless and unrestrained. In the opposite species of mono-
mania, ('lypemanie,) the patient is melancholy; his countenance ex-
presses inquietude and suspicion; he is taciturn and often suicidal.

This species of monomania prevails, it is said, very much in the
neighbourhood of Paris. There is a form of monomania which is
not well understood, particularly in England; it is that species of in-
sanity in which the reasoning faculties appear to be unimpaired,
while the conduct of the individual is, in the highest degree, irra-
tional. Pinel has designated this form of the disease, manie raison-
nante; Brierre, folie (Paction; Esquirol, monomanie raisonnante;
and the late Dr Pritchard, moral insanity. The individuals who
are so affected will often talk in the most plausible manner, and ex-
plain their erratic conduct with so much ingenuity and address as
to impose upon those who listen to them. In conversing with them
it is impossible to detect any abberration of the intellectual faculties.
They reason correctly, and often with more vivacity and ability than
usual, particularly if they imagine that they are suspected and under
any kind of surveillance; but the moment they are left to them-
selves, and believe they are not observed, they are guilty of great
irregularity of conduct; they cannot rest in any one place; they
annoy their companions, and excite one against the other by all kinds
of falsehood and calumnies; they leave nothing about them un-
touched; they displace everything; and, should they be remonstrated
with, they at once deny what they have done, or excuse and justify
themselves with great tact; they never confess the truth, and have
always a thousand good explanations to give for their conduct.
Such patients are extremely troublesome and difficult to deal with.

They frequently overwhelm the person in charge of them with com-
pliments, and affect a tone of morality, sentiment, and religion; but
the moment an opportunity occurs, they commit every kind of mis-
chief which may, from the perversity of their disposition, suggest
itself, and hence they become intolerable at home, or in other private
families, and are apt even to destroy the discipline and subordination
of the asylums into which they may be admitted. The symptoms of
this form of disease are, a sudden change in the usual habits of living
?caprice?versatility?estrangement and perversion of the moral
affections?restlessness?and agitation. The intellectual faculties
gradually become impaired, and a state of dementia ensues. The
recognition of the disease itself requires experience, and the prog-
nosis is generally unfavourable; so true it is, that the more intact
the intellectual faculties remain, the greater always is the difficulty
of cure.

Among the other forms of monomania, cases of homicidal and
suicidal monomania are of frequent occurrence, but are often the
result of what has appropriately been termed impulsive insanity.
Hallucinauts are especially liable to commit either one or other of
these acts, for they often hear voices commanding them sometimes
to kill others, sometimes to kill themselves; and in many of these
cases there exists previously no evidence whatever of mental derange-
ment. Not unfrequently some peculiar fanatical notion suggests the
fatal act; religious monomaniacs, therefore, are never safe. Pinel
relates the' case of a fanatic who conceived the idea that mankind
should be regenerated by the baptism of blood; and under this delu-
sion he cut the throats of all his children, and would have murdered
his wife had she not effected her escape. Sixteen years afterwards,
when a patient in the Bicetre, he murdered two of his fellow-patients,
and would have killed all the inmates in the hospital if his homicidal
propensity had not been restrained. Instead of being impulsive, the
homicidal act is sometimes premeditated; a fixed idea of vengeance
occupies the mind until the favourable moment for consummating
the act arrives. An insane patient having asked a female attendant
in a private asylum for some money, was refused; he conceived im-
mediately a feeling of resentment against the poor young woman,
and having possessed himself of a piece of iron, sharpened the point
of it, and for a fortnight carried the weapon concealed about liis
person, when suddenly a scream was heard, and it was found that he
had stabbed her in the thigh, the sharp instrument having penetrated
through her clothes, and divided the femoral artery. Upon suicidal
monomania, many very interesting and curious facts are cited, some
of which clearly prove that an hereditary predisposition to commit
the act may exist.

It is stated that Gall used to relate the anecdote of a rich pro-
prietor, who left a fortune of two millions between his seven children,
who lived in the neighbourhood of Paris. They were very provident
of their paternal inheritance, which some of them augmented. No
misfortune happened to one of them. They enjoyed good health and
an honourable position in society, but successively every one of these
seven brothers committed suicide. He also knew a family in which
the grandmother, sister, and mother, all committed suicide: the
latter had two children, a daughter and son; the former was rescued
from drowning herself, but the latter hung himself. It was the
opinion of Gall that the cranial bones, in cases of suicides, present an
increase in thickness and density; but this fact has not been verified.
Cabanis imagined that the brains of suicides, and the insane gene-
rally, possess an excess of phosphorus, which is also not proved.
Osiander ascribed the cause of this morbid propensity to lesions of
the heart, and inflammation of the abdominal viscera. The perse-
verance of some patients to accomplish suicide almost exceeds belief;
one patient attempted it successively forty-five times, and another,
after having been for some months under the restraint of the
camisole, the moment he was set free tried to dash his brains out
against the wall. Some specific remedies have been recommended
for this form of the disease, such as quinine, opium, musk. Aven-
brugger advises that a seton should be placed over the region of the
liver, and the patient be made to drink a great quantity of water.
The actual cautery has also been prescribed, and blisters have cer-
tainly been found useful.

We must, however, here pause, as our limits preclude our giving,
at present, a further analysis of this valuable work. In another
article, we propose considering at length the views which are given
upon the medical and moral treatment of insanity.
