The Philosophy of Animated Nature, or the Laws and Action of the Nervous System
=================================================================================

555
Art. IY.
:Author:  G. Calvert Holland, M.D.
London : J. Churchill.

Dr Calvert Holland's work has more than ordinary claims to
our attention. Whether the originality of the facts brought forward,
the numerous interesting views which they elucidate, or the exten-
sive knowledge exhibited of the labours of former physiologists, as
well as of the laws of nature generally, be taken into account, it will
be admitted to be a production of considerable value. We have
evidence in every page of an active and comprehensive mind. Inde-
pendently of the principles which it contains, it has literary qualities
of a high order. The style is easy, elegant, and perspicuous; and
not unfrequently we find in the volume passages of great eloquence
and beauty. The mode in which the author has developed his views,
is not, indeed, the least merit of the treatise. The work is singularly
free from scientific jargon and professional terms, and is, therefore,
easy of comprehension to the general reader. Some portions of it,
from the novelty of the facts adduced, and the principles which they
explain, are as interesting as a romance.

The author exhibits an accurate knowledge of the labours of other
physiologists, and has evidently a mind keenly alive to the pheno-
mena of nature generally. The value of the work does not consist
simply in the acuteness of its reasoning or the depth of its reflections,
but in the decidedly practical conclusions to which it leads.
If the views which he endeavours to establish be correct, they
will unquestionably be productive of great advantage to the science
of medicine. Dr Holland brings under consideration a nervous
principle, not in an hypothetical form. The existence and the laws
of its operations are pointed out as clearly and as satisfactorily as
Harvey establishes the fact of the circulation of the blood. No one
will be inclined to question the value of the discovery of the latter
in regard to medical practice, and there would be just as little
reason with respect to that of the former. Of the two discoveries,
as a previous reviewer has already well observed?" The discovery of
the nervous principle, or rather the tracing of the operations of a
power to which the term nervous is applied, was surrounded by much
greater difficulties than that of the motion of the blood. In the latter
instance, the structure of the heart, arteries, and veins, when pro-
foundly studied by the philosophical mind, demonstrated that the
blood must have the course which the immortal Harvey has indicated.
He had to deal with matter palpable to the senses; and the wonder
is, not that he made the discovery, but that it was not made at an
earlier period. It is certain, from the important light which had
been previously thrown upon the subject, that the circulation of the
blood could not possibly have remained long unknown."

The facts which establish the existence and exhibit the operations
of a nervous principle have to be sought, not in the structure of the
nerves, or indeed in the structure of any part of the animal system,
but in the close observation of a multitude of phenomena, the classi-
fication of which gives the first glimpse of the laws according to
which the nervous principle acts.

The numerous and interesting facts which the author brings for-
ward to prove that such a principle has an existence, and may be
accumulated or dispersed in any organ, are, in our opinion, as satis-
factory as the evidence which proves the circulation of the blood.
In the short analysis which we propose to give, we shall in the
different extracts from the work, allow the author to state his own
views; at the same time it must not be expected, in the brief space
which we shall occupy, that a correct idea of the contents of upwards
of five hundred pages can be conveyed. The work, to be under-
stood, must be read; for though the author considers a variety of sub-
jects connected with the nervous system, yet they are all inseparably
connected by the same general facts and reasoning, they all equally
illustrate the existence and operations of a nervous principle, conse-
quently they each reciprocally borrow and reflect evidence of their
truthfulness.

No medical work has appeared since the days of Harvey, display-
ing the same novel and comprehensive views; and certainly none
having an equal claim to attention, from their exclusive relations to
the treatment of diseases. As we have already remarked, if the
views be well founded, they will thoroughly change the prevailing
doctrines, not only in reference to nervous affections, but to the
complicated evils to which flesh is heir.

The first part of the work is occupied in tracing " the relations
between organs and their functions." The author enters fully into
this subject, and shows that every portion of the animal system is
energetic or otherwise in its action, ceteris paribus, according to its
structural development. He observes?

" The co-existence of thought and feeling with nervous matter, is
as indisputable as motion resulting from the contraction of muscular
fibres. To admit the dependence in the one instance, and to deny it
in the other, is unphilosophical. The connexion in both is established
by the same kind of proof, though it may, indeed, be less obvious to
the ordinary observer in the operations of mind than in the pheno-
mena of muscular contraction.

" Thought springs, however, from the action of matter as neces-
sarily as motion from muscular contraction, and the power of each
is proportionate to the size and condition of its material instru-
ments.

" The doctrine that mental power is proportionate to matter is as
universal in its application as the law of gravitation. It excludes
exceptions. The vigorous exercise of a faculty implies an ample
organ, and the one will never be found separate from the other."
In this part of the work, the author adduces many interesting
facts in regard to changes from time and other circumstances, in the
structural condition of the organs of the senses, and shows how
invariably the senses are modified in their power according to these
particular changes. He further proceeds to prove that the activity
of these organs, as well as those of the brain generally, depends on
the amount of the nervous fluid which is associated with them, and
he certainly establishes beyond doubt, that this fluid, the same as
the blood, is constantly undergoing changes in its amount in all the
organs of the body, and that the extent or soundness of their opera-
tions is proportionate to the amount of the nervous fluid which
they possess. The whole of the work may be said to be occupied
in establishing and illustrating this truth. Its application to the
explanation of phenomena is shown to be almost inexhaustible. He
observes?

" That a function is proportionate to the capacity of its organ
may be laid down as a general rule, and all things being equal,
admits of no exception. The power accompanying any given organic
capacity is not, however, a fixed quantity, but is constantly exhibit-
ing modifications, not merely in cases of disease, but in the numerous
changes of the nervous system in health ; the nature of which modi-
fications is simply a difference in the amount of nervous energy
existing. The acuteness or activity of an organ varies with this
amount.

" Whatever sense is excited, the nervous principle, in consequence
of which it acts, is increased. In vision it flows from within; out-
wards, not only in the direction of the visal organs, but towards
every portion of the human countenance, producing an expression in
harmony with the predominant feelings of the mind.

" That phenomena result, which may be explained on this view,
will not be doubted; and Ave shall prove in the following pages that
it is in this manner only that numerous facts, in connexion with the
nervous system, admit of a satisfactory elucidation. To deny the
transmission of a something along the nerves, which is capable of
accumulation and dispersion, is to involve the disputant in difficulties
and absurdities.

"We do not imagine that the nervous principle is increased by
immediate production, when the organ in which it exists is suddenly
aroused to powerful action. This principle will flow where it is re-
quired, and the knowledge of this circumstance is fraught with the
highest interest to the physiologist. Though rich in speculative
materials, it abounds far more in truths of a practical nature.
" It is a law of the animal system, that every predominant action
draws to itself the vital energies from parts less excited. We ob-
serve this in regard to the circulation, and the fact, though less
obvious to ordinary observation with respect to the nervous system,
may be equally well established by profound investigations. The
phenomena which crowd upon the mind in illustration of it, perplex
from their variety."

" The flow of the nervous energy from within, outwards, as exem-
plified in the action of the visual organs, is much more evident in the
feline than in the human species. The eyes of the former, when the
animal is enraged, glow with fire and actually emit sparks. Does
this arise from the transmission of a something from the internal
organs, or is it only a change in the constitution of the nervous
molecules, neither diminishing nor increasing the principle by which
they are animated 1 The eyes of the cat when intently fixed upon
an object in the dark, become large and brilliant in the extreme.
The change is not simple concentrated attention, but accumulated
nervous energy by which perception is rendered much more acute."
" The hare, when it first catches the distant sound of the dogs,
erects its ears and presents a large surface to sonorous impressions.
But this is not the whole of the phenomena. A much more sensitive
medium is created for the transmission of sound. The same nervous
energy which modifies the form of the external organ of hearing,
keeps up an excited action between the brain and the complicated
apparatus of the sense, and hence the acuteness which results. We
cannot, however, on the present occasion, indulge in the amplification
of these views."

Almost all physiologists have contended that the nervous fluid
has not the slightest analogy to electricity, and in confirmation of
the opinion numerous experiments have been performed, apparently
establishing the fact. I)r. Calvert Holland points out very clearly
the fallacies which exist in all such experiments. Though he does
not assert that the two are identical, he shows that no means have
been devised which can be regarded as proving a difference in their
properties. The following observations on this point are not with-
out interest. He not only shows the source of the fallacies, but sug-
gests an experiment in which they are entirely obviated, thus leaving
to future physiologists, the no easy task of discovering a difference
in the properties of the two fluids, if such exist.

"We have, in the preceding remarks, taken it for granted, that
the experiments, by which Muller and others endeavour to establish
the distinction between the nervous and electric fluid, present, in an
unobjectionable manner, the phenomena of the latter. We shall,
however, show that they have been performed without a due regard to
certain important conditions, and consequently have led to false con-
clusion. We found on operating on the sciatic nerve of a rabbit,
that when one pole was placed upon the nerve, and the other on the
muscles of the thigh, the contractions were violent; and further, that
when the nerve was tied, or divided, leaving a space of the eighth of
an inch between the two ends, one pole being applied above the
ligature, or the divided portion of the nerve, and the other in its
previous situation, the contractions as stated by Muller, were not in
any degree lessened. Care was taken, in all these experiments, to
insulate the nerve from the surrounding textures by means of glass.
"We conceived, however, that the electric fluid might possibly,
through other channels than the trunk of the nerve, find a passage
to the muscles, and, therefore, to obviate all sources of fallacy, Ave
separated the spine, at the fourth lumbar vertebra, from the body,
and then divided the limb from the pelvis, so that the two portions
might be connected at pleasure by the nerve only. When the two
ends of the nerve were in the least degree apart from each other, the
electric fluid did not produce any muscular contractions, but these
were observed as soon as the two ends were placed in juxta-position,
clearly proving that in the experiments of Muller and others, the elec-
tricity had been transmitted not directly through the nerve operated
upon, but through other channels to the muscles. The experiment was
most striking and satisfactory. When the space between the two
ends of the nerves became moist a slightly conducting medium was
established. In order to insure success it is necessary that the glass
on which the nerve rests should be perfectly dry."

" The numerous phenomena which have been brought under con-
sideration, in reference to the nervous system generally, whether
motion, sensibility, or intelligence, or vital action in any of its various
conditions, prove that they depend on the same common principle;
and that this is indeed the animating power throughout the ex-
tended and unbroken chain of breathing flesh, modified only in its
manifestations by the capacity and nature of the structure with which
it is associated. All that live, move, and have their being, derive
that which is designated life, from the union of this principle with
organic matter; and when we consider how difficult it is to deter-
mine where the animal ends, or the vegetable begins, and reflect on
the character of the functions exercised by the latter, it is impossible
to resist the conviction, that they are equally the result of the same
agent in combination with material elements. In the plant, we ob-
5G0 the philosophy of animated nature.

serve the ascent and descent of the sap, and the organs of respira-
tion to fit the circulating fluid to the purposes of nutrition, and the
variety of its secretions; and also the season in which it displays its
maturity and vigour, in the richness of its efflorescence, in which
stage of vegetable life the different sexual organs are developed, the
presence of the one being essential to the impregnation of the other,
and the effect of the mysterious action is the production of that
which secures the continuance of the species. And, if we take into
account, that electricity abounds in every plant, and is evolved in the
ratio of its vital operations, precisely as in the animal; and further,
that it pervades all substances, the air we breathe?the water we
drink, the food we eat, the ground on which we move, and every-
thing which falls under observation, the conclusion seems almost in-
evitable that the same principle is common to the whole universe.
" Does such an idea deprive nature of any of its ennobling views ?
It displays in beautiful simplicity the laws which an all-wise Spirit
has impressed on the creations of his hands.

" The contemplation of the infinity phenomena which may be
traced to the operation of the same cause,?from the order in which
the planets revolve in their undeviating path, to the unfolding of the
seed-leaf in search of light, both equally indebted to the same agent
for the manifestation of their powers, cannot fail to exalt and refine
the conceptions of the mind. The instruments with which nature
works are boundless, but that which gives them their vitality or pe-
culiar properties is one, and accompanies matter in all its diversified
forms, itself susceptible of no change?save in the laws of its distri-
bution."

By far the most interesting part of the treatise is that in which
the author traces " the influence of the mental faculties on the con-
ditions of the body." The whole is not less distinguished by its
originality and practical bearings than by the very varied informa-
tion displayed, and the not less acute observation of the healthy and
morbid conditions of the animal system, as well as of human cha-
racter, pervading its pages, which are nearly half the work. It is
not possible, by a few extracts, to convey a correct or general idea
of the subjects discussed, or of the mode of their treatment. To
be understood, Ave again repeat, the book must be read. The author
traces the operations of the nervous fluid, under a variety of circum-
stances, and then proceeds to show in what manner the brain, through
the medium of the nervous fluid, influences the form and motions of
the body, and the expression of the countenance. He refers to the
phenomena which Mesmerism discloses, in confirmation of the just-
ness of his view and reasoning. He observes?

" We will briefly advert to the relations between the mind and
the body in the several classes of society, and the modifications of
these relations and the mode of their production, from alterations in
the character of external circumstances.

" In the peasant, especially in purely agricultural districts, where
the physical condition of the masses is low, we have the vacant
stare, the gaping mouth, the heavy and scarcely rolling eye, and
every bodily motion ungainly. These, however, are in harmony
with the mental faculties. There are few objects to excite them.
Such only are called into play as are necessary for his daily tasks,
and the narrow sphere of his social duties. Sleep is his only relaxa-
tion from labour.

" It would be against the order and the laws of nature, if these
circumstances produced any other results. Quickness of perception,
restlessness of thought, and the firm step of independence, are not the
growth of such a soil. The animating principle, which, under more
favourable conditions, imparts beauty to the human form, grace and
dignity to its motions, and intelligence to its every expression, has
here a more circumscribed range of action, or, at least, one much
less varied. It has to invigorate the muscular powers. These
regulate its current, and are the sources of its expenditure. That
which is employed, in a different position of life, in developing the
mental faculties, in arousing their noblest efforts, and sustaining
their loftiest flights, flows here in the direction of those bodily organs
on which labour makes the greatest demand. The principle will
not maintain two co-existing predominant actions.

" The importance of this view cannot be too strongly impressed
upon the understanding. It has simplicity and truth to recommend
it. Its application, in the elucidation of phenomena, is boundless,
whether they spring out of the healthy or morbid conditions of the
cerebral or corporeal organs.

" It must not be imagined that the agent which ministers to the
one class of functions, is, in any degree, different in its properties
from that which imparts life to the other. It is one and the same,
and pervades all nature. The variety of the phenomena to which
it gives rise, is according to the diversity of the instruments with
which it is associated.

" The awkward movements of the limbs, and the rounded
shoulders, partly the effect of labour and of habit, have relations
with the brain, which no education or improved social condition can
correct, save, perhaps, the rigorous and unrelaxing discipline of the
army, and this only in youth.

" The nervous fluid having long flowed in a copious current from
the brain to the muscles in active exercise, cannot be turned from
its course by new and more varied motives presented to the mind;
or by exercising the body in other pursuits. These circumstances
may partially modify the conditions, but here ends their influence.
We may as well attempt to divert the swelling flood, as withdraw
the nervous principle from its long-frequented paths, so changing
jts distribution, that it shall awaken the higher mental faculties, give
life and spirit to the features, and grace and dignity to the human
frame.

" The view which explains these relations and the consequent
results on the form and motions of the body, is equally applicable to
the varying states of the cerebral organs. They have their relations
with the nervous fluid, the modifications in the circulation of which
account satisfactorily for numerous interesting phenomena arising
from their exercise. The same law applies to the diversified condi-
tions of both. The muscles not only acquire strength, but agility of
action, by frequent and animated movements; and equally so the
organs of the brain, and from the same cause?the increased amount
of the nervous fluid ministering to their operations.
" The excited and sustained activity of the intellectual faculties,
gives occasionally an energy and comprehensiveness of thought, a
lucidity of perception, an aptness of illustration, and a copiousness
of expression, that appear more like inspiration than the results of
mental exertion. What writer has not experienced these luxurious
and elevating moments! The happiest conceptions of the poet and
of the philosopher, and the exquisite language in which they are
clothed, have been the production of that state of the mind in which
it pours forth its riches with an unconscious liberality."

" In the middle classes of society, we observe the influence of
similar cases, differing only in the degree of intellect which tlicy
excite. We have here the first transition from the imperative re-
quirements of labour, to a more active and comprehensive field of
exertion. Commerce and manufactures, science, literature, and the
arts, appeal to the higher faculties of the understanding, and they
impart an energy and enterprise, a vigour and capacity of thought,
which cannot co-exist in any other class. The motives to exertion
are various. The pure and exalted love of learning for its own sake,
but especially for the advantages with which it is pregnant to hu-
manity, are not the least influential of the considerations which
stimulate the brain to activity. The necessity of exertion, and the
laudable desire to command the comforts and the luxuries of life,
arouse the diversified mental powers; and we see their consequences
in the busy and enlivening operations of manufactures?in the ex-
tension of commerce, in the improved tone, order, and tendencies of
society, and in the vast influence which they exert in diffusing the
blessings of civilization, wherever man breathes. It is from these
classes that the spirit of improvement mainly takes its rise. It
communicates an impulse to those above, which renders their pro-
gression imperative; and the same is awakened in those beneath
them, by presenting for their emulation the fruits of industry, talent,
and perseverance. It is their high function to set thought in motion,
and their position is peculiarly favourable for giving it the required
direction. They are not enfeebled by the indulgences and apathy of
the great; nor is their steadiness of purpose, or energy of action,
interrupted by the sensual or grovelling ideas of the artisan.
" There may possibly be certain drawbacks to the truthfulness of
this picture?shadows which partially obscurc the distinctness of its
outlines, but the general consequences which flow from the invigo-
rated understanding, are not substantially affected by them.
"We must not expect to find in the majority of these classes, a
cultivated taste, a delicate susceptibility of the elegances and nice
proprieties of life?an easy and graceful demeanour?the transition
which leads to these, springs out of transmitted and not acquired
riches. The struggle and the labour by which these are obtained,
leave little leisure, and are seldom accompanied with the disposition
to study refinements regarded as trifles, but which are fraught with a
peculiar charm and interest. They are the last touches which edu-
cation gives to the feelings. The mental energies are stimulated by
more important considerations, and they are kept in vigorous play by
the circumstances which call them into existence."

Dr Calvert Holland is an original thinker. Everything that pro-
ceeds from his pen is entitled to our most patient and respectful
consideration. He is disposed to think favourably of mesmerism,
and the facts he brings forward illustrative of the view he has taken
of this vex,ata questio, certainly are startling, and deserve careful
investigation. We confess that we have seen enough to convince
our own minds that there is some truth in Mesmeric phenomena;
but, in saying this, we consider it necessary to protest against its
betng supposed that we are Mesmerists in the fullest acceptation of
the term. Disbelieving and doubting much of the phenomena attri-
buted to this influence, Ave would respect those who conscientiously
pursue these abstruse inquiries. Lord Bacon says of the ancient
alchemists, that although they did not succeed in discovering the
philosopher's stone, their apparently profitless Speculations were pro-
ductive of much good; they dug up and pulverized the soil, and
thus made it more adapted to the purposes of vegetation. ? May this
not be said of Mesmerism ?
p p 2
