Influence cles Vetemens sur nos Orgctnes
========================================

Art. II.?. Deformation du
Crdne, resultant de la metliode plus gencrale de Couvrir la Tete
des Enfans. Par le Docteur A. Foville. Paris.

The Influence of Clothing on our Organs. A Deformity of the Cranium,
resulting from the common method of Covering the Heads of Infants.
By Dr Achille Foville, Senior Physician to the Asile Depart-
mental des Alienes de la Seine Inferieure. Paris, pp. 69. With
Illustrations.

Foville, who had the charge of the Asile Departmental de la Seine
Inferieure, paid great attention to the deformities of the cranium
among the idiotic and imbecile patients confined within its walls; and
he traced the origin of these cranial irregularities to mismanagement
in infancy, especially that of bandaging the head too tightly. This
deformity may be marked by drawing a line along the middle of the
forehead, around over the ears, and beneath the protuberance of the
occiput. This depression is most observable on the forehead and sides
of the head. He accounts for it by tight bandaging in the early months
of infancy. He observed it in all classes of society?among adults, old
people, youths, children, and infants neAvly born?under such striking
circumstances, that what was only a floating conjecture in his mind in
1829, was in 1834 a solid conviction. At a certain degree of intensity
this malformation produces grave disturbances in the cerebral circula-
tion, such as imbecility or epilepsy, and may, sooner or later, end in
confirmed idiocy or insanity. It is a barbarity, he says, which would
seem to have had its origin only among savages; and the object of his
memoir, at the head of this article, is to lay open the magnitude of the
evil, and to insist on the necessity of its being effectually remedied.
The shape of the head, when perfectly developed, is that of a sphere
or spheroid, half of which is above the eyebrows and half below, the
ear-hole being two-thirds of the distance in a line from the orbitar ridge
to the occiput. The annexed outlines are examples of this kind of
head, and, with such a formation, its fortunate possessor could not be
anything else than intelligent, if not good. Every head, however, is
not so well turned as these
two are, but eaeli, when left
to nature, approximates to
this type. The greater num-
ber of craniums are ovoid,
and regularly rounded; and
the variations or departures
from this prevailing figure
establish the difference be-
tween different individuals
or races. A very little ob-
servation will show, that the
best shaped heads may be
slightly irregular, and fre-
quently not quite symmetri-
cal in their two halves. But the deformity described by Foville is a
caricature of nature in her worst mode of expression, as Avill be seen in
the annexed drawing, which is copied from one of Foville's illustrations.
The forehead re-
treats and is de-
pressed, the sinci-
put bulges out into
a knobby globe, the
occiput is thrown
back, and deeply in-
dented just above
the spinal column.
In profile the out-
line is angular,
which is contrary,
not only to the line
of beauty, but like-
wise to the sign of
a healthy constitu-
tion, which is inva-
riably curved and
flowing. A prac-
tised eye will dis-
cern this singular
deformity beneath
a thick cap, or
beneath a cap or
bonnet, or detect it
under the disguise
of a thick crop of hair; but sometimes, in order to observe it, the head
must be uncovered or shaved. There is, of course, every possible
variety, but a very common inferiority of shape most people are familiar
with in the example given in No. 5, which is a likeness. In the worst
cases, the skull is divided into two portions, an upper and lower, by
the circular depression, and the child in the night-cap (the subjoined
outline) may serve to convey some idea of the miseries, both immediate
and future, produced by drawing the bobbins rather too tightly. It
will be remarked, that when this malformation is excessive, the fore-
head is thrown forward and the chin depressed, for the sake of preserv-
ing, it would seem, the balance of the median line.

Now, do such deformities arise from the process of ossification being
disturbed 1 Is it rachitis of the cranium 1 or diseased softening of
the bones 1 Evidently not; because these misshapen heads are met
with in persons in all other respects healthy. In fact, the cranial
bones are in these cases elongated de seipsis, proving an innate power
of growth; whereas scrofulous bones are deficient in the power of
growing. But is this deformity the result of external compression 1
It would seem to be so; although some authors affirm that no
external force can alter the shape of the cranium. They judge by
analogy, and ground their opinion on comparative anatomy. But, in
this instance, comparative anatomy fails in deciding the question, which
is one of fact, relating to the human head, that sometimes goes on
enlarging till the fortieth year, and not to the lower animals, whose
ossification is complete and stationary after a fcetation of a few weeks
or months. Yet, though the analogy with the lower animals is un-
satisfactory, we find that the comparison with other races of mankind
is valid and conclusive. The Caribbees exhibit a remarkable proof in
our favour, for their heads are from their birth forced into a false shape
by a very mischievous artifice, the frontal bone being pressed almost
flat, and the occiput squeezed out so much backwards, that one of
these crania looks at first sight like the skull of a dog. Mr. Lawrence,
in his work on the " Natural History of Man," has commented on this
striking physiognomy; and Blumenbach, in his " Collectio Craniorum,"
gives two representations of it, which are worthy of attention. Exactly
opposed to this kind of shape is that of the Peruvian skull, which,
instead of being pressed out horizontally, is forced up vertically, into
the shape of an obtuse cone. Foville says that Blumenbach mentions
some Turkish skulls, exhibiting a circular depression, in consequence
of ligatures having been tied round the head in infancy. M. Virey, in
his article Enfant in the " Dictionnaire des Sciences Medicales," says it
is certain that the shape of the head may be altered mechanically, and
that some caps drawn tightly by ribbons force the head into a sugar-
loaf shape; thus, he adds, producing idiotcy by means of com-
pression.

In France, the rustics, if not the citizens, generally bandage their
children's heads from the birth, exactly along the line of depression
already pointed out; and it is remarkable, that the tip of the cartilage
of the ear is, at that point where it is pressed upon, flattened and
wasted, but that the lower portion of the ear, which has escaped the
pressure, retains its original character. The scalp, likewise, over the
fontanelle, is blanched, dry, and shining, exhibiting a few cicatrices,
through which some scanty hairs make their appearance. Among
adults, women suffer more than men, while children of either sex suffer
equally; but then the women cover their heads more continually
than the men, and the infants are all bandaged alike. These sad
effects are entirely prevented by laying aside the head-dress from the
first.

Some have supposed that the midwife may knead the head into a
particular form during the act of birth. This is not the case: for the
head of the child is always compressed and disfigured in a very
awkward manner during the easiest labours, while, in tedious ones, it
is distorted to a great degree. Nor does it recover its natural form
immediately after birth, as it always does when the labour has been
short and easy. It is not possible for us to compress the child's head
at this time.

Those mothers who have been persuaded to discontinue the use of
bandages acknowledge the happy results in consequence of their
having done so; and others have remarked the ill effects of the
bandage, although it has never occurred to them to abandon the use of
it. No intelligent man, to whom Foville disclosed his views, ever en-
tertained any doubts as to their reasonableness. Several medical men
from Eouen, besides Dr Hodgkin from London, MM. les Docteurs Marc
and Pasquier, and Professor De Blainville, who visited his Asylum,
agreed in his conclusions. It was the opinion of Pasquier, that the
coincidence of the wasting of the gristle of the ear, and the atrophy of
the hairy scalp, upon those parts over which the bandage or roller had
evidently passed, was a proof positive in his favour. How, indeed, can
these facts be denied, when the head is as deeply crimped by the marks
of former bandaging, as the leg, above the knee, becomes permanently
indented by the constant use of a tight garter 1
The results obtained in studying the deformed heads at the A site
Departmental de la Seme Inferieure bear out this view of the question.
In the month of August, 1833, the number of patients there was 431,
of whom 202 were men, and 229 women. Out of the total number of
men, 109 heads were regular, and 93 deformed; of these 93, all did not
betray the evidences of tight bandaging equally, for 36 were moderately
marked?46 more distinctly, and 11 only very distinctly so. Out of
the total number of women, there were 75 regular, and 154 deformed;
and of the latter number, 68 moderately, 46 much more so, and 40
most of all. Relative differences apart, the sum total gives, out of 202
men, 109 regular conformations, and 93 deformed; while out of 229
women, it gives 75 regular conformations, and 154 deformed: both
sexes taken together, it gives, out of the gross amount of 431 alienated,
184 regular conformations, and 247 deformities?i. e., more than half.
Among the men, the deformity does not extend to half the number,
while among the women, the proportions exceed two-thirds?thus:

Of both sexes taken together, it is 57 out of 100; of the men, 46 out
of 100, and of the women 67 out of 100. From the 11th July, 1825,
when the Asylum was first opened, up to the month of August, 1833,
an interval of eight years, 508 men and 640 Avomen were admitted,
giving about one-sixtli more of women than men; and the total differ-
ences between the two sexes are still the same?namely, about one-half of
the men having deformed heads, and two-thirds of the women. This
result is as interesting as it was unlooked for. But what is still more
interesting than this is, that, in this Asylum, there are separate apart-
ments for those variously affected?with fury, or moping, or passive
mania?among the inmates. And besides this house in particular,
there is a sort of town residence {Maison Bourgeoise), of a similar
nature, reserved for ladies of fortune (destinee aux dames pensionnaires
de la premiere classe), provided with three courts for the women, and five
proper dormitories. In one of the courts are collected the incurables,
who are the most indocile and violent; in two of the dormitories are
enclosed the most brutal, and those the most incapable of occupying
themselves; and in another dormitory are brought together, in com-
pany, the most laborious and sociable, as well as such as are the most
disposed to the employment in common of sewing,* &c., &c.
Now it so happens, that this last dormitory presents the smallest
proportion of deformed heads?14 out of 28, or half; whereas, in the
two other dormitories, containing the most violent and indocile, and
the most brutalized of the population, there are, out of 78 occupants,
58 badly-formed heads, or three-fourths. Let it be remarked, that the
most brutal characters here present the worst-shaped heads?a result so
much the more interesting, as the classification of disease has hitherto
proceeded entirely regardless of the shape of the skull.
These observations, made by Foville at the Asylum, lead to the
inquiry, whether their accuracy has been tested or corroborated in other
establishments of the same kind, or whether one meets with such defor-
mities in the world at large. He says, that when he was the eleve
interne of M. Esquirol, at the Salpetriere, he had already remarked this
malformation among the alienated in the wards of that hospital, and
was sure of having, at that time, noticed the pernicious impress of the
bandage around the cranium. It was the same at Charenton and
Bicetre; but then both these establishments frequently receive patients
from the adjacent parts of Normandy. Dr Delaye, a friend of Foville's,
in charge of the Hopital des Alienes at Toulouse, confirms the notion,
that the same evil is rife in the south of France as much as in the
north?arising, in all probability, from the same cause. Many persons
here, says Dr Delaye, have their heads peaked (jpointue), not only
among the maniacal, but among the sane also. Children wear two caps,
or cauls, bound round with a linen roller. These two cauls, or skull-
caps, tied on with long ribbons, compress the head strongly, by being
wound five or six times round very firmly; so that it is not uncommon
* The following note of Foville's is too good to be translated:?Qu'il me soit
permis de faire connaitre ici un resultat qu'aucune autre maison d'alienes n'est
peut-etre pas parvenue, jusqu'a present, a obtenir ail meme degre.

Les jardins spacieux de l'asile sont cultives par les bras de nos hommes, diriges
par un jardinier et des infirmiers. Les travaux de la buanderie, ceux de la lingerie
sont executes par les femmes alienes, sous la direction de nos dames religieuses.
Enfin, le transport des objets necessaires au service des bains de la cuisine est
encore l'ceuvre de nos insenses, et cela de quatre ans. Ainsi, nous avons pu utiliser,
dans leur inter ets, ces malheureux auxquel le travail de corps est si favorable.
to see persons with a depression or gutter along tlie circumference of
their heads, exactly corresponding to the line of pressure. This inden-
tation is deeply traced in some idiots and imbeciles in the IIopital des
Alienes de Toulouse. It might he conjectured that these deplorable
effects from the mode of bandaging infants' heads would be met with
only among the poorer set of people; but this is not the case, for out of
40 persons of fortune (pensionnaires pour les trois pensions superieures),
20 were thus deformed. The proportion is the same in each section of
society; nor is this surprising, when we call to mind how many mothers
put out their infants to wet-nurse, and, consequently, pass them over
to the hands of the lowest and poorest of the population. Moreover,
intelligent mothers do not feel themselves called upon to invent a new
method of dressing their little ones, but take things as they find them,
and do the best they can with what comes to hand.

Now, what are the injurious effects on the functions of the brain ?
This is a capital question, and the word that answers to the question
will indicate the proper corrective of the evil.

The enormous proportion of badly formed heads in the asylum
under Foville's care will suffice to show how closely such deformities
are connected with mental derangement; and the relative differences
between the two sexes, which gives so serious a preponderance against
the women, adds to the importance of this deformity, when considered
as an immediate or indirect cause of madness. It is an extensive
question, which comprises not only the mad, but even those sensible
folks who, with badly formed heads, go about their business apparently
in the perfect possession of their faculties. The most simple disorders,
however?such as headache and giddiness?may be all that arise from
the use of the bandage, in some cases; although, in others, of a more
serious character, they may manifest themselves as the warnings that
precede and accompany the most dangerous forms of compression of
the brain. Profound debility and a very deficient understanding are
met with in such persons just as often as a slightly eccentric and an
habitually irritable disposition?symptoms indicative of a troubled
circulation through the encephalon. It is easily demonstrated: tie a
string round the finger, and the blood is strangled at the tip; bind
a roller round the compressible head of a child, and the course of the
blood is impeded within the skull; for all the vessels of the head com-
municate freely with each other?the outside with the inside veins?
the internal with the external carotids?the circulation anastamoses,
conjoins, corresponds, and sympathises throughout every portion of the
neck, face, skull, and brain. Only take into the account the unclosed
opening of the fontanelle, beneath which flows the superior longitudinal
sinus, and calculate how much this capacious channel must be engorged
by pressure on the scalp;* for tlie external veins, first exposed to the
pressure, empty themselves of their proper load, and force the burden
back upon the sinuses of the brain, if not, further on, upon the sinuses
or venous plexus of the spinal cord besides. The worst consequences
are to be reckoned on.

One of the first effects of this sort of pressure externally is suppura-
tive irritation of the hairy scalp. This portion of the skin, so highly
vascular, is not merely bound down, but kept much too hot by means
of bandages, thick caps, or bonnets. The perspiration is both in-
creased and obstructed, the hair falls off, and, in the dirtier people, it is
quickly infested with insects.t A sero-purulent discharge escapes, which
is popularly regarded as beneficial; and so it is, by relieving the in-
ternal congestion. The cervical glands enlarge, and a train of scrofulous
symptoms ensue, OAving entirely to mismanagement from the first.
Foville says, that he has seen the compression cause a varicose condition
of the external veins of the head, and he gives a drawing of one of
these enlarged veins along the occiput of an infant, which was relieved
by discontinuing the accustomed compress. Such are the most evident
effects of this erroneous method of dressing the head, especially during
infancy; and that the brain, thus compressed, should become the seat
of inflammatory affections, is not to be wondered at?meningitis, cere-
britis, epilepsy, and imbecility being the most frequent maladies in
those exposed to its operation in its severest form. Terrible as these
diseases are when uncomplicated with other evils, they become almost
unmanageable, where there already exists some permanent difficulty
in the circulation from birth; and it will be easily understood, that, at
a more advanced age, the cerebral maladies peculiar to this epoch of
life do not fail to exhibit themselves in those unfortunate beings who
have been made the victims of such disastrous nursing,?a fact most
strikingly brought into view by the reports of the Asile des Alienes,
* It has been objected that the dura mater with its processes called the falx
major and minor and the tentorium, is, from its inelastic nature, sufficient to retain
the cranial bones in their proper position, and to counteract the effects of any
pressure from without exercised upon them. The only answer to this objection is
the fact, that the cranial bones are in reality distorted and pushed awry, in the
manner so ably pointed out by Foville in the above-cited work.

?f- The loathsome insects mentioned by Foville are seldom met with in this
country, except among the lowest of the low. " It is impossible (says one of the
City missionaries) to convey a just idea of their state; the quantities of vermin are
amazing. I have entered a room, and in a few minutes I have felt them dropping
on my hat from the ceiling like peas. ' They may be gathered by handfuls,' ob-
served one of the inmates."?Parliamentary Reports; Lord Ashley's Speech on
Emigration and Ragged Schools, June 5, 1848.

quoted above. It is only by studying these statistical reports that we
are enabled to appreciate this inquiry at its full value.
The cause of the evil being thus detected and proved, it only remains
to discover and apply the remedy. Nothing can be easier. Tell the
rudest mother in the world that her mode of nursing is doing mischief
to her children, and show her how and in what manner she is inflicting
a permanent injury upon them, and you have already won over her
tenderest affections to your side, and gone more than half way in
effecting the radical reform so earnestly solicited. The ordinary night-
cap, in this country, is tied exactly round that part of the head which
Foville has pointed out as the seat of pressure, and if it do not produce
such extravagant deformities as those of which he has given us several
drawings, one of which we annex, it at least helps in preventing the
proper development of the cranium, and may become a means of ren-
dering many a head less happily shapen than it would have been of its
own accord, had it been left to the care of Dame Nature alone. How
can the tender, pulsating
head of an infant, through
which half the blood of
the whole body is flowing,
sustain with impunity the
tightness of a common
worked lace cap, nicely tied
on in the most approved
nursery fashion 1 Is it not
evident, that the head of a
newly-born child ought to
be handled with the utmost
delicacy, and that every sort
of pressure ought to be most
carefully removed from it?
It requires time and space
to evolve, grow, dilate, and
expand into the round cra-
nium of a capacious under-
standing.

But, besides these mischievous caps and execrable head-rollers, there
are other articles of dress, not less pernicious than they are, in daily
use; such as thick bonnets made to "Jit well," tied under the chin,
covering and pressing on the ears, and heating the head,?pieces of
oiled-silk, for the purpose of preventing the perspiration transuding
and soiling the silk or straw above, stitched inside, and worn precisely
over the great fontanelle. Nothing can be worse: for the head-dress
of a child ought to be light, simple, and just sufficient to preserve it
from the weather, and it ought to be airy at the same time. Children,
if left to themselves, run about without hats or bonnets, like the poorer
urchins, who have never a bonnet or hat to wear, except a thick pole of
tangled locks, which is nature's own covering. It will scarcely be
credited, by lay readers, that a common straw or silk bonnet made too
hot, or too tight, just as the fashion may direct, will tend to alter the
shape of the head, prevent its growth, damage the intellect, and lay the
foundation for eventual disease of the brain. The form of the head is
never so pleasing as when it has been allowed to grow up without in-
terference. In general, all classes keep the head too much covered. It
is one cause of baldness in adults, and of difficult dentition in children.
A light silk net or thin bonnet is sufficient in the first months after
birth; and some months later, it is better to let the head go uncovered,
except with something light to protect it from the rain or sunshine
during the day, or from the chilliness of night during sleep.
There is a fashion, almost out of date, of putting a pad about the
head, in order to prevent the child from stunning itself by falling
against anything hard. This pad, stuffed with wool, quilted, and made
elastic, is only another form of the condemned bandage, with the ad-
ditional evil of being much hotter than the flannel roller. It is a mere
excuse for want of attention on the part of the nurse. When a child
is beginning to walk, it is much better to let the head remain un-
covered; and should it occasionally suffer from a fall, the inconveniences
arising from a slight shock are not so formidable as those which are
sure to follow from the constant use of a thick heating bandage.
The thick scurf that collects about the roots of the hair in the poorer
people, and at last accumulates into offensive scabs, is seldom seen in
the nurseries of the wealthier classes of society in this country?indeed,
the fault of these last would seem to be that of washing, and combing,
and curling the hair a great deal too much; for the hair may be dressed
too much, as well as too little. Short hair, in early life, is preferable to
long, and plain water, with a sponge, is more beneficial than soap and
the various kinds of perfumed oils and pomatums so much in vogue.

The comb should be used lightly every morning, and then the brush.
Rubbing the scalp at the roots of the hair, brushing too forcibly, greasy
applications, hot curling irons, and tight curling papers, &c., which only
serve to irritate the scalp, ought never to be employed. A very soft
brush, gently applied, does good in an infant before the hair is groAvn,
but when it is once grown up, the hair-brush is an indispensable article
of the dressing-table for the rest of life. Cutting the points of the hair
frequently is a good practice, except that it renders it coarse, but strong
at the same time. The ends of the cut hair are exhalent surfaces,
which keep the head cool. The dress of very young children should be
both light and warm, easily secured without pins, which prick and tease
the skin, and the child should be soused in tepid water daily, and
rubbed dry quickly. Such are Foville's invaluable remarks on the
management of children, but especially on the evil effects of a heavy
head-dress.
