Pathology of Insanity
======================

BASED ON THE POST-MORTEM EXAMINATIONS IN BETHLEHEM HOSPITAL.
:Author:  W. CHAKLES HOOD, M.D.,
Resident Physician (o Bethle'iem Hcs >ital.
(Continued from "Vol. X. page 384.)

W. C., a male patient, died of paralysis, having been in the
hospital two years and two months. On admission he was very
thin and in a feeble state, owing, probably, to the small quantity
of nourishment he had lately taken. His mental disease had
then existed seven weeks, and was evinced by great taciturnity,
especially in replying to any questions. When he did speak, it
was only to describe various torments that he considered himself
undergoing. "Want of success in business, and impending
poverty, appeared as the exciting cause, influenced by strong
hereditary predisposition to insanity. For the first few days
after admission he refused any food willingly, and for some time
took little more than liquid diet; his obstinacy continued so long,
that for upwards of a fortnight it was necessary to give him
food by means of the stomach-pump. After this time he sank
into a state of complete melancholia attonita, rarely speaking, but
occasionally giving evidence that he understood what was said to
him, and was conscious of passing events ; appetite and willing-
ness for food returned, and he would remain for hours sitting
UP in bed, reading page after page of any book that was given
to him, perfectly unconscious of what he was reading. His
symptoms varied very little during a protracted illness ; weak-
ness gradually increased, paralysis ultimately overtook him, and
he died helpless in body and childish in mind.
Autopsy.?All the bloodvessels, both of the membranes and
brain, extremely turgid. Slight partial opacity of the arachnoid
on the convexities of the cerebral hemispheres. Serous infiltra-
lon of the pia mater, and much fluid in the basis of the skull,
a er lemoval of the brain. Lateral ventricles of the brain dis-
01T>?C cJear fluid, estimated at two ounces in each.

e right lung uniformly and firmly adherent, so that it was
orn rough in drawing out the contents of the thorax ; a few
\cry ar small bodies were scattered irregularly through it, and
some cavities, not larger than small peas, with loose chalky
matter, were discovered, but the lung was otherwise healthy and
pervious to air throughout.

The left lung was healthy, and firmly adherent at its posterior
aspect.

The pericardium was universally and closely adherent to the
heart, the connexion being obviously of ancient date. During
two years of this patient's residence in the hospital no pecu-
liarity had been noticed in his pulse, nor any symptoms referable
to the heart, which in structure was perfectly healthy. .
The liver was soft, so that the substance yielded readily to the
pressure of the finger.

The middle portion of the colon (transverse arch), was
nearly twice its usual length, bending down after the hepatic
flexure to the pubes, and then ascending to the left
hypocliondrium. (This peculiarity has been observed in a few
other instances in the Bethlehem examinations.) The colon was
greatly distended with flatus, except in its ascending portion.
The body generally well nourished ; there was much fat in the
omentum and about the abdominal viscera, and a stratum of an
inch deep under the integuments of the abdomen.

M. C., a female patient, died of gradual exhaustion, after a
residence in the hospital of thirty-one years. Until the year
185-i, (twenty-nine years after admission,) this patient was the
subject of recurrent mania, having periods of excitement
and violence, followed by seasons of depression, the mania
?quickly succeeding the melancholia, without any lucid interval.
During the last two years of her life the maniacal symptoms
were constant, and she died, the excitement and irritation
peculiar to that stage, yielding only to physical exhaustion.
Autopsy.?Great general emaciation. The external vessels of
-the head empty; the internal turgid. Slight serous infiltration
of the pia mater. The lateral ventricles enlarged, and containing
each not less than an ounce of fluid. Much fluid about the
velum and pineal gland. No morbid change was observed in the
substance of the brain.

Both lungs connected to the thoracic parietes by old strong
adhesions of considerable extent; they were both somewhat
congested and thickened in their posterior aspect, from long
continuance in the recumbent position, but not otherwise diseased.
The heart was healthy. No other change was observed in the
.abdominal viscera.

G. G.j a female patient, died of phthisis pulmonalis, aged 62,
after residing in the hospital thirty-three years. Her occupation
had been that of a milliner. Her symptoms were maniacal, and
she was under the influence of many delusions, principally of an
extravagant character, inducing her to expect court and attention
from her fellow-patients and the officials of the hospital. The physi-
cal disease which caused her death was severe in its character,
but of short duration; the delusions and mental peculiarities
remaining unaltered to the last moment of her life.

Autopsy.?Skull-cap thin and devoid of blood; considerable
quantity of clear fluid escaped on its removal. The substance of
the brain soft; an entire absence of bloody points. The lateral ven-
tricles contained about two ounces of serous fluid.

Left lung small, and much compressed by a spinal curvature ;
the structure of the lung healthy. Apex of the right lung com-
pletely altered by the substitution of a tubercular mass for the
healthy substance, and throughout the other portion of the lung
tubercular deposits were scattered. Heart apparently healthy.
No disease observed in the abdominal viscera.

C. H., a male patient, died of general paralysis, aged 27,
after thirteen months' residence in the hospital. By occupation,
a jockey and horse trainer, he had been exposed to, and indulged
in excesses of almost every description; an easy temper and
naturally weak intellect offering little opposition to temptation.
On admission, evident symptoms existed of approaching general
paralysis, although they were not sufficiently stamped to render him
ineligible by the rules of the hospital. The disease quickly showed
itself, advancing rapidly stage by stage in the following order:
Irritability; tremor of the upper lip and edges of the tongue ;
unsteadiness in gait and articulation; mental excitement and
extravagant conversation; delusions connected with personal
power and possessions; loss of memory ; inattention to habits of
cleanliness and self-respect; perfect dementice and death.
Autopsy.?General emaciation of the frame, with entire
absence of fat in the thorax and abdomen. Little blood in either
the external or internal vessels of the head. General thickening
of the arachnoid, with infiltration of the subjacent tissue over
the entire convexity of both cerebral hemispheres. The sub-
stance of the pia mater was filled with fluid, like a sponge;
this membrane adhered so closely that, in detaching it, portions
ot the grey substance were torn away in several places. Between
two and three ounces of perfectly limpid fluid in the two lateral
ventricles. Vascular congestion, with partial solidification to an
lun^ n0t Very considerable, at the posterior aspect of both
The heart small not containing much blood. No morbid
appearance m the abdomen.
i \i ' cl,female criminal patient, died, aged 66, of exhaustion
an le effects of age, after a residence in the hospital of thirty-
three years.

This woman was tried at Worcester for the crime of infanticide,
and acquitted on the ground of insanity. During her prolonged
residence in the hospital she was, with two exceptions, uniformly
cheerful, and endeavoured to make herself and those around her
comfortable. During these two exceptional periods she suffered
from melancholia and attempted suicide, each attack being pre-
ceded by febrile excitement. A short time previous to her
death she again became melancholic and restless; her mental
symptoms appeared not only to be influenced, but much aggra-
vated, by the physical weakness attending age, and in this state
she sank and died.

Autopsy.?The skull-cap of compact bony substance, heavy and
rather thick. The internal vessels both of the brain and mem-
branes congested. A convolution of the posterior lobe of the left
hemisphere shrunk so as to leave a vacuity of an inch in length
by half an inch wide, occupied by serous infiltration of the pia
mater. A similar effect in less degree in two or three other
situations. Slight general infiltration of the pia mater. The
lateral ventricles distended with limpid fluid, at least half an
ounce in each.

Slight adhesion of the left lung, with partial consolidation to
a small extent of the inferior lobe at its posterior part. The
pleura covering the part thus consolidated covered by an effusion
of soft slightly adherent fibrin. Two or three small bits of
similar consolidation at the back of the right lung, which was
not adherent. In the rest of their substance both lungs were
healthy. No morbid appearances observed in the abdomen.
M. A. J., a female patient, died of general anasarca and disease
of the heart, after seventeen years' residence. She was married,
and the mother of three children. "When first admitted she was
in good bodily health, but under perpetual morbid fear of being
murdered. Very restless at night, and fretful during the day.
She ultimately became more maniacal, was subject to sudden
outbursts of passion and violence, at the same time occasionally
(as if induced by fear) she started off to escape some imaginary
persecutors. Her conduct was generally childish, and at all
times she showed great disinclination to occupy herself. Her
conversation was frequently very obscene, and always devoid of
auy intelligence. Until two years before her death her general
health was good ; after that time she suffered much from dyspnoea
and all the complications of diseased heart. Her mind became
gradually more and more imbecile, and she died in a comatose
state, though not much more intellectually lost than she had
been for many months.

Autopsy.?The body not emaciated; there was a moderate
share of fat under the integuments, as well as about the viscera.
All the bloodvessels of the brain and membranes extremely
turgid. The two cerebral hemispheres presented a remarkable
contrast in external appearance. The convolutions of the left
were completely flattened by internal pressure, and the pia mater
was throughout of a dull pink colour, from intense vascular con-
gestion. Excepting slight infiltration of the pia mater with a
clear fluid of a yellowish tint and fulness of vessels, the corre-
sponding parts of the right side were in a natural state. The
cerebral substance on the lower lateral and under part of both
posterior lobes was extensively and deeply disorganized, this
change nearly reaching to the lateral ventricle. It was softened,
partially broken down, and mixed with small portions of coagula,
yielding to the slightest pressure. The vessels of the surrounding
medullary substance were injected to the utmost, and this sub-
stance presented in the posterior lobe a slight brownish-yellow
discoloration. The bulk of the right hemisphere had been so
increased, that the right ventricle was pushed over to the left of
the middle line of the skull.

There were old adhesions of both lungs, but no recent disease.
The heart was large and distended with blood; there was
some thickening and induration of the left auriculo-ventriculo
valve, but not such as to interfere with the circulation.
The kidneys were slightly granulated, with partial thickening
and adhesion of the capsule. No other morbid appearance was
noticed in the abdomen.

J- S., a male criminal patient, admitted in the year 1830,
having been tried at the Central Criminal Court for discharging
a loaded pistol at one of his Majesty's subjects, and then ac-
quitted on the ground of insanity. The first symptom of insanity
was noticed during a sea voyage six months previously, when he
ordered the captain to turn the ship round or they would be lost,
he having seen a man in the sun who had given him the counsel.
On his return to England he threatened his uncle's life, while
under temporary mental irritation and vexation. He was after-
wards taken into custody at the entrance to the House of Lords,
where he had waited three days, with a loaded pistol and a knife
concealed in his sleeve, for the purpose of assassinating the late
~uke of Wellington. For many years before his death he con-
sidered himself a prophet, and foretold plagues and earthquakes,
as Uods revenge for his incarceration. His conduct was gene-
y good, and while he maintained the delusions with great
tl maCltS ^le was never unwilling to listen to the arguments of
o iers. He was very anxious for liberty, and though still main-
taining 11s character as prophet, he nevertheless, on the death of
ie a e ^ uke, sued for his discharge, considering that his crime
was expiated. His mental state altered but little during his
sixteen years' confinement, when he died of general dropsy, fol-
lowing disease of the liver.

Autopsy.?Great general emaciation; the fat had entirely
disappeared from the thoracic and abdominal regions. No morbid
appearances were noticed in the contents of the cranium.
Partial firm adhesion of the left lung. Considerable but not
general tuberculation of the upper and back part of this lung,
with a vomica of moderate size. The right lung was healthy,
and not adherent. The heart healthy. Immense enlargement
of the liver, which was at the same time very heavy. It de-
scended below the cartilaginous margin of the chest, nearly filling
the left hypochondrium, and pushed the diaphragm upwards,
encroaching so much 011 the chest that the lungs did not collapse
when the pleurae were opened. This increase of size was caused
by the deposition throughout the organ of adventitious masses,
varying in size from that of a small pea to a diameter of three
or four inches, generally of circular figure, immediately sur-
rounded and continuous with healthy hepatic structure, without
any intervening capsule. They were firm, and of whitish colour,
and of nearly homogeneous substance; they were flattened on
the surface of the liver, and the smaller resembled in colour and
consistence the secondary deposits in the liver in cases of cancer.
Some absorbent glands near the pancreas, and in two or three
other situations, were discovered similarly enlarged. There were
numerous hard fiattish tubercles, not large, in the great omentum,
and still smaller ones in the peritoneum, at the lower part of the
abdomen. The hepatic substance connecting the morbid deposits
was healthy, and of dark colour from vascular turgescence. It
was considerably less in quantity than the amount of the morbid
growths. The gall-bladder was moderately full of healthy bile.
The abdomen contained dropsical fluid of strong bilious tinge,
and the skin was of the same colour. Several ulcers in the
coecum and neighbouring part of the colon. Incipient granular
degeneration of the kidneys, with partial adhesion of the
capsules.

(To be continued.)
