On the Paralysis of the Insane 
================================

Art. IV.?
:Authorr: Pliny  Eakle , M.D.

In previous issues of the American Journal of the Medical
Sciences, I published two series of cases of that peculiar disease
termed hy the French physicians, Paralysie gene rale, and by
the English and the Americans, Paralysis of the insane, but for
which I ventured to suggest the name, Partio-general paralysis.
Those cases included all the distinctive characteristics of the
disease, and the number of autopsies was sufficient to furnish a
pretty clear idea of its cerebral pathology. Most of the cases, a
Keport of which it is proposed to include in this article, present
peculiarities, or exceptional characteristics, which render, theiii
worthy of preservation. In the one first presented, the disease
ran its course so rapidly that the patient was exhausted before
the extreme symptoms ol paralysis had appeared.

"American Journal of Med. Sciences." Editor, Isaac Hays, Philadelphia.
Case I.?Mr. was born in the interior of the State of New
York. He was of medium stature; his hair was light-brown, his eyes
blue, and his temperament bilious-nervous.

He learned the business of printing, and worked at it for some
years. His intellect was above mediocrity, and his acquirements
became such, that at length, and during a term of several years, he
was an assistant editor of a newspaper in the city of New York.
In business, he was industrious and persevering ; in habits, generally
esteemed correct, although, from early life, it is supposed that he gave
a pretty free rein to the venereal propensity. He also drank wine,
but perhaps never to intoxication. He was married, and had several
children. It is said that his parents were both " eccentric," if not
insane.

In the summer of 1847, it was observed that he had become un-
naturally irritable. This disposition increased upon him through the.
ensuing autumn and winter, and in the spring there were some-
evident symptoms of insanity. He, however, continued in his business
until about the 1st of May, when the disease prevented the further
performance of his duties. On the 10th of May, at the age of forty-
two years, he was brought to the Bloomingdale Asylum.

Condition on Admission.?He is restless, excited, and incessantly
talking, if any one be present. Countenance animated; pupils con-
tracted, unequal?that of the right eye the smallest; tongue moist,
pallid, smooth, and very slightly coated; pulse considerably accelerated.
No abnormal sound of the heart.

May 11 th. He occupies one of the best rooms, and, if alone, is quiet.
He says th? Common Council will give this Asylum to him. He will
have four hundred mechanics here, and will raise vegetables enough to
supply the city. He will want two or three clerks, and three se-
cretaries. He will give ten thousand dollars to stay three weeks and
carry out his plans; or he will buy the place in less than a week, pay
one hundred and fifty thousand dollars for it, which will not be more
than a cent to him, will have all luxuries, and supply all the other
patients with them, and will cure all the patients by a special course;-:
of treatment.

He has a very slight impediment in his speech. In the midst of"
conversation, he stops to whistle or to sing.

13th. He says he is the cream of American patriotism, and that.
God has revealed to him all the events of the last six weeks. He-
is restless, loquacious, petulant; sheds tears, and asks if Washington
is not here.

14th. He mentions the names of several attendants and patients*,
claims them as his illegitimate brothers, and offers each of them " a
carriage, horses, and twenty thousand dollars, to start upon." Says
that he shall be the next President of the United States, and that the
Supreme came down last night, and rested on the window-sash, and is
still in that cloud (pointing upwards through the window), ready ta
come down at his bidding.

15th. He asserted that he is the " Duke of Gloucester, and entitled
^ to the throne of England, of which Yictoria is not the legal possessor.'*
A few minutes afterwards, lie said he was President of the United
States and King of England; that his legs are iron, and that he wound
up the sun yesterday.

lGth. He calls one of his fellow-patients the Pope, and to several
others gives the titles of some of the English nobility.
20tli. His excitement has gradually increased from the time of
admission. Having become very boisterous, both by day and night,
and having begun to destroy furniture and clothing, he was now
removed to the ward for violent patients.

21st. He declares that he is the son of the King of the world; that
he was in the Crusades ; that the writings of Shakspeare and Scott are
merely a record of his life; and that he had a conversation with the
Black Prince the night before last.

22nd. Says he killed Abel in the garden; that Eve was his mother;
that all the people in the world are descended from him; and that the
Dutch Queen had such an affection for him, that it made a tumour grow
on his right side. He is much excited, very noisy at night, and destroys
clothing.

23rd. On entering his room, I said: "You are noisy!" " I've a
right to be," he answered. " I'm the god of thunder!" His tongue,
as usual, is covered with a thin, white, strongly adherent, pasty fur;
bowels habitually costive; right pupil smallest?both contracted;
pulse 96, regular; sounds of heart, normal; general sensation, obtuse.
He has emaciated constantly since admission.

26th. He tore his bed to tatters "to find his cattle;" says he can
j ump over the house, but is so large he cannot go through the door;
tells the physician that he can hold him on his little finger, and could
sustain the weight of the world if he had a foothold.

Neither his mental nor physical symptoms changed during the early
part of June. On the 19th, his scalp, forehead, and right arm, were
much tumefied and ecchymosed, as if beaten against the wall. Being
asked how it was done, lie laughed, and said: "Jesus Christ did it."
Towards the end of the month, and in the early part July, he became
more emaciated and feeble; his excitement was less constant, but
occasionally, even in the latter part of J uly, he was very turbulent.
At the close of the month he was nearly exhausted, all the worst
symptoms, both mental and physical, above-mentioned, continuing.
Almost the last words he uttered were an assertion that lie was one of
the men mentioned in the Old Testament. Died, August 2nd, 1848.
Treatment.?Purgatives, alteratives, and tonics. A seton was
inserted in the back of the neck on the 23rd of May, and continued
until his death. The discharge from it was never copious. Regard-
less of all medication, the disease regularly proceeded towards its fatal
termination.

Autopsy, sixteen hours after death.?Pericranium pretty strongly
attached to the skull, and but little blood in the vessels. Cranium
adheres more than normally strong to the dura mater. It is of ordinary
thickness, and not unusually hard. The dura mater adheres to the
subjacent membranes on the anterior lobes, and for three inches over
the vertex, on the border of each hemisphere, beside the longitudinal
sinus. The latter attachments can he separated hy dissection alone.

The whole brain, when removed from its cavity, appears unnaturally
soft or flaccid, and its weight, when laid upon its base, partially tears
asunder the corpus callosum. The arachnoid is thickened, semi-opaque,
and strongly adherent to the pia mater upon the whole surface of the
cerebrum, except the base, where it is normal. The pia mater adheres
so strongly to the cortical substance, that on removal it brings off
small patches of it. Blood-vessels not remarkably injected. The cortical
matter is of normal colour, but is decidedly softened. The brain being
cut, the surface of the medulla is interspersed with some bloody points,
but tliey are not numerous. The corpora striata, and the medullary
matter around them, are thought to be somewhat softened?the most
so in the right hemisphere. The fornix is very soft. The pineal gland
contains very little sabulous matter. There are filamentous adhesions
between proximate surfaces in the fourth ventricle, and at the base of
the brain. One ounce of serum in the ventricles and at the base.
Cerebellum thought to be somewhat softened. Its investing arachnoid
apparently normal.

Considering the protracted course of the next case, and the
comparatively extreme degree of the paralysis of the voluntary
muscles, it is remarkable that the functions of the digestive
organs were so little impaired, and that the patient was exempted
from those sloughing ulcerations which are one of the most
i. ^ striking characteristics of the disease in its severer forms.

Case II.?Mr. was a native of the State of New York. He
was tall in stature, his hair black, eyes blue, temperament sanguine-
bilious, the bilious greatly predominating, constitution mediocre. His
intellectual faculties were fair, and lie received a good English educa-
tion. Being devoted to mercantile pursuits, he emigrated to a
southern State at the age of between twenty-five and thirty years,
established himself in business, and was sufficiently successful. He
?' ; was never married. It was said that his habits were correct, but by
* J persons who had no intimate knowledge of his course of life. His
mother was eccentric, but it was asserted that he inherited no pre-
disposition to mental disorder. At the age of thirty-five years he had
scarlatina; and at the age of forty-three, what is described as a " slight
attack" of paralysis. He lost his property, and became excited with
political affairs; but whether prior or subsequently to the commence-
ment of insanity, could not be accurately ascertained.

Having become insane, he was brought by sea to New York. On
board the vessel he was so violent that he was most of the time kept
in a strait-jacket.

On the 18tli of March, 1848, at the age of forty-five years, he was
taken as a patient to the Bloomingdale Asylum. He was then
emaciated; his skin sallow; the tongue furred and pasty; bowels
costive; pupils unequal, the left being the larger; speech imperfect
and hesitating; gait faltering. He appeared bewildered ; thought he
was in Savannah; said he saw an angel on the previous night; would
^egin to speak, and, forgetting the idea, run to another subject.

He slept but little, at night, during the first few weeks after
admission ; but he could not bear opiates. One morning his forehead
was severely bruised, probably, as has occurred in other cases of the
kind, by running against the walls. On being asked how it was done,
he said, " The raft slid into the river and many people were killed, but
the ladies walked across the plank of the steamboat and were saved."
On the 14th of April he said that he was in a southern city, and that
on the previous night they "stuck him into a rotunda to sleep." A
copy of a New York newspaper being handed to him, he appeared
much astonished, and remarked that "it must have come by tele-
graph." General sensation was then very obtuse. On the 16th, he
said that in the night he saw five or six hundred little soldiers, beau-
tifully dressed, and on horseback; they were not larger than his fore-
finger, but they "fought the Bostonians courageously, like tigers."
His bed being wet, and emitting a strong odour of urine, he was asked
the cause of it, and answered that some person opened his window, and
a shower coming up, it rained upon him?but it was warm rain. The
night was clear. On the 20th, his appetite was good, and he was
gaining flesh and improving in general health. He said he had some
barrels of the best wine in the world; and, assuming a very earnest,
business-like manner, requested to be let out into Broadway, as he
was going to the banks, and was afraid he should be too late.

In the summer he took Lugol's solution of iodine ; and a seton,
which was introduced on the 4th of April, caused a free discharge.
He gained flesh, and his general health was good. His mental con-
dition varied, but was at no time much, if any, better than at the time
of his admission. He had but little memory of recent events. Soon
after a visit from his mother, he said it was more than a year since he
had seen her. In the early part of August it was perceived that he
had lost the sense of taste. He ate all kinds of food with equal relish.
In the early part of September, his feet were cedematous for a few
days.

On the 17th of November his pulse was 76, regular; pupils unequal,
the left being the larger; appetite voracious; face and feet (edematous ;
gait unstable. He walked with his feet far apart, like an infant; the
grip of the hand and the strength of the arm were feeble ; speech con-
siderably impeded, but less so than at some former times. At this
time he occasionally tore his bedclothes, and upset the furniture in the
room. On the night of the 29th of November, he thought the earth
was sinking, and, in order to save himself, he turned his bedstead up
upon the side, and seated himself astride it. He said he was thus
enabled, by using his utmost exertions, to save himself from being
engulfed. His speech was now much more impaired than at any
previous time. General sensation was nearly null, but existed to a
greater extent upon the legs than upon the superior portions of the
body. His feet and hands were somewhat cedematous. He asserted
that he could run tvventy-five miles in an hour, or walk twenty miles,
and that he owned six hundred acres of land at the South and one
hundred acres in Harlem, occupying the latter as a barber's shop.
Being requested to write a letter to his mother, he sat down, and,
after much labour, hesitation, and alteration of orthography, produced
a document, of which the following is a copy :?
"Mrs. Deear Motherr
Vder as this 29th Jxu-ly
b ? o gond to
$18. S. DOOCCKET."

The signature hears no resemblance to the name of the patient,
except that the initial letters of the former are the first two of the
three which belong to the latter.

There was no material change in his general condition at the time I
left the asylum, in May, 1849. Neither was there, as I am informed
by my successor, Dr Nichols, throughout that year. During the
whole of his residence in the asylum he never recognised, as an
acquaintance, any person except his mother. During the last six
months of his life he did not know even her. In the early part of
1850, the power of the voluntary muscles visibly diminished, but most
rapidly in the lower extremities. For six months before his death he
could not walk without aid. His digestive functions remained but
slightly impaired until the 5th of August, 1850, when he was attacked
with diarrhoea, and died on the following day. No autopsy.

The third case is exceptional, so far as my observation is con-
cerned, in the striking similarity of its earlier symptoms to those
of mania a potii. The disease was rapid in its course, and all its
other characteristics would probably have soon assumed their
worst form had not the patient been carried off in an attack of
cerebral congestion.

Case III.?C. was a native of Ireland. His constitution was
strong, frame robust, stature medium, hair sandy, eyes grey, tempera-
ment sanguine, intellect mediocre, education common. At the age of
about twenty-two he emigrated to America, settled in the city of New
York, and established himself as a retailer of liquors. He was sub-
sequently married. He afterwards became addicted to the daily use
of alcoholic drinks, though not frequently to intoxication.
< In September, 1846, when he was at the age of twenty-eight years, he
lost a favourite child, and his friends say that his insanity appeared im-
mediately afterwards. He was subjected to no medical treatment. For
four weeks he gradually grew worse: was restless and talkative, and in-
dulged in extravagant schemes of business, made imprudent purchases,
and'wandered about the city, apparently without any definite object. At
length, having determined to go to Ireland, he went to a wharf,
jumped into a boat, and rowed himself out into the river. His
determination then changing, he leaped into the water, and swam to
the shore.

A day or two after this occurrence, and on the 16th of October, he
was brought to Bloomingdale Asylum. His friends asserted that he
inherited no predisposition to mental disorder, and had always enjoyed
good bodily health.

During the first three days after his admission, he had all the
symptoms of a person labouring: under a severe attack of delirium
tremens.

He was excited, sleepless, turbulent; bad hallucinations of vision,
and would keep no clothing upon himself, excepting a blanket thrown
over his head, or wrapped about his body. His tongue was tremu-
lous, his pulse rapid.

After catharsis with cal. etjal., followed by compound cathartic pills,
he took mass, ex hydrarg. gr. ij. t. d. and, subsequently, a portion of
pulvis purgaps. On the 23rd he was so much improved that he was
permitted to be hi the hall, and to go out of doors; and, on the 24th,
he began to take a tonic vegetable infusion. He rapidly gained
strength, and on the 29th the medicine was stopped. During this
period there was a partial bewilderment in his aspect and manner.
He was careless of his personal appearance, at times tore his clothing,
and was otherwise mischievous. His appetite was now good. He
generally ate voraciously, and required occasional purgatives. This
was the only medical treatment to which he was subjected, with the
exception that, a few days before his discharge, he took Fowler's solu-
tion gtt. v. t. d.

November 10tb. For several days past he has uttered the most ex-
travagant ideas. He now says he owns the Asylum premises, and is
worth two hundred thousand billions of dollars. He also declares
that he is the head of the Church throughout the world, and is going
to turn the earth into a paradise, and manage it all himself.
11^7i. He went to the school-room and wrote a letter to his wife,.
from which the following extracts are made:?

" I am at the reading school and am one hundred times as smat as any of
them tliey they are the greatest dunccs in Eternity I shall commence travelling
next week Please God and the first place I will go to is to my native own
green Isle." "I would not trust the word no but the Oath of G. and 0. ?
I wd not Trust them in an Empty room or a room full of Mill stones I am tak
as many friends as go with me By their Paying Expenccs it wud not not mak
much of a difference I shl have High life all over the continet and all the
Comers in the World which I will make a Parridise of all the world and Have
shepherds to take care of them so that has Plenty
Resp ful
Head of the C. Church
all over the world
C.

12th. The pupils are unequal, the right being the larger. There is
an evident stammering in his speech, and general sensation is so
obtuse that he can barely feel the most severe pinch.

He says he is worth ten times as much as John Jacob Astor.
Being seen to make some strange gesticulations, he was asked what
he was doing, and answered that he was blowing himself up; that he
could blow himself so large that he would be thirty feet in height, or
reduce himself to the size of twopence. On being requested to blow
himself up, he put the end of the forefinger of each hand into the ear
of the corresponding' side, elevated his head, rolled his eyeballs as far up-
wards as possible, compressed his mouth, puffed up his cheeks with air,
stretched himself upwards, standing upon tiptoe, and thus exerted him-
self until his body was in a general tremor. Upon being told that
that was enough, he said, " Oh, that is nothing; I only went up to
nine feet."

Qtli. He is endeavouring, with but little success, to sing; says he
hears and sees music throughout his bod\', and can sing better than
any man at the Italian opera. He asked for writing materials, for the
purpose of " corresponding with all the different Governments on the
subject of converting the world into a paradise." Being permitted in
the afternoon to go to the school, he wrote a long letter to his wife.
It was so badly written as to be almost illegible, and closed with a
postscript consisting of two verses of pretended poetry, but so far as
it could be deciphered, contained 110 rhyme and but little reason.
From this time his delusions continued unchanged.

2.3rd. Sphincter of the bladder apparently paralysed. He says he can
swell to the height of more than a hundred feet. He is very noisy at
night; chews and swallows pieces of woollen rags, picks his clothes to
pieces in the daytime, and empties the straw from his bed at night.
25th. He shuts his eyes, and says he sees " gold and all the bril-
liants in their shape and lustre manufactured says he weighs five
hundred pounds, can run thirty miles in an hour, and walk twenty.

He frequently "blows himself up;" attempts to sing, talks of his
wealth and of his proposed conversion of the world into a paradise. He
exhibits little or no interest in his relatives and friends.

On the 26tli he fell into a state of coma, with very slight spasms of
the limbs of the right side. This resisted the usual remedies for more
than twelve hours, when he partially revived. He continued in bed,
rarely speaking, and with but imperfect use of the right arm and leg,
until the 29th, when he Was removed from the asylum, and died at
home on the following day.

No autopsy.

The subjoined is the most remarkable case of the kind that-
lias ever fallen under my observation. It is the only case of
recovery from the partio-general paralysis that I have ever known,
and the second of which I have ever heard as occurring in this
country. Mr. Calmeil, who first minutely described the disease,
and who bad for more than twenty years been connected with the
Hospital for the Insane at Cliarenton, near Paris, where hundreds,
perhaps thousands, of cases had been treated by him, informed
me, in 1849, that he had never known a case of complete reco-
very. He had had patients who improved sufficiently to return
to their homes, and, in some instances, to pursue their occupa-
tions, but in every one of them the disease had resumed its
course.

Case IA .?Mr.   was a native and resident of one of the inte-
rior counties of the State of New York. He was of medium stature,
with brown hair, grey eyes, and lymphatico-nervo-sanguine tempera-
ment. His constitution was strong; his intellect above mediocrity.
After pursuing a classical course of study, he read and practised law,
and became eminent in his profession. He was married at the age of
thirty-four years. Although not intemperate, according to the com-
mon acceptation of the term, yet it was said that he " liked good
living, and indulged freely in the luxuries of the table." One of his
paternal uncles was insane, and a maternal aunt was affected with
melancholia.

In August, 1847, he was much afflicted by the death of a favourite
child; and in September, having involved himself in pecuniary diffi-
culties, he became melancholy. In the early part of 184S he had an
epileptiform fit, which was followed by another upon the same day, and,
subsequently, by several others. It was said, however, by his friends,
that previously to this his speech had become defective, and the mus-
cles of his arms so much impaired in their action that he was unable
to write. His disease continued gradually but slowly to progress, and
for some time he was under the care of the local physicians. On the
30th of July, 1848, at the age of forty-two years, he was received into
the Bloomingdale Asylum.

At the time of admission he was much excited, constantly in motion,
walking to and fro, talking incessantly and incoherently, mostly upon
pecuniary matters. He wanted to go to Wall-street, where he said
lie would purchase $35,000 worth of railroad stock, and make a great
speculation. He spoke rapidly, but frequently dropped a syllable, and
sometimes hesitated, from inability to utter a word. The pupils were
contracted, but of equal size; tongue furred; pulse somewhat accele-
rated. After the administration of a dose of pulvis purgans, he was
put upon the use of twenty drops of antimonial wine, with ten drops
of the tincture of digitalis, three times daily.

31s?. He is still much excited, shouting that he wishes to get out
of the house and go to Wall-street. His speech is more imperfect
than it was yesterday. No evacuation of the bowels. ?Cal. et
jal. aa grs. x.

August 1st. There having been but a slight alvine movement, an-
other portion of pulvis purgans was administered. This produced free
catharsis, and his excitement was considerably subdued.
6th. The pupil of his left eye is larger than that of the right, and
there is an evident partial paralysis of all his limbs.
11 th. His excitement has almost entirely subsided, and the paralysis
has so far increased that he cannot walk without support. Stop the
vin. ant. and tinct. digital., and give a tonic vegetable infusion three
times daily.

l^th. His ideas of wealth, of station, and of power have been con-
stantly increasing since his admission. He now says that he began
business with a borrowed capital of three hundred dollars, and from
that has accumulated a fortune of five millions; that in the town of
Oswego he has one hundred and fifty mills, each containing five runs
of stone, and the whole turning out twenty-five thousand barrels of
flour each week; that a million of dollars has been cleared by this
operation; that he has seven ships at sea?four of them on whaling
voyages, two bound to China for cargoes of tea, and one to the Medi-
terranean for fruit; that he has purchased the whole of the United
States, except New York and Philadelphia, together with the wheat
lands in Canada, and the whole of Mexico, for all of which he paid but
one million of dollars; that he owns two coal-mines, one in Virginia
and the other in Mexico, all the copper-mines in Wisconsin, one gold-
mine in Africa, all of those in Mexico, as well as all other mines of
gold and of iron, and that his income from each of these mines is
seventy thousand dollars in three weeks; that among the rest of his
property are?1, the Bank of Milwaukie, with a capital of three hun-
dred thousand dollars; 2, three hundred thousand dollars invested at
twelve per cent, interest in New York; 3, stock to the value of five
and a half millions in the Hudson River Railroad; 4, a factory in one
of the towns upon the Hudson River; and that he is about to esta-
blish a bank in New York, with a capital of two millions of dollars.
He asserts that he is a Judge of the Supreme Court of the State of
New York, and a member elect of the next Congress; that he is to
be appointed minister to England; and that he shall be elected as the
next Governor of the State, and the next President of the United
States after General Taylor. He proposes to start, to-morrow, on a
tour to the Catskill Mountain House, the Thousand Islands, Quebec,
Montreal, Oswego, Falls of Niagara, Ohio,Washington, Florida, Mexico,
and Buenos Ayres, returning by the way of Mexico, Mississippi, Illinois,
and Oregon. This journey, he thinks, will occupy his time for four
weeks. He intends, after it is completed, to start for Europe, and
spend two years in England, two in France, one in Switzerland, one
in Germany, one in Sweden, three in Russia, one in Norway, one in
Turkey ? in Constantinople?(" Con-con-stan-no-nople," as his im-
paired enunciation makes it), and one week in Africa, making, in all,
eighteen years. He proposes to take his wife and children to Russia
with him, in a steamer of one thousand tons burthen, which he will
have built expressly for the purpose, and named for himself and wife.
He will freight it homewai'd with English goods, which will yield a
profit of $100,000. On its second voyage, he intends to return and
to build twenty houses, at a cost of $10,000 each, on one of the docks
in New York.

17th. His general sensation is obtuse ; his taste imperfect. A por-
tion of the sulphate of magnesia being prescribed for him, it was made
into a strong solution, which he drank, saying that it was " first-rate
Congress water."

21st. The paralysis has extended to the sphincters of the bladder
and rectum. The patient's speech is variable, being much more im-
perfect upon some days than upon others. His memory of recent
events is almost entirely destroyed. He says that he has invited
several guests, among whom are God and Van Buren, to dinner; and
that one of his whaling vessels arrived yesterday with twelve hundred
barrels of oil, upon which he will make a nett profit of fifty thousands
of dollars. On being informed of the recent destructive fire in Albany,
he remarked that he did not " own any of the buildings that were
burned, except the Eagle Hotel, the Mansion House, the Townsend
House, and the Odeon, which are all insured for their full value." He
added, that he has " bought all the land of the burned district, and is
going to build it up with marbleand that he will "immediately
give one hundred dollars to the sufferers, and fifty thousand dollars
by-and-bye."

There are many sores upon different parts of his body, some of them
apparently having arisen without any external cause, and others the
ulceration of places upon which the skin was abraded in the course of
his period of high excitement. Attempting to write his name, his
hand is unsteady, moving by partial jerks; and although one or two
of the letters are pretty accurately made, others are very imperfect,
several are entirely omitted, and there are some unmeaning marks.
It takes him probably five times as long to write it as it did prior to
this disease. On the second attempt he is somewhat more successful,
but his writing is no better than that of a child in his first essay upon
a connected fine-hand copy.

September 1. The left pupil is larger than the right; but both are
contracted.

3rd. He says he is worth ten millions of dollars ; that the Lord came
down to him; that he is now sixty-five years old, but the Lord will
make him only twenty-five.

5th. Besides his fanciful ideas of wealth, he now has many religious
delusions. He often calls himself a bishop, or a clergyman, and asserts
that he is going to preach in Trinity Church.

17th. He says that God is up in the room, on his throne, and is going
to preach to-day; asks us to go up and see him. A seton was this day
inserted in the back of the neck.

18th. He talked as follows: "I went up to God one day, and said,
' God, what is the reason that   and   are in hell ?' His
answer was, ' They are not in the right line of succession with the
church.' 'Well,' says I, 'what does the devil do with them when
they are first put in there ?' He said they were first ground down
with fire and red-hot iron; afterwards they were ground down with
spirits of turpentine and saltpetre. Don't you think that will make
them smart ?" He then proceeded to give an account of his wealth,
and concluded by saying that he was the most eloquent lawyer in
the world.

27th. His pulse is always rapid. It is now 124 per minute, small
and regular; pupils nearly equal, tongue slightly coated, bowels regular,
the sphincters under voluntary control, general sensation less obtuse
than it has been. He writes better than he did, and can stand alone,
but cannot walk without assistance. Being asked how much he was
worth, he answered, "Nine hundred thousand dollars," hesitated a.
moment, and then added, " No ; God says it is ten millions. I have
made ten thousand four hundred dollars while you have been sitting
there ; and I own a million dollars' worth of jewels." He then said
that he goes up to Heaven to see his father, and offered to take his.
mother up with him.

The seton produced a considerable discharge throughout the month.
The tonic infusion was stopped in the early part of October, and fol-
lowed, through a large part of the month, by alterative doses of the
bichloride of mercury. Under this treatment the discharge from the.
seton almost entirely ceased, most of the sores upon the body healed,
and the appetite and digestion of the patient continued to he pretty
good. In the latter part of the month he was attacked with diarrhoea,
which was subdued by opiates. All the characteristic symptoms of
the paralytic insanity varied from day to day, but subsequently to the
27th of September the patient was not at any time better than upon
that day. The general character of his delusions remained unchanged.
At one time he enumerated the different offices of which he imagined
himself to be the acting incumbent. Among them were the presi-
dencies of several banks, insurance offices, and railroads ; a number of
bishoprics; offices under the national government, &c. &c. He made
the aggregate salaries $76,000 per annum.

On the 3rd of November, 1848, the patient was removed from the
Bloomingdale Asylum to Dr Macdonald's private institution, at Flush-
ing. There, after a residence of some time, he began to amend, and
at the end of a few months was discharged, recovered. Dr Macdonald
died soon afterwards, and I had no opportunity of conversing with him
in regard to this very remarkable case. I am informed, however, by
Dr Benjamin Ogden, that no special treatment was pursued which
was supposed to have effected a cure, but that Dr M. attributed the
patient's recovery solely to an effort of Nature. :;
This gentleman is still living. He is in excellent health, both
physical and mental, and is engaged in an extensive and successful
business.

In the following case, the symptoms, not only in its earlier
periods, hut along its course, were such as to lead the experienced
observer to the prognosis of paralysis; and yet, although the
progress of the disease was comparatively slow, and although
some of the other most peculiar characteristics of the partio-
general paralysis were present, the paralysis itself never ap-
peared :?

Case V.?Mr. , a native of the interior of New York, was of
medium stature. He had brown hair, grey eyes, and bilious-nervous
temperament, the nervous greatly predominating. His talents were
fair, and he received a good common education. He was active, in-
telligent, and of mild disposition, though excitable. His mother once
had an attack of insanity. He entered into business, and when quite
young accumulated great wealth by speculating in real estate during
the years 1835 and 1836. This fortune, however, he subsequently
lost; and afterwards engaged in various kinds of business. He was
married and had children. In the winter of 1845-46 he came to the
city of New York, in the hope of finding employment. Soon after his
arrival, his friends perceived that he was eccentric, wilful, and easily
excited; more than usually talkative; self-complacent when speaking
of his business capacity, and elated with great hopes for the future.
These symptoms increased. He began to make imprudent purchases ;
gave away his money, lost sleep, and grew more and more excited until
the 23rd of February, 1S46, when, at the age of thirty-six years, he
was brought to the Bloomingdale Asylum. His friends stated that
he had had a cough ever since the preceding summer.

State when admitted.?Emaciated, somewhat sallow; pupils natural,
tongue slightly furred, bowels costive, pulse 110. He is restless, and
very talkative, but shows no disposition to be violent. He consents
to remain, but thinks that "placing a man, so well as he is, in a
Lunatic Asylum, is one of the most ridiculous farces ever imagined."
His general conversation is quite rational, and no attempt is made to
elicit his exalted ideas. Before his friends leave, however, he in great
good-humour takes some papers from his hat, and requests the doctor
to look at some poetry which he has this day been writing. The paper
contains six stanzas, the first three of which he says were written by his
favourite author, Mr. Tupper. The others are a parody upon them
composed by himself. After reading these lines, and hearing a history
of his case, I told his friends that I thought there was but little hope
of his recovery.

February 24th. IpL?Blue mass. gr. ij. t. d., with an aloetic pill
morning and evening.

March 1. Skin more natural, and he looks less worn ; tongue clean,
appetite and digestion good. Stop mass, and pill. 5L?Tinct. opiigtt.
x. t. d.

4ih. Bears the opiate well; sleeps sufficiently. Increase tinct. opii.
Four days after admission he wrote a letter in reference to some
mineral lands to a gentleman in the northern part of the State, with
whom he was entirely unacquainted, requesting him to take men and
teams to those lands, procure one or two thousand barrels or boxes of
all kinds of minerals, and send them to him in New York ; stating, fur-
thermore, that if the said gentleman had not money enough to accom-
plish this object, he might draw upon him. He then proceeds, byway
of introducing himself to the stranger to whom this letter is directed,
to give a genealogical history of himself and of his wife. He says, that
if the minerals should prove to be rich and the lands valuable, the
county in which they are situated will become more populous. " We
will," says he, " put a bank at your place or in Peru, and it would be
a good place for a college for the north of this State, better calculated
than any in the State now; for it might be used for the poor of the
State, as well as those who could handsomely pay. I speak of this as
an inclination, and not anything which would trouble me at all if it
should not be worth anything. And as to the sum to be paid to the
noble man, the owner of the farm, the soldier of the great llevolution
?why, I think I would not feel a sigh to pay him $200 a year as long
as he lives, without any interest at all, if it would do him good, for I
feel perfectly well off, and it would give me much pleasure and con-
tentment to do such a thing."

About the time of the date of the foregoing communication, after
reading the advertisements of several valuable houses that were to let
in the city of New York, he wrote to the owners, advising them to
furnish the houses, as they would then, rent more profitably than if
unfurnished, and made some preliminary propositions in regard to
hiring them. He subsequently wrote the following letter :?

t( "New York, March 20, 1846.
"To the Hon. Daniel "Webster.

" Sir,?As a stranger, and having some business to have done at Washing-
ton, which I know to be of great importance to me, if not to our country. . . .
For three years I have known what I now write, yet have said nothing; but
uow, as the great and good men of both parties, conservatives, are all together,
I thought it of great importance; and it is this : That by using the bright
sands of the sea-coast, and the small, round, clean stones, or other hard mat-
ters, with water-lime, you can make a road from here to the upper part of
Oregon, in a month, or less; because water-lime, mixed with clean stone or
glass, or anything solid, will make a road much better than a railroad. So far
in a month, for instance, make it soft and mix it clean, and throw it upon the
ground as far as you choose, and make it smooth, and, as soon as it is dry, it
is, in my opinion, harder than rock. And should the great men of our great
democratic nation, now altogether to do right, believe surely, as I do, that, in
one day, I could, with that mixture, by the aid of good builders, make one
hundred ships a day. And now, suppose a ship was planned large enough to
carry thousands. Make it three feet thick and one hundred feet wide, and flat
on the bottom, having large places all along its side or bottom, to take it up if
necessary, and put down again. "Well, it would require no ballast; and round
the sides, from the bottom to the top, and while it is soft, at the bottom fix a
keel, as low as profitable,that can at anytime be hauled up for other purposes;
such a ship, in my opinion, would draw but little. And, as far as war was con-
cerned, no common shot or ball could hurt any one; for it is a rock, smooth,
and the balls would slide under. Now, build as many as you please, in a
month, and put them together, and in two or three days they could reach
England, and everything upon the ocean could be taken without trouble, or
anything else. The reason they would, in my opinion, go so fast, is that they
could draw no water, laying so flat, with a deep tiller, if it would be thought
right, and with engines of the screw to give them their power; when they were
wanted for something else, it would be well to have the engine screw put in
the bottom, so that you could bring it within the ship, and have rollers under,
which would cross any land one hundred feet wide; and make a railroad or
road of hard rock, and as fast as the stuff could be thrown out (I mean the sand-
lime and stone), the engine within would roll the rollers under the ship, and
make the road smooth and ready for use as soon as it was dry. And, before it
was dry, the same material would make a fence as high as would be necessary for
anything, by sticking them down when wet. Carriages, and everything, almost,
could be made, and will be, and buildings (safe from all fire) which now cost
so much, could be built by my patent for a little. Now, in my opinion, should
it be thought right, and above all question, in my opinion England could be
made a state of this Union, and all Europe, and this hemisphere, and the whole
world, could easily be made one democratic kingdom. And now it is useless
for me to say more at present. I have wished to be sccured in the Patent
Office for this matter for all time. All I have acted upon was a trial in dig-
Sing a hole for a post, and putting it in, and throwing in this material, and it
ecame stone. It such an arrangement could be made with our great men,
say H. C. C., the Secretary of State, Mr. A., and the best in Washington, why,
I think, without spilling any blood, an arrangement might be made with
England, letting them have their titles they now have, and making them and
their great men only as farces, our own great men to rule the world. I believe
it was Napoleon who said, before thirty years, that Europe would be demo-
cratic or Kussian. ^ Now, I have been reading the great argument of Senator
C. upon our position with Great Britain?wonderfully correct, and, with one
exception, true. But he thinks to possess Mexico. It would cost millions.
Why, it is all wrong, for it would cost nothing to speak about. If it would
be allowed by our Union for a man to undertake the control of Mexico 011 liis
own account, I am sure it could be done in a month, and could be done with-
out asking a cent from the country. I would begin a road with my mixture
at Washington, via New Orleans, and, at the same time, make arrangements
with the wire telegraph to use it under ground instead of above, for the use of
the Government. There would be no hindrance from water or land in running
such a road through to Mexico, with such a fence that few could get over on
each side of it, and 110 guns could hurt or shatter the machine or ships. No
blood would be spilt, but all taken.

"Now, not to let it be known that ships and other things are made in this
way, it would be extremely necessary that the patent should be concealed, and
the ships covered with sheet iron, and call them iron ships. And as to Canada
and New Brunswick, it would be all the same, and I truly believe, if the ques-
tion was placed by the great men of this country at England, with our ships in
sight, that they would be satisfied to becomc part of our Government, and in
doing this without much trouble. It would insure unto the United States the
government of the whole world, making it democratic, or allowing the great
men of their country to join with ours in the government ; and it would be a
wonderful affair in respect to the religion of our Maker, for now the news of
the arrival from Europe is, that England is now at war in the East, and many
thousands have been killed lately ; and now is'the time to put a stop to this
business. If I am right in my idea of the great and wonderful power our
Maker has given to this country, 110 argument, in my opinion, can be made
which can be a conviction of truth against this : that the United States should
do her most to gain the control of all they can, simply for the defence of their
own liberty, and the liberty of the whole world.

" I shall say no more at present, but, at all events, as soon as you get this
patented for me, and if you think I am wrong in my ideas of right, why keep
this a secret, and return it to me. I would have no man see it, if your opinion
is against it, as far as the Goverment is concerned.

" Yours, respectfully, .
"P.S.?Show this to Calhoun, and let me hear from you immediately."
He wrote several letters to liis wife. The following extracts
are made from one of them :?
" Sly happiest moment in life is now, I am well beyond all question, and
healtliyer than I ever was before. 3

" I am so well that I have grown so strong and healthy that you would . -
hardly know me. I was measured yesterday and found myself at least six feet '
high with boots on, my whole body looks as straight as it could be, and I can-
not alter it. I feel great in my power which has been given to me by my
Maker, for there is nothing I can not do in business and the following year
will test the question I can write any thing, poetry, argument, and can
sing as well as I wish, and sing without knowing any thing, but with my ear,
when I get through this I will give you a happy song, of three or four verses
which I think will be suitable to the occasion. I have written to TV upon
country matters I can follow Tupper and I think I can do what he has
done
" And now to thro off all nonsense I will write a few verses as I said I
would

" Dear blessed sweet   ? a dear Queen
Always so beautiful, as the sun shining
Upon the Earth which our Maker, green
Has given to you and to me, rising.
Upon this wonderful world beautifully seen
ON THE PARALYSIS OF THE INSANE. 459
With our eyes beautifully shining, devising
Our -word of the great truth, upon which we lean
Given by the Lamb of our Maker so, rising
Above the great world, by our Redeemer's will,
That you and me, with holy thoughts, sighing
Away our delightful selves, so still
To our Redeemers; wonderful rising
Prom death, to his everlasting good
Which wakes you dearest, and your loving .
In this beautiful world our hearts always good,
To Our Redeemer, which always will make us
Nature Nobleman, and quean with our
Dear blessed hearts in one hand, in one hand."
Ml I
i)v
May 29th. He has gained mucli flesh ; his appetite, digestion, and
general health are very good, and there appears to be no indication
for further medical treatment.

From the time of his admission his restlessness and excitement have
gradually subsided. He is perfectly calm; and a stranger, in a short
conversation with him, might not perceive anything peculiar. To
those around him, however, he frequentty enlarges upon his magni-
ficent schemes. He imagines that he has more talent and skill in
everything than any other man. In literature, particularly, he believes
no one to be his equal. He really plays skilfully at cards and nine-
pins, but is irritated at the least opposition.

After this he continued very slowly to improve, although he was
subjected to no further medical treatment. He had the liberty of the
premises, upon parole, and passed much of his time, during the sum-
mer, sitting or lying in the shade, reading. He less and less frequently
alluded to his extravagant notions, and throughout most of the winter
could not be induced either to speak or write anything in reference to
them. It was believed, however, that he still secretly entertained
some of them; and a degree of self-complacency was still exhibited.
In the course of the winter he did considerable writing for the officers
of the institution, copying documents in a good, legible, and firm hand.
Discharged, much improved, January 2, 1847. He went to his
home. About two months afterwards he called at the asylum, and
appeared to be in nearly the same condition as when he was discharged.
He now attempted to obtain employment in the city, but his friends
were obliged to send him again to the country, as lie was considered
unfit for business. On the 20th of May, 1847, he was taken, hand-
cuffed, to the Utica Asylum. For a time he was excited and some-
what destructive. His ideas were exalted, and in the daytime he was
almost constantly in motion. He said he was going to be President
of the United States; that he owned the State of New York, and was
going to plough it all with a plough made of cement. He pretended
to communicate with his wife and with the Government, by tele-
graphic dispatches. He thought his food was poisoned, and, at length,
refused to eat, so that it became necessary to feed him. There was no
evident defect in his speech or gait. In the autumn he became more
calm, and joined others in playing cards; but even in bis best condi-
tion, if he was alone, he was constantly walking to and fro, rubbing
his hands, and pretending to be making worlds.

After a few weeks he became more excited, and it was necessary to
confine him in a darkened room, and, at length, to his bed. Here,
during the day, he still talked almost incessantly?the making of
worlds being a prevailing topic. In the winter he had an attack of
cerebral congestion, unaccompanied by spasms. He roused from the
immediate effects of this, but his mind was much more impaired than
before. Afterwards he had illusions and delusions simulating those of
delirium tremens. He imagined that he saw devils, and struggled
in encounters with them.

During the last few weeks of his life it became necessary to feed
him, and his bowels were moved only under the effect of powerful
cathartics. He was emaciated and ghastly, and his mental faculties
almost entirely prostrate. He died on May 2nd, 1848.
The principal pathological appearances of the brain were as follows :?
Thickening and opacity of the arachnoid pretty general; blood-vessels
enlarged; pia mater much injected ; about four ounces of serum in the
cranial cavity ; substance of the brain generally softened.
In the autumn of 1848, I was requested by Dr H. D. Bulkley
to see a patient, then under his medical care at the New York
Hospital, some of the symptoms of whose ease were very similar
to those of the partio-general paralysis. The man died soon
afterwards, and Dr J. B. Arden, formerly one of the house-
physicians of the hospital, furnished me with the following brief
history of the case :?

D , set. thirty-three years, resident of New York, boatman.
About six months ago the patient had a slight apoplectic attack, from
which he so far recovered as to be able to walk about in three or four
weeks ; but he has never completely recovered the faculties of his
mind. He has lost his memory, and the ability to recall the appro-
priate names of objects. He has not complete control over his lower
extremities ; walks with difficulty and unsteadiness ; does not complain
of pain in the head. The pupil of the left eye is much the more
dilated, but is slightly acted upon by light. General health good.
Nov. 2nd. Patient remains about the same; has no pains ; walks
about the hall with the aid of a stick.

Dec. 4th. Patient last night had an apoplectic attack, with tonic
convulsions, and in about six hours died.

Auiojpsy, eighteen hours after death.?On opening the cavity of the
cranium, there was found a large effusion of blood under the arachnoid
membrane, and around the medulla oblongata. The lateral and fourth
ventricles were filled with fluid blood, in which were some coagula.
There was no marked softening of the brain. The right vertebral and
the basilar arteries presented an appearance resembling a varicose vein,
or like a string ot beads; in other words, there was aneurism of these
vessels. The basilar artery was, in one point, as large as a pea, and
this enlargement was situated under the pons Varolii. Other organs
healthy, as far as examined.
