Prevention and Early Treatment
==============================

90 MENTAL HEALTH
Editorial

There has been much comment on the gap
created by the National Health Service Act
between two large bodies, the Regional Hospital
Boards and the Local Health Authorities, and
certain dangers which result from this are
particularly obvious. The difficulties, for
instance, which arise in the after care of mental
patients were described in this column in our
last number (p. 62). A less obvious question
is perhaps more important?who is responsible
for the prevention of mental ill-health or, to
put it in more positive terms, for the maintenance
of mental health ?

Under the Act, it would seem that the
responsibility is that of the Local Health
Authorities and that the specialist psychiatrists
employed by the Regional Hospital Board are
to be occupied in serving out-patient clinics.
It is true, of course, that the latter's aim is
to treat cases as early as possible, and the
further this goes, the nearer does it approach
to prevention, so that any specialist in charge
of a clinic must inevitably be asked to advise
on factors which affect the maintenance of
mental health. In so far as the understanding
of these factors is gained in a large part from
the study of examples of mental ill-health,
this is very proper: and it would seem as
ridiculous to make plans for maintaining mental
health without the advice of the practising
psychiatrist, as it would be to plan a general
health service without a doctor. Nevertheless,
plans for mental health, of necessity are made
and put into execution by the Local Health
Authorities, and unfortunately, as things are
at present, there are few who employ full-time psychiatrists; and it is not suggested here
that the time is ripe for them to do so.
Consequently there is a grave danger that some
may not take enough account of the clinicians'
point of view.

Although the case of the psychiatrist has been
discussed here, there are, of course, other
members of both Local Health Authority and
Regional Hospital Board services whose help is
essential, for instance, the psychiatric social
workers, and health workers. At present, the
majority of the former are on the staffs of mental
hospitals (or teaching hospitals), but, in so far as
their work inevitably takes them into contact
with their colleagues employed either by voluntary bodies or by the local health authorities,
there is not everywhere such a rift between the
work of the- two sides; and there are signs that
where there is one, it is narrowing, as has been
discussed before.

All these, and in particular, the psychiatrist,
must be brought in. How this should happen
must obviously vary with local situations; it is in
fact taking excellent shape in some areas, where
the psychiatrist in charge of an out-patient
clinic, and perhaps on the staff of a mental
hospital, has been asked by the health committee
to act as their adviser on a mental health
programme; in other areas, a less formal,
but equally close contact is maintained between
two sides. In other areas, however, the gap
created by the introduction of the Act yawns
wide.

Bridges are best built from both sides at
once; and sometimes a few piers in midstream
(in the shape perhaps, of voluntary associations)
are necessary if the river is wide and turbulent
enough. There is a real need on the part of
both sides to approach the other if we are to
advance from the purely curative aspect of
psychiatry to plan how to maintain and improve
mental health.
