Principles of Psychiatric Nursing
===================================

:Author: Madeline Elliott Ingram, lhira edition. w. a.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia and London. 19s.

There are few books devoted solely to Psychiatric
Nursing and this book, written by an American, is a
useful addition.

The tone is on the lines of Florence Nightingale's
remark, quoted in the book, " If you find your way
into their hearts, you may do what you like with
them, and that authority is most complete that is the
least perceived or assented."

One great difficulty in teaching psychiatric nursing
is the lack of a hard and fast list of symptoms
peculiar to each illness and the fact that some
symptoms are common to different forms of illness.
This, especially for a nurse who receives her medical
and surgical training first, is not easy to comprehend.
The chapter dealing with approach is well written and
explains the importance of personality in dealing
with psychotics.

The book is written in a manner which makes it
interesting reading and the author's sense of humour
enables her to quote anecdotes which are amusing
and serve as memory aids. Student Nurses' records
and letters from patients add to the interest.
Actual treatments and requirements are well
described, the only difficulty being the difference in
spelling and phraseology, common in America, but
not used in this country.

First aid measures for accidents are described.
A chapter, " Travelling with Patients " is a useful
addition in these days when patients have so much
more freedom. Nurses called upon to escort them
need adequate instruction.

The book stresses the need for nurses to accept
responsibility for observation and in the words of
the author " to develop nurses instead of guards,
and judgment instead of rules

This is a book which may be recommended to all
psychiatric nurses whether trained or in training and
would be a useful addition to the general nurses'
library.
I.R.T.
