The Mental Life of the Child
==============================

:Author: Dr Hans Graber.
Maples Press Ltd. 8s. 6d.

This book is mainly a detailed descriptive account
of analytic interviews with children. Dr Graber
has chosen his cases carefully and usefully, and has
attempted the almost impossible task of combining
^presentation of the factual content of the interviews
in relatively simple language, with an account of the
interpretative subtleties of treatment and of the total
transference picture. His approach varies from
that of strict scientific observer, to that of clinician
and at times of philosopher. These variations are
sometimes confusing, but they are useful and
provocative, causing the reader to explore and
question as he reads.

The title of the book is in some ways misleading,
and " Clinical Studies in Child Analysis " might
have been more appropriate.

In his introduction, Dr Graber sums up the
range and purpose of his work as " Illustrations
from the practice of child analysis?a glimpse of the
daily work which has come to me for the past 25
years." He goes on to say :

" In these descriptions of the course of treatment I have, for the sake of simplicity, left out
all changes in the environment, home, school,
etc., which were necessary for ?the healing and
mental hygiene of the child, nor have I mentioned
' physical' education, which schools still keep
too much in the background. Moreover, very
little is said about the instincts, feelings, character,
spirituality, or religion. It is best for the prudent
man to say nothing about these in the psychoanalysis of children. Attention was always
focussed on the whole person, even when the aim
was to remove disturbances of the instjncts,
emotions, will, vital energy, etc."

Dr Graber addresses his book to all " preceptors,
parents, (especially mothers), teachers, priests,
physicians, and psychologists, and also to students?
to all who have been convinced that the most
urgent task of culture is to turn inwards, to train
and continue to train the unconscious life."
Some of the people listed by Dr Graber might find
this book disturbing and obscure, unless they themselves have had considerable analytic experience,
and some parents could be alarmed or bewildered
by the admittedly pathological nature of much of the
material quoted.

But although this book may not appeal to the
very wide public to whom it is addressed, it is,
nevertheless, an interesting and valuable contribution
to the clinical records of child analysis.
E.W.
