The Effect of Imprisonment on Mental Health
============================================

36 f MENTAL HEALTH
By W. F. ROPER, M.B., B.S.(London)
Principal Medical Officer, H.M. Prison, Wakefield
The purpose of this paper is to give a brief
review of the effect of imprisonment on mental
health. Owing to the time factor much must
perforce be left out which ought to be inserted,
and as it is impossible to go into any detail, the
most that can be hoped is to give a broad
general survey.

The effect of imprisonment on any particular
person is the product of many factors, the most
important of which are his physical health, the
length and nature of the sentence, the course
of external events which are of importance to
him, his management whilst a prisoner, and
finally, and most importantly, the attitude
which he displays towards his conviction and
sentence.

Let us now examine these factors in order.

Physical Health
---------------
The effect of imprisonment on physical
health is, in general, good. Prison provides a
regular life and a full range of medical treatment, either from internal resources or by
arrangement with outside agencies. Complaints
of ill health at the time of discharge are rare,
and there is an average gain in weight of
about 5 lbs. with a general convergence on the
normal weight. The obese lose weight and the
lean gain. A fair number of repair operations
?as for a hernia?are done with the general
object of fitting a man physically for work on
his release.

The efficiency and thoroughness of the general
medical work done has important repercussions
on the attitude of the prisoner. If he feels that
he can and does receive efficient medical
attention, he is more inclined to be receptive
to anything in the nature of general or psychiatric counselling, and much can be done with
a man whose pain or discomfort one has been
able to relieve, just as much can be done by the
respected general practitioner in ordinary life.
There is a difficulty, however, in that some
prisoners, particularly some recidivist prisoners,
are apt to try to exploit any disability which
they have in order to gain some ulterior purpose,
such as avoidance of work which they do not
like, or escape from disciplinary penalties. It is
very understandable that they should do this,
but it is important that they should not get
away with it with any frequency; if they do,
the idea that they are clever people capable
of fixing things to their advantage is reinforced;
in short they are confirmed in that kind of
cunning which has led to their offence.
The art of dealing with these men lies in
being able to expose their ulterior motive without
animosity. If this can be done, this type of
intrigue dies away and more straightforward
and mutually trusting relationships are possible;
it is just this sort of relationship which is to be
desired in order that the prisoner may not feel
that he is in another camp and so proceed to
deceit and stratagem in order to get what he
wants.

One of the most encouraging aspects of
prison, to my mind, is the way in which many
psychosomatic illnesses clear up. In peptic
ulcer, for example, the usual evolution is that
for the first week or so after conviction, the
prisoner will ask for and receive a special diet,
together with alkaline powder; he then gives
up his diet and shortly afterwards forgets to
collect his alkaline powder. His symptoms have
gone, presumably because the emotional tension
which produced the somatic lesion has gone.
For prison means security of a kind and
therefore relaxation. A not infrequent remark
on discharge is, " it is a pity that 1 had to come
to prison to get my ulcer cured ".
In a like way, but to a lesser degree, enuresis,
allergic diseases and hypertension tend to clear
up, presumably for the same reasons.
This kind of fortunate result appears to be somewhat more frequent now than it was 20 years
ago, and it reflects the general improvement in
the flexibility of prison discipline which has
taken place during that time.

Length and Nature of Sentence
For the prisoner, the sentence divides itself
into three periods?a beginning, a middle and
* Paper given at a Specialist Meeting of the Institute for the Scientific Treatment of Delinquency held in connection
with the International Congress on Mental Health, London, August 20th, 1948.
an end. In the beginning he is casting his mind
back to times and opportunities past, in the
middle he is concerned mainly with the present
and its possibilities, in the end he is thinking of
his approaching release and is chiefly concerned
to avoid anything which will defer it.

Both the beginning and the end are relatively
unstable periods in which the mind is preoccupied with external events, past or future,
and they are very good times for the discussion
of the past or future with the prisoner, but very
bad times for training, because the mind is not
?n intra-mural events.

It follows that a short sentence, one of six
months or so, which has no middle, is useless
for training purposes and is regarded with
disfavour by prison authorities, though still
extensively used by the courts.

In the medium sentence of about two years,
there is a distinct middle period when repining
is over and release is too far ahead to claim
much attention. To the prisoner this seems a
static period which he often considers a futile
one; he is apt to say that he is wasting his time
and that he would be better at liberty earning his
living and keeping his family. But it is in this
Period that the lessons he has learnt consolidate
and fix themselves, and it is the most favourable
Period from the penological point of view.
Long sentences, say of six years and upwards,
seem all middle and may lead to a certain
disinterest and boredom in those men who are
unable to find real interest in their work. It is
usual to find means?as by transfer to other
and different prisons?to break up this period
and vary the monotony. In this way, what has
keen called " prison rot" is avoided and
mental deterioration is not now seen. In times
gone by, what were called prison psychoses
did occur, but they must now be very rare.
In the English system all sentences except life
sentences are determinate, and the man concerned can reckon up the date of his release.
As soon as he has done so, a kind of time clock
seems to settle itself in his mind, and it is a bad
Policy to suggest to him that the timing may be
revised; such a suggestion leads to considerable
unsettlement, and if the hope is dashed it seems
to him almost like beginning the sentence again.
This is a thing to remember when advocating
an indeterminate sentence or frequent revision
of sentence.

External Events
----------------
Although the body of the prisoner is in prison,
his mind is free and will often return to his
family and his friends; bad news from them
will often cause distress, which is the greater
since he can do nothing about it. In general,
both prisoners and their friends' are reasonable about this and give no more currency
to bad news than they must. But it not
infrequently happens, chiefly between husband
and wife, that a vicious circle is set up,
in which self-pitying or angry letters evoke
their counterpart and bring about anxiety
symptoms, usually of a somatic nature. It is
always worth while enquiring of a prisoner who
presents himself with vague complaints, whether
he has had bad news from home. Often he has,
and the discussion of his anxiety rather than the
treatment of any somatic condition is what he
requires; indeed, it is often a great mistake to
give medical treatment in these cases, lest the
idea of a somatic disorder fix itself in the mind;
it is not appreciated how much harm the
inappropriate bottle of medicine can do. If
this facile method of temporary disposal is
avoided and the actual problem tackled, much
good work can be done.

The most difficult reactions occur in prisoners
of hysteroid personality, of whom there are
many. These people welcome the opportunity
for histrionic display and make the worst of
their troubles rather than the best. Actually
the effect in these demonstrative cases is shallow
and the demand soon arises for some special
privilege or other?that is to say, there is a
positive trend towards personal profit which
has to be carefully and tactfully parried lest
the disposition to show self-pity for profit be
reinforced. Any such reinforcement is greatly
to be deplored; nothing saps character so
quickly and so destructively as distress reinforced and exploited for profit. Considerable
numbers of former psychiatric patients arrive
in prison who have obtained fugitive advantage
from the display of psychopathic behaviour,
and they have trained on from that point to
become useless to themselves and others.
A major service can be rendered to these men
if this training can be reviewed in prison by
gently but firmly demonstrating to them that it
is better to keep trying, and by removing the
idea that a diagnosis of psychopathic personality
is a licence to behave irresponsibly. If this
idea can be removed, the personality deviation
often clears up also, and is revealed as something
which has been learned and not as something
innate. A considerable number of these cases do
clear up in prison and the prognosis as to
recidivism improves accordingly.

It is important to do what one can to tidy up
the prisoner's relationship with outside persons
and groups, because his fate on release depends
so much on whether he goes out in a state of
mind which enables him to cohere to a socially
desirable group. If he is acceptable to such a
group and recaptures a sense of belonging to it,
that constitutes the greatest guarantee for
future mental health and future good behaviour.
The lonely man, the man on the outskirts of a
group, or the man who is only at his ease in a
socially undesirable group has not the same
restraint on him; he can contemplate and do
things that would be unthinkable to one fully
integrated in a satisfactory social group.

Attitude of the Prisoner
------------------------
The most important factor in deciding the
effect which imprisonment will have on a man,
is the attitude finally adopted towards conviction
and sentence. If the attitude of acceptance
with regret occurs spontaneously or can be
induced, the outlook is good, both as regards
contentment during confinement and good
b'ehaviour on release. The point one wants
to reach is that at which the sense of guilt is
sufficient to make the prisoner feel that he has
deserved more or less what he has got, without
there being so much over as to set up defence
reactions.

Only a minority of prisoners show outward
signs of rejection of the approximate justice
of conviction and sentence, and they are a fairly
hopeful group provided their reactions can be
properly managed.

The disquieting group are those who accept
their fate without much reaction. The bulk
of them are drifters who think of little beyond
the moment, and readily follow the lead of
others. Their fate depends upon the environment into which they fall and upon the character
of those who trouble to lead them. Imprisonment has little effect upon these men; in their
earlier days they did not want to return, but
do little to prevent coming back; in their later
days they often do not trouble whether they
come back or not, and are even glad to do so
when they are up against difficulty.

A smaller group is that of the professional
criminals who accept confinement as one of the
risks of their trade, just as a coal-miner might
accept the risk of injury in the digging of coal.
They do not want to return to prison any more
than the miner wants to be injured, but they
feel that the profit they make is sufficient to
justify the risk, and they reject with contempt
any suggestion that they should settle down to
live on a modest wage. Their attitude is often
rationalized by allegations that, in any case,
society will not give them a square deal; this
makes the condition an obdurate one for which
little can be done.

On discharge these men return to criminal
groups and there is little hope for them so long
as this is so.

Management
-----------
The great attraction of prison work is the
scope given for the art of man-management;
it is a good career for those who like the
management of men, a poor one for those who
do not. The difference between people in this
respect is very great; with the same group, one
man may have peace and progress, another
discord and discontent.

The roots of crime go back to faulty piersonal
relationships in early life, and these faulty
relationships come into evidence again quite
strongly when a prisoner is again reduced to a
position of dependence. A flexible attitude
is required in which both kindness and firmness
are combined; the object is to restrain the fault
without feeling or showing dislike of the
person.

Prisoners of all kinds react very well to the
right mixture and there are very few who cannot
be brought to tolerate their imprisonment well
if properly handled.

It does not necessarily follow that the effect
produced will endure after release, but it will
often do so and thus enable the man concerned
to tolerate the give and take of everyday life
in a way which was formerly impossible to him.
This is the fundamental task of prison treatment, and the quality of the staff determines
the degree of success which can be achieved.
However, there must be more than this if a
secure result is to be achieved. There has to
be some grasp of the use and value of life, so
that the released prisoner may have some
standard by which to live. Not a great deal
has been done in this way as yet, but the moral
idea cannot be neglected. It will have to be
faced, bearing in mind that it is useless to try
to thrust any moral system upon the prisoner;
his own ideas have to be brought out and
developed; these he can accept, but he will
defend himself against ideas which are thrust
upon him, or accept them only as a hypocrite
does.

The Social Results of Imprisonment
----------------------------------
The prime criterion by which imprisonment
is to be judged, is its efficacy in preventing the
recurrence of crime, for such is its social
function. Since 1930 the re-conviction of men
coming to prison for the first time has been
noted, so that the number of failures is known.
Of those who first came to prison in 1930,
75 per cent, had not been re-convicted by
1943, 13 years later. If only those are considered who had no previous convictions before
coming to prison, 80 per cent, had not been
re-convicted.

Taking a shorter period of follow-up, since
the above is rather a long one to compare with
most follow-up studies of psychiatric clinics
and the like, of those first coming to prison
in 1938, 83 per cent, had not been re-convicted
by the end of 1943, 5 years later, and of those
who were first offenders, 90 per centt had not
been re-convicted.

These are good figures which make nonsense
?f allegations that prisons are colleges of crime
and breeding grounds of anti-social feeling,
Particularly when it is borne in mind that a
considerable number of those who have become
recidivists started as juvenile delinquents and
graduated through Approved Schools and
Borstals. It is very difficult to deal with these
institutional failures; they have already had all
Possible sympathy shown to them and have
become immunized to it. Quite often they are
of affectionless type, able to receive but unable
to give. This debars them from assimilation
into any satisfactory social group and continues
to do so* unless and until some capacity to
reciprocate affection emerges.

The Stereotyped Idea of Prisons
-------------------------------
One great difficulty under which prisons
labour, is the popular idea that they are nasty
places for nasty people; a stereotyped idea
of that sort, based on the prisons of many years
ago, persists, and prepares a ready credence for
biased evidence. The popular stereotype persists
because it is thought convenient to have something to cause fear to intending criminals,
although it is doubtful whether this kind of
deterrence is worth much; a threat is often
taken as a challenge.

Another reason for the persistence of the
stereotype is the need found by novelists and
dramatists to have some limbo into which they
may consign their villains or their heroes. It
is convenient for them to preserve old traditions,
and difficult for the public to escape from them,
so long as they are continually thrust upon
them by the most dramatic pens of their time.
The effect of this, so far as the prisoner is
concerned, is that the public are apt to regard
him in an ambivalent way. Considered as a
criminal, he is unduly detested, otherwise he
could not be sent to a detestable place; considered as a prisoner, he may be unduly pitied,
since he has been sent to a detestable place.
This may thrust the social role of villain or
victim upon the prisoner, and unless he keeps
his sense of proportion, as fortunately most of
them do, he may settle all too easily into the
one role or the other, or both by turns, and
either is a role which could hardly be other
than anti-social.

It is much to be hoped that the stereotyped idea
of prison will undergo that same change as has
that of the asylum, when it was transformed into
the mental hospital. The point is an important
one; just as it is now not so socially difficult
for a released mental patient to find a place in
the world as it was in times gone by, so, if a
better idea of prison becomes current, it will
not be so socially difficult for prisoners after
their release. After all, as we have seen, the
great majority of them remain honest and
reliable after their first experience of prison.

Summary
--------
Let us now summarize the points made,
they are:

1. That the physical health of prisoners on
discharge is satisfactory, and that the
commonly favourable evolution of psychosomatic disorders argues in favour of a
relief of emotional tension in prison.
2. That short sentences provide little effect
save unsettlement, and that long sentences
produce no deleterious effect if properly
managed. Indeterminacy of sentence
brings unsettlement.

3. That the fate of prisoners on release depends
very much on their ability to cohere to a
satisfactory social group and upon the
existence of such a group ready to receive
them.

4. That the effect of imprisonment depends
mainly on the attitude towards his fate,
taken by the prisoner. The attitude of
acceptance with regret is the desideratum.
5. That the right handling of the prisoner is a
potent factor in bringing about this right
attitude, and that right handling means,
above all, the ability to restrain the fault
without disliking the person.

6. That the social result of prison treatment is
good beyond the general recognition.

7. That the stereotyped idea of prison as a
nasty place for nasty people tends to
thrust upon the prisoner the role of
villain or victim, either of which is unprofitable; and that it will be a good
thing if this stereotype can be replaced by
one closer to the truth.
