The Re-Adjustment of the Hospital In-Patient How the Nurse Can Help
===================================================================

:Author: A. F. DAY
Night Charge Nurse, St. James' Hospital, Portsmouth;
Winner, " Lord " Memorial Essay Competition, 1949

To those nurses who have grown grey in the
service, any consideration of the patient's
readjustment to life, on discharge from hospital,
must inevitably recall the distance we have
travelled in the field of Mental Health over the
past quarter of a century and the changes in the
nursing approach to mental illness during that
period.

Many of us can remember?for it was not so
long ago, really?when the best that we could
offer our patients was a refuge from the world
and such care and comfort as it was in our
power to give; theirs to appreciate. We longed
to do more?but could not. As time went on,
progress, " the shining light that shineth more
and more unto the perfect day", made it
possible for us to think more in terms of relief
and recovery, less of asylum. To-day, psychological medicine has a place in social service
which few of us could have imagined possible
twenty-five years ago; the question of reconditioning the patient, so that after recovery
and discharge there shall be no recurrence of
the trouble, is becoming increasingly vital as a
nursing problem. It is a most heartening
development.

Let us seek an analogy from the recent war.
It will be remembered that long before the
cessation of hostilities, wise men were giving
thought to the building of the post-war world.
It was not enough, they said, that peace should
be merely an uneasy breathing space between
two wars; they wanted to find a way to create
a world of smiling, happy childhood, of men
and women who could live and work together
in friendliness and security; a state of society
in which war could never happen again.
So with the mentally ill. What is the lasting
. avail if, on recovery and discharge, patients
return to the same environment, have the same
attitude towards that environment and are
subject to the same stresses that combined to
produce former difficulties. Is it altogether
surprising, if, under such conditions, the old
troubles sooner or later reassert themselves
and they suffer another breakdown ?

If we had attained the ultimate Utopia, it
might be possible to readjust to an unsuitable
environment. But under our existing economic
structure, such a thing is very rarely accomplishable. The housewife, anxious and depressed
as a consequence of the strain of coping with
post-war domesticity, must live where her
husband's work is. Queues ! Rations !
Shortages ! Trying to fill a quart pot of
expenses with a pint of income ! These are the
problems of her contemporaries everywhere.
When a man has been a bank clerk for twenty
years he cannot, as a rule, switch to house
decoration or landscape gardening at a moment's
notice; nor, in a competitive, striving world,
can he avoid those frustrations and setbacks
which are the common lot of man, merely by
changing his occupation. Nor can thousands
of workers of either sex avoid the deadly
monotony of repetition work which, in an age
of machine-watching and mass production, is
the cause of so much neurosis in industry.
" The mind is its own place, and in itself
Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven
said Milton, and in the vast majority of cases
of people at odds with their environment (the
maladjusted child apart) it is not so much the
environment that is the cause of the difficulty
as the person's attitude towards it. The object
then, of treating for readjustment to commercial
and social life, must be so to change the patient's
outlook that he may be able, more courageously,
to grapple with the old environment when he
returns to it?to meet it with a different approach,
a less jaundiced eye. And this end must be
in view even while physical treatments for
obliterating the exciting cause of the trouble
are still being carried out; in fact it must
be the goal from the moment of entering
hospital. Two methods suggest themselves.
The first is psychotherapy, the second the group
of treatments which may be broadly classified
under the head of occupational therapy.

Psychotherapy, which aims, by psychoanalytical methods, to probe the root cause
of the problem is, of course, largely the doctor's
function. The nurse has, nevertheless, considerable opportunity. A careful study of the
patient's social history and domestic background
is well worth the trouble involved. A thorough
grasp of the doctor's plan of treatment is
essential.' Thus armed?and helped by the
closer, day-to-day relationship which a nurse
has with the patients?factors may be uprooted
from which a sense of frustration, of inadequacy,
?f inferiority have arisen. By precept, by
example, by conversation in the course of the
day's normal round, the patient could be helped
on the road to overcoming some of the ways
by which he has, in the past, failed to come to
terms with his environment. The ambitionthwarted, for example, whose ambitions are
beyond the range of their capabilities, may be
helped, through doctor and nurse in combination, to realize their limitations and adjust
their outlook. The square-peg may similarly
be removed from the round hole. Indeed, the
art of wise talking?and that includes the art
?f knowing when not to talk?can be a very
Potent weapon in the mental nurse's armoury.
Occupational and the companion therapies,
Play therapy, recreation therapy, bibliotherapy,
are very much the nurse's line of country. Let
it be at once emphasized that occupational
therapy does not merely mean making baskets,
rugs and table-centres which are .subsequently
sold at a handsome profit. It is curative, not
commercial. It has the immediate effect of
avoiding boredom and unhealthy thinking
during the intervals between treatments and
during convalescence. It gives the patient
something with which to occupy hands and
thoughts. More than that, however, it aims,
by stimulating the creative urge, to restore lost
self-confidence and above all to widen the range
of interests. In general?though this must
not be accepted as an axiom?the more varied
a person's hobbies and tastes, the more cultural
reserves he has to fall back upon and the greater
his depth of understanding of men and matters,
so the more tolerant is likely to be his attitude
towards an uncongenial environment and the
less likely is he to break down under the stresses
and strains of life.

The nurse's job here is to encourage the
patient to the top of his or her bent; to awaken
dormant or untapped interests in handicrafts,
music, art, literature, sport, dancing, gardening,
collecting and the hundred and one other means
by which humanity diverts itself, stimulates
itself or seeks mental and spiritual solace.
This is by no means easy; it involves infinite
patience, the risk of rebuffs and many possible
false starts before discovering where an interest
is likely to be developed. It can range from
physical activity to, in quiet mood, advice and
discussion over the choice of books. But it is
fascinating and tremendously worth-while and
it affords a nurse almost unlimited scope.
Obviously, the more varied a nurse's own'
interests the greater his or her potentialities in
this direction. But virtuosity and versatility
are not essential. The great thing is to be able
to encourage; to have the art of awakening
enthusiasm in others.

Inter-hospital, inter-departmental, inter-ward
and inter-patient activities and competitions is
another effective nursing job in this medium.
The patients themselves should be encouraged
to take a full share in their organization and
administration, the nurse holding a watching?
and watchful?brief. Who knows what latent
talents may emerge; talents which may afterwards become buffers against the slings and
arrows of outrageous fortune !
Have you ever re-visited, after long absence,
a place once familiar, but now, in the process of
time, much changed and, stepping back into
the past?as it were into another world?
sought well-remembered land marks, hoped to
recognize a few faces ? Only to find, instead,
that demolition and re-building and the decay
which the years must bring, have changed the
face of the district and that gone are all the
old familiar faces. You are a stranger in a
land where once you were at home: a poor,
lonely ghost, longing to be remembered,
wandering among the ruins of a once happier
day.

Something akin to these emotions must so
often, long years ago, have been experienced,
on facing the world again, by those patients
who were fortunate enough to recover after
perhaps years under certificate. And something
akin to them could, as easily, be felt to-day,
though a great slice has now been cut out of
the average period of hospitalization. The
tendency, even in an up-to-date hospital where
there is greater contact with the outside world,
for life to become monastic, " the world
forgetting ", can be very real. The patient is
still, metaphorically, very much shut in behind
high walls and bars.

The' nurse, in close daily association, can
become a sort of liaison-officer between the patient
and the life beyond the hospital gates. The
responsibility for creating a friendly, homely
atmosphere in the ward, as opposed to bare,
barrack-room-like institution frigidity, rests
almost entirely with the nursing staff. Those
small touches, acts of courtesy and consideration
for the feelings of others, that " indefinable
something " which makes up the pattern of
home life, need never be entirely absent from
life in hospital. They are for the nurse to give
and encourage; they smooth the way. Newspapers, periodicals and discussions help to
keep patients " in touch ". Where suitable,
walks and visits to entertainments in the district,
patient and nurse together?not a group of
patients, which can invariably only mean
embarrassment to the sensitive person?help
to ward off a sense of remoteness from the
world. By these and other means a nurse can do
much to ensure that the patient is never entirely
cut off from ordinary life and so avoid, as far
as possible, the risk, on discharge, of his being
haunted with a feeling of being " not wanted ",
not fitting in, of that sickening loneliness of the
spirit which could so easily undo in a short
time all that the hospital has done.

It is good that legislation and science should
so admirably have combined to reduce the
length of a patient's stay in hospital, but there
is a danger lurking behind even this inestimable
boon. Let us take the hypothetical case?
by no means an unusual one?of the housewife
referred to earlier and who has, shall we say,
left home and children to the care of an elderly
mother, a kindly, but already overworked
neighbour, or to a husband faced with this
addition to his normal job. It is perfectly
understandable if, on recovery from physical
treatment and " feeling much better in myself ",
as she might put it, she should wish to return
home at once and relieve others of the burden
they have been carrying for her. The doctor
will undoubtedly advise a policy of festina
lente, pointing out the necessity for preparing
her mind to tackle the future; for a period of
quiet convalescence. The nurse who will
endorse this advice and supplement it with
details of others who have insisted on premature
departure, only to return in a short while,
acknowledge their error and remain to complete
the treatment, may, if successful in persuasion,
be helping to contribute more that she knows
to human happiness.

The peculiarly intimate nature of the nurse/
patient relationship has been much stressed
here and with reason, for on it hangs the whole
art of mental nursing. To gain the patient's
confidence, that is the beginning of all success
and a good start in the relationship is half the
battle. The nurse who can strike up this happy
association from the first, so that the patient
feels at once that he (or she) is in sympathetic
and understanding care, is already on the high
road. No light task this, and there can be
no rule of thumb to determine how to set
about it. We are dealing with human minds,
delicately balanced as a watch spring; some
enter hospital on the defensive?aggressive,
non-co-operative; others come without hope;
others still obsessed by the " Lunatic Asylum "
attitude towards mental illness. Each category,
each person within each. category, requires a
different, an individual approach. Resourcefulness is the keynote.

The routine of nursing; the general duties
in connection with physical treatments; the
careful observation of the patient under domestic
conditions, his eating and drinking, his waking,
his sleeping, may secure data?perhaps some
almost infinitesimal detail?which will help to
explain a maladjustment.

We seek divine guidance in our way of life.
Is it not of a piece, then, that in asking for
blessing on our work we should think, too, of
those who are entrusted to our care, remembering, with Tennyson, that " more things
are wrought by prayer than this world
dreams of
What is the secret ? Winning confidence.
Keeping eyes, ears and brain alert. Being
tactful, resourceful and versatile. Doing one's
duty?just that. That is the beginning and
the end of " helping to permanent recovery
of all mental nursing?the alpha and the
omega.
