The Personal Touch
=====================

Editorial

Just over a year after the National Health
Service was introduced, it is natural that there
should be a phase of stocktaking. Some of the
more politically-minded may be concerned to
call attention to its successes or shortcomings,
and such subjects as the cost of the dental
services, or the delays in their products are,
fortunately, outside our scope. There is,
however, another criticism which has been made
often enough to give rise to some disquiet?
particularly in view of its author. He is not
a politician of either side but an individual whose
views are still of some importance even if his
influence and interests are implied more tacitly
than ever in many negotiations?that is the
patient.

First and secondhand accounts of patients'
views met at random in different parts of the
country, suggest that they are missing something
of the personal touch they had from the medical
profession before the Act came in ; their
general practitioner " seems more rushed off
his feet than ever before " ; the specialist
at the local hospital " can't be seen for some
weeks, and even then hasn't much time" ;
the dentist asks if he shall " spend the appointment by filling the form or filling the cavity
All this is very unsatisfactory to the patient,
and is obviously damaging to the doctorpatient relationship ; its immediate effects are
likely to be a lowering of the confidence in the
profession in many and a gross neglect of a few.
This neglect will, of course, be more marked in
the less obvious and apparently less urgent but
more preventable cases, and the ill-effect on the
health of the nation in the long run can well be
imagined. This is bad enough for all, but it is
of particular concern in the field of mental
health ; the past has shown us only too clearly
that what is not treated early becomes progressively more and more difficult to treat, and it
would indeed be tragic if at the very moment
that new techniques and new hopes have been
given us, and a completely new orientation has
become possible, we should be hindered in our
task by this lack of time, and manpower.

Moreover, it is not just a question of the treatment of the individual ; the problem is even
bigger, and concerns the whole feeling in the
country about mental health and illness.
If this is unsatisfactory for the individual
patient, and dangerous for the nation's health,,
it is no less unsatisfactory and dangerous for
the medical profession. The doctor will deplore
the loss of a good relationship with the patient
as much as the latter ; and he realizes perfectly
well that he does not give of his best when he is
very rushed. Indeed, he sees the possibility '
of being so swept off his feet by the mere
pressure of the day that he works automatically
and has no time to do the really important work
?sitting and thinking, or sitting and listening.
Without it the art of medicine and the vision
fade ; and " where there is no vision, the
people perish The doctors then are as
disturbed as the patient by the lack of personal
touch.

The cause of the trouble is not so easy to find ;
to some it seems to be too much time spent in
form-filling (" futile quill driving ") ; to some,
too much committee work ; to some, a great
increase of patients, encouraged by the advent ^
of the National Health Service to seek assistance
or appliances ; to some, merely inefficient
administration, in the planning of a surgery or
out-patient department which has broken down
under extra work. Not so often mentioned, but
sometimes evident on enquiry, is the habit of
" flitting Time is wasted by never being
thorough, never doing more than a patch,
always hurrying on to do as little for the next case.
The first three of these may be expected to be
temporary ; for all should be symptoms of the
beginning of the National Health Service, not its
constant accompaniments. Forms should be
more familiar, committee work less frequent,
new patients less eager. This, of course,
presupposes (in what some may feel is a pathetic .
optimism) that no new forms are designed, no
fresh work found for committees, and no more
free offers made to patients. We shall see.
But anyhow, the latter two deserve attention. Is
medical administration adequate ? How much
doctor's time is wasted by doing work his
secretary could do ? How much secretarial )
work could be saved by doctors thinking a little
ahead ? And for the matter of that, need
patients wait as long as they do in hospital outpatients and surgeries ? Secondly, the lack of
thoroughness is most insidious ; we can
sympathize ; a feeling of rush engenders it,
and one must be very strong-minded to settle
down methodically and thoroughly to an
individual case with a crowd of others waiting.
Unfortunately, without it the patient so often
goes steadily downhill, never satisfied, never fully
investigated, and losing confidence at each visit.
The success of early treatment had gone far to
remove the prejudice and fear of mental illness
among the general public, and they were consequently being encouraged to seek advice
earlier. They are likely to slip back where they
were, if treatment becomes restricted to the acute
forms of disorder.
