The Personality of the Pre-School Child
========================================

:Author: Dr Werner Wolff. Heinemann Medical Books,
Ltd. 25s.

Throughout this book the emphasis is laid on
the difference between the viewpoint of the young
child, and that of the adult. The child explores
the world not only to gain knowledge but also
to differentiate himself from his environment,
and all expressions of his personality are variations
of the one theme: the child's search for his self.
Behaviour in the young child similar to that of the
adult may in fact arise from very different roots,
and mean something very different. With this
in mind, Dr Wolff has after some fifteen years of
study evolved certain methods of exploring the
depths of the child's personality as shown in his
different modes of expression?in drawing, in
movement and in gesture. He has followed the
Behaviourist School by careful observation, but
has refrained from drawing any conclusion until
he has obtained the child's own statement, and in
its environmental context. Close studies and a
number of experiments have been made on a group
of three to five-year olds. From the point of view
of the child therapist, the chapters on Principles of
Children's Art, and Intelligence in the Pre-school
Child should be of great value. The child's
ability to express certain relationships in the
emphasis given, for example, to certain aspects
of the human body, to the total elimination or
partial suppression of other parts, appears to arise
from unconscious sources, and each young personality appears to express in drawing a certain rhythmic
proportion which is characteristic throughout.
This has been called the R.Q. (or rhythmic quotient)
and Dr Wolff shows how this can be estimated,
and in an integrating personality it appears to bear
a steady relationship to the I.Q. Where a discrepancy between I.Q. and R.Q. occurs, it may
suggest an overstraining of intellectual functions,
or a chaos of emotional drives. In the pre-school
child, whose life pattern is more determined by his
unconscious than by his conscious life, his sensing
of relationships as expressed in drawing can indicate
normal or abnormal changes in personality.

Dr Wolff disagrees with the application of certain
of the psychoanalytical principles; he lays greater
stress on the mother's more exclusive influence
throughout the pre-school period, and considers
that each child needs very individual understanding
in order to appreciate the symbolism expressed,
but he himself becomes somewhat dogmatic and
over-simplified at times, especially in his chapter
on the insecure and secure child.

The book is at times repetitive?some of the
quotations of the children seem unreal in the rather
too adult phraseology?but it is a careful and sincere
effort which takes the study of the pre-school child
a considerable step further.

Anyone who is associated with nursery school
work, and educational psychologists concerned
with young children, should find the book of great
interest, and the bibliography is a very complete
one. M.C.
