Materialism at the International Medical Congress
===================================================

233 Art. VII.
:Author: J. M. Winn, M.D., M.R.C.P., &C.

Although the International Medical Congress cannot be said
to have added much to our store of medical knowledge, it must
be admitted that, as a social gathering, it was a great success.
It is, however, to be regretted that there was one dark blot in
its proceedings?the advocacy of Materialism bj Professor
Huxley, in his address on The Connexion of the Biological
Sciences with Medicine.

Inasmuch as the Professor is one of the most strenuous supporters of materialistic doctrines, the title of his address is
singularly inappropriate, inconsistent, and misleading. What
right has he to adopt the definition of biological science, which
wholly relates to life, when he ignores the vital principle ? It
would have been more candid if he had styled his address: An
attempt to prove that all vital phenomena are the effects of
mechanical and chemical forces.

No one can object to the prefatory remarks in the address,
which have reference to the valuable aid medicine has derived
from modern discoveries in physiology and chemistry ; but this,
however true, is not new, and is familiar to nearly every second
year's student at our medical schools. When, however, the Professor leaves the beaten track of facts and gives utterance to the
dogmatic assertion?that there is no contrast between living and
inert matter?he makes the most glaring and egregious blunder.
In speaking of Descartes and his followers he makes the following observations, which are unwarranted by those very modern
discoveries in science for which he professes unbounded admiration : " Others, on the contrary, supported by a robust faith in the
universal applicability of the principles laid down by Descartes,
and seeing that the actions called ' vital' are, so far as we have
any means of knowing, nothing but changes of place of particles
of matter, look to molecular physics to achieve the analysis of
the living protoplasm itself into a molecular mechanism. If
there is any truth in the received doctrines of physics, that
contrast between living and inert matter on which Bichat lays
so much stress, does not exist." If Professor Huxley had been
thoroughly acquainted with the researches of Professor Lionel
Beale and others on cell-life, he surely would not have proclaimed to the world the extravagant hypothesis that a living
body is a mere piece of molecular mechanism ; a theory which, he
must be aware, if true, would tend to subvert the fundamental
principles on which morality and polity are based. The following observations from Dr Lionel Beale's Lumleian Lectures on
Life and on Vital Action,* are diametrically opposed to
Professor Huxley's view. After an elaborate description of
bioplastic movements, be remarks : " Of the several primary vital
movements I have described, none can be initiated. They are
peculiar to living matter, and not one of them has been explained
by physical law. No mere physical or chemical attractions or
expulsions, on the part of any material particle, at all resemble
vital movements I beg you carefully to consider the
evidence upon which the views I have advanced are based. It
has been affirmed that the phenomena occurring in the simplest living matter, are not far removed from the phenomena of
the non-living, and, like these, are to be explained mechanically, but only the operation not the explanation is forthcoming." We are not aware that Professor Huxley has paid
special attention to microscopic investigation of living tissue,
and are therefore not inclined to give so much credence to his
haphazard remarks, as to those of Professor Lionel Beale, who
has devoted a life-time to the patient observation of living
tissue with microscopes of the very highest power.
About four years since Dr Huxley expressed his belief that
vital force is a sort of crystalline force. A crystal as much
resembles a life cell as an icicle does a warm palpitating
animal.

One of the most reckless assertions in the Professor's
address, showing the unphilosophical haste with which he
adopts fiction as fact, was the affirmation that " living matter
differs from othpr matter in degree and not in kind; the
microcosm repeats the macracosm ; and one chain of causation
connects the nebulous original of suns and planetary systems
with the protoplasmic foundation of life and organisation."
It would have been more in accordance with sound philosophy
if the Professor had waited till the nebular hypothesis, which
is at present in nubibus, had been proved, before announcing
it as a fact. We have not the slightest desire to check scientific
inquiry, but the vice-president of the Congress surely might, for
the sake of humanity, have paused before giving the weight of
his authority to visionary, extravagant, and unverified theories
of a decidedly atheistical tendency. The subtle sophistries
of his school are doing infinitely more mischief than the outspoken blasphemy of Bradlaugh.
It is a marked feature in the constitution of the Professor's
mind, that he is always in such hot haste to propagate fanciful
speculations. The speedy collapse of his theory?that seamud and bioplasm were identical?should have been a warning
to him to be more cautious for the future. His notion also that
* On Life and on Vital Action. London: J. A. Churchill, 1876.
a living organism was the same as a crystal, to which we have
previously referred, is another example of the mode in which he
is carried away by his imagination. Moreover, he still persists
with a pertinacity worthy of a better cause, to uphold evolution
(that modern figment of science which the Rev. F. 0. Morris,
the distinguished naturalist, has happily termed " The Darwin
Craze "), after the innumerable unanswerable objections which
have been advanced against the hypothesis ; the chief of which
I published in my " Collapse of Scientific Atheism,"* and
which, to any but a prejudiced inquirer, must have shown incontestibly that Darwinism is played out.
At the Congress, Dr Bastian's attempt to revive the exploded
materialistic theory of spontaneous generation, was a complete
failure.

In the Physiological Section Dr Ferrier exhibited two of
his uselessly mutilated monkeys, to show that injury to particular parts of the brain will produce paralysis, which might
have been taken for granted without vivisection. As regards
the localisation of the moral and intellectual faculties in the
brain, Dr Ferrier is no nearer the goal than he was six years
since. The dog exhibited by Professor Groltz, and from which
he had removed the greater portion of its brain, afforded
evidence opposed to the views of Professor Ferrier. Inasmuch
as a dog is a more intelligent animal than a monkey, we are
inclined to give our vote in favour of the dog.

Since the above remarks were written, the British Association for the Advancement of Science has held its annual
meeting at York. Its proceedings fully bear out the character
I gave of it last year in The Journal of Psychological
Medicine. I described it as a gigantic pic-nic, enlivened by
sensational addresses on materialistic philosophy, and that it
might be not inaptly termed: An association for the advancement of infidelity. In their recent addresses, Dr Huxley and Sir
John Lubbock have done their best to maintain the materialistic
character of the association; and it is a great misfortune that
its members should allow these gentlemen to take the lead in
its proceedings year after year. Their scientific fallacies would
matter little, and they might be safely left to the sobering
influence of time, had it not been for the baneful influence they
are exciting on those younger members of society, who have
neither leisure nor opportunity for the study necessary to
enable them to perceive the shallowness of the pernicious and

fallacious doctrines, so loudly espoused by Drs. Tyndall and
Huxley.

The president, Sir John Lubbock, in his address endeavoured
to make it appear that the difficulties of the Darwin theory
were more and more being overcome. This we most emphatically deny. Even his protege, the industrious ant, rises up
ungratefully, in arms against his patron. Sir John has taken
great pains to endow him with the attributes of the human
mind, but he did not see that in doing so he was breaking the
ingenious chain which was to link the anthropoid ape with
man. Sir John admits that, although the anthropoid ape
approaches next to man in bodily structure, the ant claimed
the next place to him in intelligence; therefore, inasmuch as
mind is superior to matter, it happens after all, that it is not
the monkey but the ant who is our immediate progenitor:
if not, man must be a cross between the ant and the baboon,
or, as a late popular novelist might put it: In the morning of
life the industrious married the grotesque, and their offspring
was the human mind. This is only one of the many absurdities which follow in the wake of Darwinism. But we are
indebted to this intelligent creature, the ant, not only for his refutation of the evolution theory, but also for his having afforded
an argument opposed to the views of Dr Ferrier, and other
materialistic physiologists. If, as they assert, a brain of complex structure is necessary for the manifestation of intelligence,
how is it that the ant, with a simple ganglion, large only in
proportion to the development of the eyes, antenna?, &c., is so
much more intelligent, as Sir John Lubbock contends, than
the anthropoid ape ?

Professor Huxley in his address on " The rise and progress
of Paleontology," bandied the old arguments in favour of
evolution, without attempting a reply to the numerous objections
to it. The only inference we can draw from his persistent
reticence, is that he cannot answer them.

In the Zoological department, Miss Becker expressed her
displeasure that the meetings of the association had been
described as huge pic-nics. She evidently prefers sensational
addresses, like those of Dr Huxley's, which draw well, to sober
sensible discourses such as Mr. William Spottiswoode's. It is a
notorious fact that sensational lectures with a spice of wickedness
in them attract the largest audiences. We have no doubt that if
some one were to announce an address entitled " The existence
of a Deity disproved by the spectrum analysis," or something
equally impious or absurd, that the draw would be immense.
There is nothing like ad captandum atheistical rhetoric to
attract a thoughtless crowd.
