The Causes Of Insanity
=======================

83 Art. IX.?

The extent to which insanity prevails amongst civilised peoples,
and the rapidity with which its increase is registered, are serious
questions to occupy the attention of thinkers. On what is dependent the visible yearly multiplication of those to whom the
treatment of asylums is requisite ? What are the elements of
insanity? What are the causes that primarily excite it? It is
hardly to be expected, perhaps, that much in the way of reply
to these questions will be obtained from a study of pathological
changes in the organs chiefly affected. We shall learn but
little respecting that which drove A, B, and C to the shelter of
the madhouse by a study, howsoever closely conducted it may be,
of the brain and body of A, B, or C on the post-mortem table.
Such inquiries as this give us only the most valuable information as to structural changes brought about during the course
of the illness, and present a view of that which had occurred
in its progress. Nothing is revealed to tell why A, B, or C
became mad, rather than developed any other of the numerous
acute diseases capable of producing absolute decay and death of
the organism. Many there are who will not, probably ever,
resign the vain expectation of finding definite knowledge in the
evidences the dead subject may present?knowledge that will
guide him more or less surely to a discovery of that which first
initiated the lesions, of which he has the proof before him.
This objective mode of looking for what it is possible to gather
only by invoking the additional assistance afforded by retrospective inquiry, can hardly be expected to produce any very
considerable results. The facts of pathology are simply facts,
and the aid they render towards elucidating the conditions to
which they are due, will, so long as it is sought in them
alone, be of the most illusory description. We are unquestionably justified in assuming of any given case of mental
disease that three principal factors have been concerned in its
production, viz.: 1st, an exciting cause ; 2nd, a predisposition to
disease; and 3rd, inability, chiefly physical, partly psychical, to
make progress against the influences once brought to bear on the
organism. The researches of later years have done very much to
clear up the former obscurity which surrounded the history of
the two latter of the three essentials above stated; but, spite
of every effort, it remains still for anything more definite than
conjecture to be suggested concerning the exciting causes of
84 the causes of insanity.

insanity. In a paper by Dr George M. Beard, of New York,
in defence of a National Association for the Protection of the
Insane, a line of inquiry is pursued which, if persistently followed
by those who possess opportunities of investigating the questions
it opens up, may in time lead to the accumulation of really
invaluable information. Dr Beard boldly attacks the problem,
and indicates the direction whence enlightenment will come, in
the following cogent paragraph :?

"This augmentation of the numbers of the insane, and
development of novel symptoms and forms of insanity, are most
notably seen among the English-speaking people. Insanity is a
part of the cost of liberty ; it is a tax on our freedom, that so
many must be deprived of their freedom. In the great despotisms there is little need of societies for the protection of the
insane ; where the sane are all oppressed, the number of the insane
lias never been very great. The Czardom of Russia oppresses its
subjects, but does not make them crazy, and the Turks, with all
their weaknesses, are mostly sane. England, the spawning
ground of empires, sends out her children through all the earth,
carrying with them the seeds both of liberty and nervous
disease. Liberty implies responsibility; responsibility leads to
worry, and worry is attended always with disappointment. Out
of the throes and agonies and manipulations and calculations of
the last month, two men have been nominated for the supreme
office of this nation, to the disappointment of thousands upon
thousands of candidates, their followers and friends. A solid
despotism and established religion are partly redeemed by this?
that they keep the asylums empty ; if we think for ourselves
and govern ourselves, thousands must go down in the struggle.
Nature knows nothing of disinterested benevolence : she never
gives anything: she may often trust for a time, but sooner or
later we have got to pay, principal and interest. As a
philosopher has said, all progress is in waves?a motion without
any advance."

Civilisation, with the attendant excitement of life it entails
in those countries where continual changes mark the progress
of events, is in its effect more of a curse than a blessing. The
fault, however, is not in itself so much as in the feverish
anxiety, the unreasoning ambition, of those whose aspirations
are fostered by whatever alters the ordinary current of everyday occurrences. The tendency of the time is to stimulate
desires that had better been left unroused; the exigencies of
political situations, and of mercantile, necessitate the co-operation of a vast proportion of the community in measures that,
under a more subdued and less ambitious regime, would be an
object of concern only to those entrusted with the exciting
conduct of state affairs. Wide-reaching political schemes,
however, entail a national sympathy with ideas of a more
extended nature than such as are familiar to simpler-minded
nations. And, as is now very generally recognised, the character of a great people as a whole is visibly affected by the
kind and degree of the operations in which they are involved.
Greatness is of many kinds, moreover, and as each country
grows in wealth and in importance, so do the matters of
internal concern to it grow in complexity and in number. Its
government, religion, morals, educational code, &c. &c., all
become centres of fixed interest to more or fewer of the people
composing it; and, accordingly as these latter are more or less
absorbed in, and influenced by, the conditions affecting their
chosen objects of regard, so are they liable to succumb at any
moment of extraordinary pressure to influences reacting on
them for ill. In some the consequences take on the form of
physical disease; in many they exhibit themselves in the shape
of mental alienation; and when in the latter way, it is to be accepted as certain that there has been a preparatory weakening
of the organisation, in such wise as to admit the ready action of
disturbing causes sufficiently strong to destroy the harmonious
relations of health. These causes, their nature, influence,
initial and continued, need to be studied carefully and exhaustively to the end, that any real and reliable, useful knowledge
about exciting causes of insanity may be gathered ; generalisations in plenty have been made, and the rough outline of the
study has again and again been sketched. What is wanted
now is such an aggregation of facts as could be obtained, for
instance, by bringing together the histories, as fully as possible,
of every patient at present in confinement. From a cursory
examination even of the few that one has been able to learn
much about, it is all but certain that it will be possible by and
by, when evidence has vastly increased, to formulate a series of
expressions which shall have all the value of laws, and be
serviceable for the purpose of predicating the course, and
thereby suggesting the treatment, of any and every given case
of disease.

The " protection " of the insane has been taken as the
object with which an American Society has begun existence.
Its president is Dr H. B. Wilbur, and Dr Gr. M. Beard holds
the office of treasurer. As a first contribution to " protection "
it has issued a small work containing papers by Drs. Beard,
Shaw, and Seguin, in which the need for such an association
as the new club is demonstrated. The aims held in view by
the Society are fair and useful, judging from the following draft
of its constitution :

86 the causes of insanity.
" This Society shall be known as the National Association
for the Protection of the Insane and tiie Phevention of
Insanity.

"The methods by which the Society proposes to attain its
end are:
"First. By the encouragement of special and thorough
clinical and pathological observations by the medical profession
generally, as well as by those connected with asylums.
" Second. By enlightening public sentiment as to the
nature of the malady, the importance of early treatment, improved methods of management and treatment at home and
abroad.

" Third. By recommending an enlightened State policy,
which, while neglecting no one of its insane population, shall
so administer relief and protection as not to lay unnecessary or
undue burdens upon the tax-payers.

" Fourth. By holding public meetings, wherever needed, to
stimulate legislation that will secure efficient State supervision
of all public institutions for the care of the insane, as a mutual
safeguard for the protection of Society?the patients, as well as
those who have them in charge.

" Fifth. To further the perfection of laws relating to the
treatment of the insane, and their rights while patients in the
asylum.

" Sixth. By efforts to allay the public distrust in relation
to the management of insane asylums, by placing them on
the same footing as that of other hospitals, both in the matter
of freer communication with the outside world, and the privilege of a consulting medical staff of general practitioners."
If the intentions shadowed forth in this somewhat comprehensive scheme are at all efficiently carried out, there will accrue
a very considerable increase to the knowledge we possess respecting the causes of insanity. Of all the six methods suggested for developing the resources of the association the most
important, and that which will most probably be productive of
good, is the first: " Encouragement of thorough and special
.clinical and pathological observations." will bring to light a
good deal likely to explain the many incomprehensible facts
of lunacy ; and in the way of " protection " it is no doubt a
legitimate application of the redundant energy so apparent in
our Trans-Atlantic brethren. The association, however, is in
fault in omitting to include among its aims the further extension of its inquiries to those causes which are primarily
potent in the causation of the diseases it seeks to exert an
iniluence over. The examination of resulting conditions, of
actual results will not, we consider, lead beyond a certain limit
of discovery; they can do little or nothing to tell how and
why they have been developed rather than any other series of
changes consequent on the co-operation of the three essential
factors of disease ; and in the state of our present understanding
the first desire of every student of insanity is to know what
produced it.

It has been frequently pointed out that intense intellectual
labour is not a fertile agent in the production of insanity. The
most arduous and constant brain workers of every age have by no
means helped greatly to swell the ranks of the mentally unsound;
we may at any moment find in asylums a proportion of men of
exalted intellectual capacity, but they will as a rule be found to
be persons of intellectual habit rather than intellectual occupation; and though a few professional thinkers are scattered
among the lunatics of every country, they are always of a type
that is itself a tolerable explanation of their condition. For
example, highly educated and highly intellectual men who
engage in the worry and concern of mercantile pursuits, who
are subject from day to day to the exciting responsibilities of
vast commercial enterprises, are pre-eminently those whom we
expect to find, and do find, among the insane inmates of our
asylums. They are men of nervous, susceptible temperaments ;
men who have become exquisitely sensitive by education to the
influence of absorbing interests, and men too, who, relieved from
the cares incident to business life, had been capable of the
loftiest intellectual achievements. Such as these are the first
victims to fall before the exciting causes brought to bear on
them ; and though, fortunately, their number is not considerable,
they are the most instructive cases that present themselves.
Under other circumstances, living the life of one following the
inclinations natural to cultivated minds, these same patients
would certainly not have succumbed to the shock against which,
in the life they did lead, they were unable to stand. Naturally,
they would not have been affected, in different relations, by the
same associations of circumstances ; but this fact is a valuable
one to us in pursuing an inquiry into the connections of insanity.
It must be that the conditions of existence are eventually
chargeable with the initiation of nervous changes which result
at length in total mental disablement. The question, however,
is not thus easily settled.

There are to be considered, as having an appreciable share
in the total result, a complicated series of minor assisting
agencies that together materially affect it. The conditions of a
merchant's existence are very unlike the conditions of a
philosopher's, or even a statesman's life. There is surrounding the
one at all times a personal uncertainty of consequences that carries
with it interference with bodily processes eminently inj urious
to the general health. Digestion is imperfectly performed ; the
secretions are defective or vitiated, and as a necessary consequence the nervous system suffers at a time when the calls on
its special powers are constant and considerable. In this case
the exciting cause may with propriety be said to be either one
of two ; either that is, the inappropriate nature of the occupations engaged in, or the continued physical disturbance engendered through the occupation. The ultimate result is the same
whichever is considered; but the mode of arriving at it deductively will differ as one or the other is taken as a point to start
from. The detail of especial importance in this connection is,
that there is a definite and fixed agreement between certain
definable and marked conditions and their resulting consequences.
The exact nature of this relation, its kind and degrees, and its
susceptibility to influences brought to bear on it, together with
the particular nature of these influences themselves ; these are
the questions that present themselves, and to which answers
must be given ere we can hope to advance very much past the
point to which mental medicine has attained.

In honest desire to improve the condition of patients brought
to them, and anxious to relieve them as speedily as possible,
professional students of lunacy have directed themselves to the
task of cure without reflecting how much the success of remedial measures must depend on their adaptation to the condition they are invoked to aid, and that this must be immediately
dependent on the nature of the causes producing them. It is
always a somewhat thankless duty to peer backwards, but in this
instance it is imperative, and may well be expected to be
abundantly productive. The method of investigation would
afford excellent opportunities for the employment of members of
such an association as the new American guild for the protection of the insane. It will require for its successful prosecution
not only considerable patience, and some technical acquaintance
with the individual aspects of insanity, but also such a constant
intercommunication of those engaged on it as can only be
secured by association of numbers with a common object in
view. Single-handed endeavours will do a good deal in the way
that is here suggested, but of itself it cannot do all that is required to secure an exhaustive work.
