Intelligence Test Ratings and Trainability of Nurses
=====================================================

:Author:  J. L. Rosenstein
Assistant Director
The Herman E. Young Foundation for Research in Clinical Psychology
Indianapolis, Indiana
When in 1924 Herman H. Yonng1 made his comparison between
the intelligence test ratings of nurses and their success in training
at the Indiana University Training School for Nurses, he found
that:
1. On an average they rated 8 percentile points above the average for high school seniors.
2. All except one came from the upper ninety per cent of high
school seniors. Nearly two thirds of the nurses rated above the
average for high school seniors.
3. They rated 13 percentile points above the Indiana high school
senior girls who reported nursing to be their choice of life work.
4. On an average they rated 7 percentile points above the
average for Indiana teachers in training.
5. The average number of credit points earned by even the
lowest group of nurses was distinctly higher than the average for
the entire University.
6. The students rating highest on the Intelligence Test made
distinctly the highest average in both their theoretical studies and
their efficiency record on practical work.
7. There was no significant difference between the efficiency
records on practical work of the students who rated lowest and
those who rated average on the tests, neither was there much difference between these two groups in the number of credit points
earned in theoretical studies.
8. The intelligence tests results correlated higher with theoretical studies than with practical work.
The second study was undertaken as a sort of follow-up on the
first to see whether or not any significant changes had occurred in
i Young, Herman H. Intelligence Eatings and Success of Nurses in Training. J. of Appl. Psychol., 1924, 8, 377-389.
260

the type of individual who made up the personnel of the nurse's
training group. Young's study was made by comparing the Training School credits received with the intelligence test results of 101
students who were given the Indiana University Mental Survey
Test Schedule D as employed by W. F. Book,2 and as employed by
0. H. Williams 3 in his Indiana State Mental Survey of recruits
to the teaching profession.

Since the intelligence tests now in use have not reached such a
degree of perfection that their results may be used unqualifiedly as
indicators of the degree of intelligence or the quality of the number
of varied abilities which the members of a group possess, a study
must necessarily consist in comparisons of individuals within the
same group or of individuals in different groups having a common
point or basis of similarity.

In the present study nurses are compared with other nurses in
the same group as to scholastic ratings, efficiency, and intelligence
test results. Because all nurses in training must have a high school
education and since first year college students are of approximately
the same age it was decided to compare these nurses in training
with college students. The nurses are given the psychological examination after they have been in the training school about six
months.

In order to make comparisons more simple the groups of both
nurses and college students were divided into percentile groups
according to standards on the American Council of Education
Tests. Those percentiles are collected in groups of 10 so that an
individual whose rating places him among the 0-9th percentiles
is in a group of individuals which made lower records on the A.C.E.
Tests than 91 per cent of other college students. The 10-19th percentiles constitute a group containing individuals who did worse
than 81 per cent of those taking the tests and better than 9 per
cent of those tested. Thus at the 50th percentile we have two
groups; the one comprised of individuals who did better than and
the other worse than 50 per cent of all individuals taking the A.C.E.
Tests. In a general way the 50th percentile may be thought of as
the average.

Further on in this paper the writer will attempt to explain
what he considers a more efficient means of describing what he calls
2 Book, W. F. Intelligence of High School Seniors, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1922.
a Williams, O. H. A Mental Survey of the Kecruits to the Teaching Profession of a State, Dissertation for Doctor's Degree, Department of Psychology,
Indiana University, 1924.

"Nurse's Trainability" by expressing it in the form of a "Nurse's
Trainability Quotient.''

Because of various changes in the system of keeping records, it
was not possible to get all the records of all the nurses as the writer
would have liked, but a record of all school activities of 156 nurses
was obtained upon which to base a comparison with the college
students. There were 2358 college students of which 988 were
women and 1370 were men.

Comparison of Nurses and College Students in Intelligence Test
Ratings and Scholastic Credit Points Earned
The records made by the nurses and college students were
worked out in terms of the percentile scores made on the standard
A.C.E. Tests given students on entrance to college. Curve 1 on the
Chart shows the median or average group of college students (men
and women) with their test percentile rating compared to the number of scholastic credits obtained. Curve 2 gives the same results
for nurses.

In comparing these two charts one notes that the lowest percworld C,or"l  fAMbarudv*,?.b#y?? CumS
test Perc?*t//ts J test fczentilts
T-V.C?lle<)6 Hen a n* doum C.U. College Vi/om??
_ Qchofa-stic Credits. C vrvt Z Scholastic Omjits o ,r>^> A.
CoMpar?d rut*Xr>te///$?*Cf?   ... Compaq wiM rnfeffj?<?u . +
txst ferce 7it>/?s J ??tt perc<?tl/e* '
1-U- fJursts z-U- Collcji Mtn
<?|/0 /*[?> ^|30 5f|^?> ^|7? 77p? /?]"
Intelligence Test percentiles on A.C.E. test
Chart 1
8?
cr0
1
r-K.
3?

centile of nurses rates at least 1 full credit point (out of a possible
total of 3) above the average for college students. "Which means
at least 33% per cent scholastic superiority of this group of nurses
over the same group of college students as classified by the intelligence test percentile grouping. The highest scholastic score for
the upper percentile of nurses is .2 of a credit point above that of
the upper percentile for college students, showing a slight advantage again for the nurses group. In fact, at no point of the curve
does the college group reach the nurses group.

This same superiority seems to hold over the group of college
men (Curve 4) taken separately, but on comparing the nurses
group with college women only (Curve 3) we find the differences
in scholastic credits received not as marked as for the total group.
The upper levels of scholastic credits received are the same for
both groups and the superiority of nurses shows itself only in the
lower percentiles. Comparing Curves 1 and 2, it can be seen that
the lowest group of nurses on the Intelligence percentile rating
earned a distinctly higher scholastic rating than the average college
student. So that if a prophecy were to be made one could say that
the expectancy was that nurses in general would earn more and
higher credit points than college men and women in the same percentile group on the A.C.E. Test ratings.
Scholastic Record and Efficiency Record of Nurses
In Table I, we find that the earned scholastic credit median of
nurses is in the group 1.8 to 1.99; well above the actual credit

Table I
Credit Points Earned by Nurses and College Students
Credit Points Earned
0 - .19.
.20- .39.
.40- .59.
.60- .79.
.80- .99.
1.0 -1.19.
1.2 -1.39.
1.4 -1.59.
1.6 -1.79.
1.8 -1.99.
2.0 -2.19.
2.2 -2.39.
2.4 -2.59.
2.6 -2.79.
2.8- 2.99.
Efficiency in Practical
Work, I. U. Nurses
No. of Cases
0
0
1
1
3
7
13
14
24
24
34
17
12
3
3
Scholastic Work,
I. U. Nurses
No. of Cases
0
0
0
0
0
1
13
29
32
28
22
19
10
2
0
Scholastic Work,
College Students
No. of Cases
202
172
178
182
206
276
232
211
160
139
135
105
75
45
36

median of 1.4 to 1.59. There are 113 out of 156 nurses whose
scholastic record is above 1.59 with 14 lower than 1.4 and 29 at
median level.

A system of efficiency records on practical work has been introduced into the nurse's training school by Mrs. Ethel P. Clark, the
director. Every nurse while in training is rated by each of her
instructors and head nurses on personality, professional fitness,
good points, weak points. A three point system is employed in the
personality and professional fitness factors. The various factors
rated are given below.
1. Professional Fitness
2. Personality Ratings
3. Good Points
4. Weak Points
Takes Criticism
Loyal
Economical of Materials
Reliable
Interest in Work
Memory
Economical of Time
Conscientious of Details
Punctual
Power of Observation
Neat Worker
Initiative
Rapid Worker
Truthful
Sense of Humor
Courteous
Industrious
Dignified
Even Tempered
Enthusiastic
Adaptable
Tactful
Sympathetic
Personal Appearance
Resourceful
Intelligence
Good Health
Cheerfulness
Address
Culture
Executive Ability
Interest in People
Good Technical Work
Professional Attitude
Wins Cooperation
Stimulating to Associates
Poor Health
Talks too much
Lack of Interest'
Lack of Promptness
Diffident
Languidness
Questions Authority
Grumbles
Antagonizes People
Nervousness
Poor Technical Work
Immature
Self Centered
Aggressiveness
Insincerity

Each instructor or head nurse rates the students on all of these
factors by indicating whether they possess them in a high degree,
fair degree or weak degree. Since the student nurse is on a constantly rotating service, after a couple of years she has a rating on
every one of the above factors for every service on which she has
worked. These ratings therefore furnish a reliable index of the
student's success in practical work and provide the best available
basis for determining a student nurse's probable success in the field
of nursing after graduation.

In Table I, we find the efficiency record median or average to be
just exactly the same as that of the scholastic record median, namely
1.8 to 1.99. There were 117 nurses out of 156 receiving credit
higher than 1.59 and 25 receiving lower than 1.40 with 14 at median
level 1.4 to 1.59.

A comparison of the scholastic and efficiency records actually
shows that only three students cause the difference between identical figures in the scholastic median and efficiency median.
Comparison of Psychological Test and Nursing Records
On comparing the psychological test record with that of the
efficiency record, we find little of any significance. Those students
in the lowest percentile group in the psychological test had practically the same credit rating as those in the highest percentile;
there being a difference of only .4 of a credit point between the
0-9 percentile group and the 90-99 percentile group.
This seems to indicate that the paper and pencil test, through
some lack in its make-up, cannot be used as a means of predicting
qualitative results in the practical field of nursing. However, the
students earning the highest grades on intelligence tests were in
the higher groups of the efficiency records on practical work.
A much better result seems to be obtained by comparing the
psychological test results with theoretical class records (Curve 2).
Here we see a persistent and consistent increase in the number of
credit points received with an increase in intelligence test percentile
rating. This was also shown to be the case in the study of Young.
Students are dropped from the Training School rolls for various reasons; such as, poor scholarship, inefficiency, discipline and
personality defects. Of those individuals who were dropped from
the Training School for scholastic reasons, 50 per cent were below
the 25th percentile on the psychological test ratings, and 75 per
cent were below the 50th percentile of the psychological test
ratings, showing a high degree of correlation between low scholastic
ratings and low psychological test results.

Comparison of Scholastic Credits of College Students and Nurses
In Table I we note comparisons of scholastic credits of both the
college students and nurses in training. The median or average
for the college student lies between 1.19 and 1.2 credit points and
for the nurse's group between 1.8 and 1.99, a superiority of nurses
over college students of .79 credit point out of a possible total of 3.

The Nurse's Trainability Quotient
---------------------------------

At the Nurse's Training School of Indiana University a credit
point system is used in grading the quality of work done by a
student. Thus a three point system is used with 3 as the highest
grade a student may receive. In the Nurse's Training School there
are two divisions to the student's work, viz., Theoretical Class
Work and Efficiency in Practical Work. Thus a true summation
of a student's work must necessarily entail some combination and
correlation of both the efficiency record on practical work and
record in theoretical studies. To date this has been expressed individually in some such way as: Efficiency Record on Practical Work
?2.4: Theoretical Studies?2.3.

The writer has felt that a better and more efficient means of expressing these records would be welcome, and so has developed the
"Nurse's Trainability Quotient" as a device for such a purpose.
The greatest number of credit points a nurse may earn in her
studies is six, three in theoretical and three in practical studies.
Thus, if she makes a total in both theoretical and practical studies
of three, she is only 50 per cent efficient. If she should make a
total of six she would be 100 per cent efficient. The writer feels
that it would be more desirable to express scholastic standings in
theoretical and practical work in these percentage ratings. The
ratio between the nurse's possible 100 per cent efficiency and her
actual efficiency is called her "Trainability" and is expressed therefore in per cent as "Trainability Per Cent" or in an abstract number as her "Trainability Quotient."
For example: A student earns 2.1 credit points on her efficiency
record for practical work and 1.8 credit points on theoretical
studies; then
"'1 X 100 = 65 = Trainability Quotient.

b
Therefore, 65 equals T.Q. or 65 equals Trainability Per Cent.
The formula would be:
Theoretical Grades -f- Efficiency Grades ^ ^ ^
Thus all records made in efficiency on practical work and theoretical studies could be summarized in the T.Q. and expressed in
an easily understood per cent. This T.Q. idea is felt to be of such
value that another study has been begun to correlate the scholastic
results with intelligence test results on the basis of T.Q.'s.

Summary
-----------

The Indiana University Training School employs a probationary
period of six months in the selection of its students. Students who
do not qualify during this period are dropped from the rolls. All
comparisons in this paper are, therefore, based upon intelligence
test scores of the highly selected group by reason of survival of a
process of selection in completing a high school course; a process of
selection by personal interview and physical examination before
admission to the training school and the selective process of a period
of probation at the training school.

1. The lowest percentile group of nurses in training on the InINTELLIGENCE TEST RATINGS OF NURSES 267
telligence Test rates at least one full credit point above the average
for the University students.

2. This group shows superiority in scholastic efficiency of at
least 33V3 per cent over college students of the same group as classified by Intelligence Tests scores.
3. The lowest group of nurses on the Intelligence percentile
rating earned distinctly higher scholastic ratings than the average
college student.
4. The highest score for nurses is .2 of a credit point above that
of the highest score for college students, indicating a superiority
throughout the entire group.
5. At no point in the scoring does the college group come up
to the nurses' group.
6. The difference between college women and the nurses' group
is not as marked as the difference between the nurses' group and
the men's group, or the nurse's group and the total University
group.
7. The median for average grades for efficiency in practical work
is exactly equal to the median for grades received in theoretical
work.
This study indicates that the A.C.E. Tests as given at the Indiana University and Indiana University Training Schools for Nurses
are of definite value. In the course of an hour it so distributed the
members of the group that in checking up the following facts were
apparent:

1. The students rating highest on the Intelligence Test received
the highest averages in both theoretical and practical studies.
2. Nurses in general earn more and higher credit points than
college men and women in the same percentile group on the A.C.E.

Intelligence Test ratings.

3. The records on A.C.E. Tests are of little value in predicting
efficiency records in practical work.
4. The credit points earned on theoretical work vary directly
and consistently with rating on the intelligence test.
5. Fifty per cent of those individuals dropped from the Nurse's
Training School for scholastic reasons were below the 25th percentile on the Intelligence Test ratings and 75 per cent were below
the 50th percentile on the Intelligence Test rating.
6. The type of individual making up the group of students in
the Nurse's Training School has apparently changed very little since
the previous study, maintaining both its high scholastic average and
its superiority over college men and women.
