Economy and Technique of Learning
==================================

:Author:  William F. Book. Boston: D. C. Heath and Co. 1932. Pp. x + 534, $2.00.
This book is a thorough and effective presentation of the various phases
of the learning process from the point of view of education. "The book is
intended primarily to serve as a text for teacher-training courses in colleges
and in schools or departments of education."

The five divisions of the book indicate its scope. They are: (1) General
Nature of the Learning Process, (2) When and Why Learning Occurs, (3)
How Learning Takes Place, (4) Levels on Which Learning May Take Place
and (5) How to Make Learning Most Economical and Efficient.
The author recognizes six elements in the learning process: A, The
strengthening of old S E linkages; B, The elimination or weakening of
old S E linkages; C, The establishment of new habits by the action of
conditioning stimuli; D, The linking of a variety of familiar responses to
the same stimulus-situation; E, Originating new adaptive responses and linking them to an old problem-situation; F, Originating new adaptive responses
and linking them to a new problem-situation.

Six levels of learning are stressed: "(1) racial learning, or evolution,
(2) learning on the purely physiological, or chemical, level, (3) learning on
the conditioning, or purely sensory-motor, level, (4) learning on the perceptual, or observational, level, (5) learning on the representative, or ideational, level and (6) learning how to learn."
In the treatment of economical learning, individual differences, fatigue,
and transfer of training are stressed.

From the point of view of the experimental psychology of the learning
process, the book claims and attains no thoroughness. The educational point
of view leads to an omission of much experimental data and to an abbreviated
presentation of some of the rest. Such classical names in the field of learning
as Ebbinghaus and G. E. Miiller are not mentioned. The work of Bryan and
Harter is given as " the first scientific study of the learning process."
The author's viewpoint seems to be eclectic. He has, however, stuck
fairly closely to the work of such men as Thorndike, McDougall and Watson.
He speaks of the transfer of identical elements, of drainage and of conditioning. He mentions the newer Gestalt approach but seems largely to have
failed to comprehend its dynamic functionalism. To this reviewer the viewpoint seemed too mechanical.
Win slow N. Hallett
Cedar Crest College
