Predicting Musical Progress? A Technique for Guidance
=======================================================

:Author:  Hazel M. Stanton

Director, Musical Talent Service, Psychological Service Center of New York
During a period of twelve years in a university music school,
the writer studied the achievement of some thousand or more high
school graduates who came to the music school from all parts of
the country to begin the four-year courses leading to the bachelor
of music degree or a certificate. Their courses included practical
music, theoretical music, and academic subjects. Most of these
students were inspired with the highest ambitions, and many of
them aspired to be no less than concert artists. To accomplish
the four-year program leading to a bachelor of music degree was
a difficult task for many of them even when curricular standards
were low and poorly integrated.

Later in the development of this music school the curricular
organization was greatly improved and it was possible for the first
time to study the achievement of these students on a long time
basis. Even with more care in the selection of music students
many of them dropped by the wayside and failed to carry out the
program they attempted. If one could select the students who
could successfully complete the courses, thereby predicting musical
progress, one could direct them happily on their way and at the
same time put up the warning signals for those who could not
successfully meet the requirements of a broad musical education.
This prediction the writer attempted eight years ago and as a result
the cumulative key for the prognosis of musical achievement1 is
now organized, validated and ready to be used.

This article will consider, first, the main points of the development of the cumulative key, and second, the various angles from
which the key has been validated.

Developing the Cumulative Key. The entrance program for
music degree students included seven tests?six musical capacity
tests and a comprehension test?also a questionnaire covering such
1 See No. 6 in the Bibliography of articles by the writer at the end of
this article.
usical factors as training, education, environment, expression,
interests, et cetera. From the tests each student was given a letter
classification for his musical talent profile of six Seashore Measures
of Musical Talent and another letter classification for a comprehension test. These letter classifications, expressed in terms of a
six letter scale of E, D, C?, C+, B, A, with A the highest, gave
each student a test combination of two letters such as A, A or B,
C-f- or C?, A, et cetera, as you observe in the Cumulative Key,
Table 1. The first letter refers to the musical talent profile and the
second refers to the comprehension test.

Table 1
Cumulative Key for the Prognosis of Musical Achievement
N = 978
Discouraged
Doubtful
Possible
Probable
Safe
C+,E
C-,C+
C-, cC-, D
C-, E
B, E
C+, CC+.D
C-, A
C-, B
A, E
B, CB, D
C+, A
C+, B
C+, C+
A, CA, D
B, B
B,C+
A, A
A, B
A, C+
B, A

The five-fold classification of Safe, Probable, Possible, Doubtful
and Discouraged was derived in this way. The ratings, marks
and test scores received by several hundred music degree students
for first semester work were tabulated for observation. These students were then classified on the basis of these data into the five
groups of Safe, et cetera, referred to above. By such classification
one student was predicted as Safe for the course, another as Probable, another Possible, or Doubtful, or should be Discouraged.
The frequencies of test combinations for students thus classified determined the location of each possible test combination under
the five-fold groups in the key. For example, since the majority
of A, A students had been designated as Safe for the course on
the basis of their first semester accomplishment, the A, A test combination was placed under Safe. Likewise, the B, C-f combination was located under Probable, the C+, B under Possible, and
the C?, C+ under Discouraged, et cetera. This key has been
stabilized with approximately a thousand entering music degree
students who have been classified each successive year on the basis
of first semester achievement.

Validating the Cumulative Key. Now the question is, to what
extent does the key actually differentiate the groups as predicted?
This question is answered for several groups of university music
degree students from eight points of view, viz., the annual academic survivors; dismissals; scholarships and honors; participation in student recitals; ratio of hours to points earned for credit;
representative talent profiles; range of median scores in each of
seven tests; and percentages of students graduated from each group.
These eight points of view are considered for one entering class of
164 students, including all five classified groups; for three successive entering classes in which the highest (Safe) and lowest
(Doubtful-Discouraged, combined) were studied, a total of 83
Safe and 90 D.D. students; and for four successive entering classes,
total 565 students.

Considering the five differential groups in the class of 164
students, we see in Table 2, first, that the annual academic survivors decrease, of course, for each of the five groups but the

Table 2
Validation of the Cumulative Key for Predicting Musical Progress
Validation Factors
Expressed in
Percentages
Five-fold Classification
Discouraged
Doubtful
Possible
Probable
Safe
1. N = 164
Annual Continuity
1st year
2d year
3d year
4th year
2. N = 164
Dismissals over 3 Years...
3. N = 164
Scholarships and Honors. .
4. JV = 164
Students Appearing in Recitals over 3 Years
5. N = 122
Class of Highest Talent...
6. N = 135
Class of Lowest Talent
7. N = 565 Entrants
Four Successive Classes
Graduates in Each Group
100.0
18.1
0
0
63.6
0
18.1
0
11.9
17.0
100.0
57.1
42.8
19.1
52.4
0
23.8
9.9
16.3
23.0
100.0
65.1
52.3
39.5
17.5
19.0
33.0
29.5
29.6
33.0
100.0
67.5
50.0
37.5
14.6
17.0
43.9
26.2
27.4
42.0
100.0
89.6
72.4
55.1
3.5
42.8
57.1
34.4
14.8
60.0

percentages of decrease are much greater for the Discouraged than
for the Safe group. In the fourth or last year none of the Discouraged group remained while 54 per cent of the Safe group remained. Second, over a three-year period 64 per cent of the Discouraged group had been dismissed as compared with less than 4
per cent of the Safe group. Third, none of the lowest group received scholarships or honors, but 43 per cent of the highest group
held scholarships or received honors. Fourth, the percentages of
students appearing in student recitals increased steadily from the
lowest to the highest group.

Turning now to the 83 Safe students and the 90 D.D. students
from three entering classes, we find a similar picture for each of
the validation factors as shown in Table 3. A significant contrast
is seen between the two extreme groups in all the items mentioned
Table 3

Validation of the Cumulative Key for Predicting Musical Progress
Validation
Factors _
Expressed in
Percentages
1. Annual Continuity
1st year....
2d year
3d year
4th year....
2. Dismissals
3. Scholarships
and Honors
4. Students Appearing in
Recitals
1st year....
2d year
3d year
5. Ratio of
Hours to
Points for
Credit
Theoretical
Music....
Practical
Music
Academic
Subjects..
Lowest and Highest Groups of the Five-fold Classification
The D.D.
Group
N = 90
100.0
44.4
24.2
12.5
46.6
7.7
12.2
34.4
11.1
0.86
1.34
1.29
The Safe
Group
N = 83
100.0
78.3
60.3
53.5
2.4
43.3
32.5
41.0
45.0
1.86
1.69
1.65
Validation
Factors
continued
6. Individual
Talent Profiles
7. Range of
Median Scores
in 7 tests
Pitch
Intensity
Time
Consonance.
Tonal Memory
Rhythm
Comprehen8. Graduates
from
102 D.D..
125 Safe .
The D.D.
Group
continued
All C- or
C+ (average)
C- (45)
D (29)
D (20)
C+ (51)
C+ (62)
C+ (53)
D (27)
20.0
The Safe
Group
continued
All B or A
(highest 30
per cent)
B (87)
A (92)
B (83)
A (97)
A (96)
A (94)
A (95)
60.0

in Table 2 and in the additional items of ratio of hours to points,
individual talent profiles and range of median scores in each of the
seven tests. The Safe group is not only the highest in all these
validation points of view and the D.D. group the lowest, but each
of the five differential groups fall in line in proportion to their
differentiation.

Finally, graduation data tell a story no less significant, especially in the light of the fact that one waited eight years for this
information since it took that time for four successive entering
classes of 565 students, to complete the courses necessary for
graduation. In these four successive entering classes, the class of
lowest talent had 12 per cent of its students in the Discouraged
group and only 15 per cent in the Safe group; and the class of
highest talent had no students in the Discouraged group and 34
per cent in the Safe group. From the class of lowest talent, only
34 per cent of the students were graduated in four years. From
the class of highest talent, 57 per cent of its students were graduated in four years. It is noteworthy to mention that this class of
highest talent began in 1928, so that it carried through three years
of the depression with this highest per cent of graduation of all
four classes.

For four successive classes combined of 565 students of which
125 are Safe students, 143 Probable, 195 Possible, 73 Doubtful,
and 29 Discouraged, it was found that 60 per cent of the Safe
students were graduated in 4 years, 42 per cent of the Probable,
33 per cent of the Possible, 23 per cent of the Doubtful, and only
17 per cent of the Discouraged were graduated. Note how the
percentages decrease in proportionate steps from the highest group
to the lowest. If about eighty per cent of the lowest groups fall by
the wayside, the advisability of admitting these students is questionable, particularly with the present precarious condition of the
music market. These students plan to make some form of music
their vocation, they have reached the average age of 18 years wheo
they begin their four-year music courses. To discontinue for various reasons at any time from one semester to three years means that
they must, if they do not drop out of college entirely, start some
other college program at the same time experiencing an inevitable
set-back. The only excuse a university music school can have f?r
admitting the lowest groups to certificate or degree courses is
maintain its enrollment of students. There can be little or no conPREDICTING MUSICAL PROGRESS 275
sideration for the welfare of the students. The students in the
lowest groups are poor risks for a music degree, for themselves as
well as for the music schools; they should know these facts and
not be deceived. For many of them music should be only an
avocation.

It is to help remedy this situation that the cumulative key has
been developed. When a student knows his own classification he
has a definite psychological aid to help him decide his future concentration in music. Such knowledge can serve in preventing the
disappointment of failure and at the same time stimulate the
talented.

This cumulative key stabilized from about a thousand students
and validated from some seven or eight points of view for various
classes, single and combined, over an eight year period, is now
ready to be used as a valuable psychological aid in predicting
musical progress. Since classification into the five differential
groups can be made for all students in music schools and college
music departments, the use of the key can also serve as a comparable basis for a survey of musical talent, or to give an index of
the annual status of the musical talent in a school, college or university.
Bibliography of Various Articles by the Writer on Similar Subjects
1. The inheritance of specific musical capacities. Psychol. Monog., 1922, 31,
157-204. Carnegie Instit. Wash., Eug. Eec. Off., Bull. No. 22.
2. An experimental investigation of musical inheritance. Eugenics, Genetics
and the Family, 1923, 1, 239-242; Plate 6. Heredity of Musical Ability.
3. Psychological tests of musical talent. Rochester, N. Y.: The University
of Rochester, 1925. Pp. 48.
4. Measuring musical talent. Seashore tests as administrative aids. Person.
J., 1928, 7, 286-292.
5. Seashore Measures of Musical Talent. Psychol. Monog., 1928, 39, 135-144.
6. Prognosis of musical achievement. Rochester, N. Y.: The University of
Rochester, 1929. Pp. 89.
7. Psychological tests?a factor in admission to the Eastman School of
Music. School Soc., 1929, 30, 889-891.
8. (In collaboration with Koertli, Wilhelmine) Musical capacity measures of
adults repeated after music education. Univ. Iowa Stud., Ser. Aims
Prog. Res., 1930, No. 31. Pp. 18.
9. Research in music: looking forward thirty years. Univ. Iowa Stud. Ser
Aims Prog. Bes., 1931, No. 33, 136-138.
10. (In collaboration with Koerth, Wilhelmine) Musical capacity measures of
children repeated after musical training. Univ. Iowa Stud., Ser. Aims
Prog. Res., 1933, No. 42. Pp. 48.
11. Quantitative yard-stick for the measurement of musical capacities. Eugen.
News, 1933, 18, 78-81.
12. Testing the cumulative key for prognosis of musical achievement. J. Educ
Psychol., 1934, 25, 45-53.
13. Employment conditions in music. Person. J., 1934, 12, No. 5. Pp. 288.
14. Stability of the Seashore Measures of Musical Talent as shown by retests.
Third Internat'l Congress of Eugenics, 1932. A Decade of Progress
in Eugenics. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1934, 54-G6.
