How to Use Your Mind
=====================

REVIEWS AND CRITICISM.

:Author:  Harry D. Kitson, Ph.D. Philadelphia and Lonaon: ine n. j^ippmcoic company, lyio. rp. 210.
Modern behavioristic psychology has been defined as the study of the habits
of man and other animals. There is nothing new in the recognition of habit as
a controlling force in man's destiny but there is not much that is newer in science
than the employment of method in the investigation of the laws of habit. Very
new indeed is the application of these laws by the student to increase his ability.
Dr Kitson, who is instructor in psychology at the University of Chicago,
prepared a series of lectures for his course entitled "Methods of Study." These
lectures he has made into an absorbingly interesting book. Written particularly
for freshmen and high school students, it is adapted to give the man entering college a vigorous start toward the baccalaureate. It is the common experience of college teachers that their students do not know how to use their minds.
It is no less the common and unfortunate experience of students to pass through
college without finding a teacher who can show them how to use their minds.
This Dr Kitson's book can do, if only the reader has already mind enough to
grasp and act upon it. Not that he must be a freshman. Men and women who
have taken a college degree may find that it is not too late to make over some of
their intellectual habits. Brain workers in business and industry who are seeking
mental efficiency outside of college, will find the book a safe and ardent guide.
Dr Kitson's power of suggestion is as great as his scholarship is sound, and
his English is equal to both.
A. T.
