Experimenting with Children Under the Gary Plan in New York City
=================================================================

:Author: William E Grady,
Public School No. 64, Manhattan, N. Y.

To say that New York City has been experimenting with the
Gary plan of school organization during the past year probably
suggests "carrying coals to Newcastle" or in current terms "carrying
steel to Gary." The net outcome of the employment of Superintendent Wirt by the Board of Education during the school year just
closed, has been an increased interest in school matters by the parents
at large because of the propaganda carried on in different newspapers,
an incomplete demonstration of the work, study, and play program
in two schools,?P. S. No. 45, located in the Borough of the Bronx, and
P. S. No. 89 in the Borough of Brooklyn,?together with a paper organization for a group of additional schools in the Bronx, several of which
have recently begun to operate although with inadequate equipment.
In order that the schools thus organized may have the benefit of
Superintendent Wirt's personal supervision, he has been re-engaged
for the current year, not by the Board of Education but by the Board
of Estimate and Apportionment, which claims to see in the plan a
means of effecting certain economies.

Disregarding certain political aspects of the controversy due to
the attempt of the city administration to arrogate to itself a control
over educational policy for which there is no warrant either in the
statute law or the legal decisions of the state, a brief survey of the
situation and a statement of the mooted points in the plan may be of
passing interest.

As the records of Bluffton, Indiana, show no novel features of
school administration other than a short lived attempt to lengthen
the school year, it may be assumed that Superintendent Wirt developed his theory of duplicate school organization after his appointment in Gary, Indiana, that unique town created in 1906 by the decree
of the United States Steel Corporation at a cost of $75,000,000.
During the past ten years there has been developed in three of the
nine schools in Gary (the Emerson, the Froebel, and the Jefferson),
a type of organization which has aroused curiosity, commendation, and
condemnation because of such features as
(a) Enriched equipment, including shops, playgrounds, auditoriums, studios, swimming pools.
(19)
(6) An alternating or duplicate school program permitting, and
in fact necessitating, the accommodation of two schools of a twelve
years' span in one building.
(c) A type of program which in terms of time and subject distribution enables the pupils to attend school at such times as will best
conserve the co-ordination of the school and related social agencies
such as the home, the church, the library and private teacher.
id) An alleged reduction of cost in equipment and maintenance
insuring a twelve months' school year, a longer school day, prevocational and vocational training and a co-ordination of social agencies
at a cost either equal to or less than the current cost in well organized
school systems of admitted efficiency.

As a result of a cursory inspection of the Gary schools by the
Mayor and the President of the Board of Education of this city in
June, 1914, Superintendent Wirt was employed to advise concerning
the feasibility of securing pre vocational training for all pupils by means
of a wider use of school facilities. After considerable vexatious delay,
Superintendent Wirt was assigned to reorganize two schools already
mentioned in which the congestion tended to make advisable a
duplicate organization such as is essential to the operation of the
Gary Plan. To date both these demonstration schools are inadequately equipped to permit a real demonstration of the so-called work,
play, and study program. Moreover the group of twelve schools
in the Bronx, several of which have just begun to operate under the
program, have not yet been completely equipped with the very
limited additional play space, auditoriums and shop equipment
which Superintendent Wirt has planned.

What then shall be claimed for the experiment to date?
The consensus of professional opinion is that the alleged economies and the pedagogical merits of the plan are still open to serious
question. For example, a committee of the Teachers' Council
representative of all the teachers in the city and a Committee of
Principals representing the principals of the city both reported that
in view of the incomplete character of the experiment, it would be
inadvisable to attempt either to pass final judgment on the plan or to
make the so-called demonstration the basis of a claim for an extension
of the scheme. While a real contribution to duplicate school organization, the Gary Plan has yet to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
professional educators its stability, economy, and effectiveness when
subjected to the exaction of conditions as they exist in New York
City.

The instability of the plan is such that many are seriously perplexed as to just what are its basic administrative features. Thus in
Superintendent Wirt's report to the Board of Education of July,
1915, and in a public address delivered in June of that year, Superintendent Wirt advocated a teacher for each class in the school
organization; two principals in each duplicate school; 120 square
feet of play space per pupil; co-ordination of school and church by
means of a certain method of programming the school day; and
prevocational training through maintenance work done in connection
with the school plants. More recently he estimated that the city
system could be reorganized on the basis of his program in six month's
time at a maximum cost of $6,000,000.

At the present time he either specifically recommends or his
practice and plans conform to the following: He saves 10 per cent of
the number of teachers hitherto employed; asks for one principal in
each duplicate school organization even though that be in excess of
3000 children; plans for only 40 square feet of play space per pupil;
states that the co-ordination of school and church is unessential and
possibly inadvisable; and provides industrial training but does not
limit it either in amount or method to the opportunities such as a
maintenance plan can afford. Although the Board of Superintendants
has not yet submitted a final report on the problem of the cost of the
re-organization of schools in congested districts on the work, study
and play program, it is stated on good authority that the estimated
cost of such changes will be $15,000,000.

Such kaleidoscopic changes in the fundamental aspects of the
scheme, recommended by certain zealous advocates as a panacea for
school ills and recommended even by the Mayor and the Controller
as a basis for the re-organization of the entire New York school system,
make the judicial reflect on the possibility of the irreparable damage
that may be done through a chaotic reconstruction based on a relatively novel plan of school organization that is as yet untried in a
school system of any city with a population of 300,000 inhabitants.
Open to serious dispute are the economies alleged to be possible
under the Gary plan. No sane person will hold that economy is out
of place in school management. If, however, economy means placing
the dollar above the needs of the children, educators who fail to enter
a vigorous protest are recreant to their duty. It is important to
examine the economies which are said to be possible. These are?
1. Two schools may be housed in one building. Apparently this
saves part of the cost of an additional site and building and results
in a decrease in the cost of maintenance.

2. The duplicate school organization may be administered on
the basis of the "Model 72 Class Program" which requires but one
principal and permits a 10 per cent reduction in the teaching staff.
This reduction is macle possible by massing pupils under a limited
number of teachers in the auditorium and the playground, by distributing class units as monitors, as teacher assistants, or as pupil
helpers in the shops and laboratories and by sending classes, for part
of the school day, to various neighborhood agencies.

3. The school equipment may be maintained in proper repair
through the joint labor of the shop teacher, and pupil assistants.
By this device the salary of the instructor is offset by his productive
work and is therefore not a salary charge but a charge against the
fund for the maintenance of building and equipment.

4. The school day is lengthened one hour or 20 per cent without
additional cost and with a reduction in the number of teachers.
5. Such agents as truant officers and home visitors may be
dispensed with and the work of investigating truancy and unsatisfactory conditions affecting pupils' welfare can be assigned to teachers.
It is aside from my purpose to argue the converse of these propositions at any length, but I will suggest the following facts:
1. Superintendent Spaudling of Minneapolis found, despite the
low wage given to both teachers and principals, despite the maintenance plan of industrial training and the various other devices already
enumerated, that the per capita cost of schooling in Gary as the
schools were being operated at the time of his visit was 38 per cent
higher than in his own system.

2. According to Superintendent Wirt's frank admission the
"Model 72 Class Program" is the fruit of fifty earlier programs originated during the past ten years. The acceptance of it involves
features, which although apparently economical may be expensive
indeed if interpreted in terms of child life. Up to the time the program was presented Superintendent Wirt had very limited experience
with a type of unit school large enough to permit the use of a "72
Class Program " and the reduction in the number of principals, teachers,
and accommodations are based on theory rather than practice.
Furthermore, part of the plan calls for the vacation of 200 old buildings
and the resultant introduction of duplicate schools in organizations
already too large. Such radicalism suggests that due consideration
be given to Professor McMurry's recommendation in the "Report
of the Committee on School Inquiry" that the present tendency to
increase the size of schools should be checked and a desirable size
should be agreed upon for the future, possibly not exceeding approximately thirty teachers. Superintendent Wirt himself admits "that
cities can finance adequate work, study and play programs, only when
all the facilities of the community for the work, study and play of the
child are properly co-ordinated with the school." He admits moreEXPERIMENTING WITH CHILDREN. 23
over that since the independent social agencies represented by the
libraries, churches, and settlement houses are not yet co-ordinated with
the school, all classes programmed for out of school periods must
necessarily be accommodated by the school itself even though an
increase in cost is thus involved.

3. None of the schools re-organized by Superintendent Wirt
are making any serious attempt to apply the maintenance scheme so
as to provide prevocational training and at the same time keep the
school in proper condition. In all cases the salary of the shop
instructor is a charge against the general salary fund.

4. In the schools in which the operation of the longer school day
has been observed, it is obvious that the time lost through departmental changes within and without the building more than offset the
additional hour. Moreover the additional hour is practically on an
optional basis and when the facilities are not ample or do not meet
with the approval of the parents in the neighborhood, the retention
of the children at home has led to a reduction rather than a lengthening of the school day.
5. The substitution of the teacher for the trained social worker,
either truant officer or home visitor, is in keeping with other suggestions whose value has never been proved.
Many of the educational features of the Gary plan are either
novelties in elementary education whose value is unknown or features
concerning the value of which school men are in serious doubt. The
proposed innovations to which most serious objection has been raised
are the following:

1. The constant use throughout the school day of all parts of
the equipment such as gymnasium, swimming pool, auditorium.
However desirable it may be to have these facilities it does not
necessarily follow that it is best for the pupils to use them
at all hours of the day. For example: the assignment of a first grade
class of six year old children whose day begins at 8:30 to the playground for the first period and to the auditorium for the second period
would seem to be emphasizing the use of the equipment at the
expense of the real needs, mental and physiological, of the child.
2. The departmental plan of teaching for all grades, involving
approximately forty minute changes of teachers, room, and subject
matter for all pupils including the little tots of the lowest grades, in a
school day extending from 8:30 to 3:50. Extended experience in the
schools of this city with a departmentalized scheme of instruction
limited to the mature pupils of the 7th and 8th school years has not
led to a general adoption of the plan because of such generally
recognized limitations as lessened disciplinary control, lack of personal
influence and overemphasis on instruction in subject matter at the
expense of those finer influences that really constitute the art of
teaching.

3. The assignment of pupils for extended daily periods as monitors in halls, auditoriums, and classrooms in order to effect certain
economies in the teaching force. May it not be argued that the value
of such assignments as contrasted with intensive instruction under
a skilled sympathetic teacher is certainly a matter open to debate.
4. The promiscuous grouping of younger and older children who
work in auditorium, laboratories, and shops in spite of the obvious
difficulties of securing seats capable of accommodating both a first
grade child and an eighth grade child, and the desirability of having
homogeneous pupil groups to insure economy in the instruction
process.

5. The paternalistic scheme of extending the school day of all
children young and old from 8:30 to 3:50 and compelling the pupils
of the so-called second or Y school to do intensive mental work late
in the forenoon and late in the afternoon. The crux of the duplicate
school problem is the Y school which must be proven to be the equal
or superior of the ordinary well equipped single type of school. If
all our experience shows that the best time for doing intensive mental
work is not only between the hours of 9:00 and 3:00 but also the best
time within these limits is the early morning and the early afternoon:
mental work late in the morning and late in the afternoon is at a
disadvantage. Again, any duplicate school organization based on the
slogan that "Each parent can have the kind of school he wants"
conceals the specious assumption that 50 per cent of the parents
will choose the Y school, a choice hardly possible as soon as they become
aware of the limitations of the Y program.

6. The device of dividing the school year into semesters during
which special subjects are taught for a third of the year and then
dropped for the remainder of the year, is a novelty in elementary
education, the value of which has yet to be proven.

7. The substitution of outside activities in the home, church,
studies of private teachers, social centers and libraries as equivalent
to regular school activities, although such agencies are beyond the
control of educational authorities.

8. The substitution of casual, unorganized shop instruction
based on the maintenance theory for the type of organized, sequential
instruction given to mature children in the vocational and prevocational schools throughout the country, in most of which productive
work is done, but in which the doing of jobs is incidental to the
instruction and training of pupil workers.

Despite the fact that the consensus of opinion is that sufficient
time has not elapsed to permit a proper evaluation of the work in
the two schools that Superintendent Wirt organized, City Superintendent Maxwell assisted by his chief statistician, Mr. Burdette
Buckingham, conducted tests in March and in June, 1915, which
included the two schools administered on the Gary plan and a group
of so-called control schools organized in the ordinary way. The
examinations were in fundamental subjects: arithmetic, spelling,
English, grammar, geography, and history, and were intended to test
the increment of progress made by the pupils between the dates
indicated. The results are given in the following tabulation:

IMPROVEMENT IN ALL SUBJECTS BY GRADES.
BASED ON THE NUMBER OF PUPILS WHOSE SCORES WERE BETTER IN
THE FINAL THAN IN THE INITIAL TEST.
Grade
7A.
7B.
8A.
8B.
All grades.
GARY SCHOOLS
Pupils in
both tests
1,541
1,366
1,216
1,126
5,249
No. who
improved
839
770
686
640
2,935
Per cent
who
improved
54.4
56.4
56.4
56.8
55.9
CONTROL SCHOOLS
Pupils in
both tests
4,702
4,114
3,894
3,591
16,301
No. who
improved
2,824
2,571
2,297
2,117
9,809
Per cent
who
improved
60.1
62.5
59.0
59.0
60.2

The City Superintendent states, "While I would be the
last to claim that this test is final or that it renders an effective decision against the Gary system for this city, it is fair to say that it raises
a strong presumption against the general introduction of the Gary
system into this city." Mr. Buckingham says, "Meanwhile, the
Gary plan is on the defensive and it is inevitable that it should be.
It is a new system, expressive of a new creed: it sets up new principles based upon new educational values. It is an important attempt
to put into practice theories which are already accepted. But it
will have to prove itself superior as a working program to the system
which it seeks to supplant."

Finally if in order to secure a proper perspective we disregard the
New York situation, ignore the adverse criticisms of the superintendents of Elizabeth, N. J., and Syracuse, N. Y., and turn to other localities in which the plan has either been adopted in whole or in part,
a number of interesting facts are brought to light which do not bear
out the claims of its advocates. In not one of these communities
is either the extent or the mode of adoption such as to warrant a
belief that the Gary plan is in anything but an experimental stage.
Sewickly, Pa., has a school population of about 800, all housed in one
building; New Castle, Pa., has a limited application of the plan in
four buildings; Winnotka, 111., Troy, N. Y., and Los Angeles, Cal.,
have adopted the plan in one school. Kansas City follows the plan
in two of her seventy-two schools, but after a trial of two years is
unwilling to give any judgment as to its value. Philadelphia, Chicago,
and Cleveland have not adopted nor do they contemplate adopting
Superintendent Wirt's theories, and this fact is doubly significant,
since the educational problem in these cities is comparable, both in
magnitude and complexity, with that of New York.

Whether, then, the Gary plan be regarded either from the standpoint of stability or of economy or of the novel pedagogical features
that seem to be integral to it, or in the light of its limited adoption by
various communities, the inevitable conclusion is that it is as yet
only an experiment, neither superior nor even equivalent to the best
program of the orthodox type. But what shall we say to those
enthusiasts who regard the Gary plan as the last word in educational
practice? A touch of idealism, or a spirit of generous enthusiasm
frequently makes appreciation march far in advance of achievement.
