Transient Delusions due to Syphilis
====================================

:Author:  Eleanor Larrabee Lattimore, Ph.D., \J
In Charge Social Service Department, Psychological Clinic, University
of Pennsylvania.

Richard was fifteen years old and had obtained his working
papers but he could not keep a job. He had trouble with his employers, and bore grudges toward his fellow employees. He was insubordinate, refusing to carry out instructions because of his unreasonable
fear of the dark where skeletons and ghosts flit. He could not serve
his apprenticeship as a shoe clerk satisfactorily because the stock
room was in the basement and it is common knowledge that spooks
haunt the corners of dark basements. When sent there on errands
he would think of ghosts of people?people he had never seen in
real life?who were covered with cloth. If he heard something
moving in the room it would "scare the wits out of him." If voices
were heard from the adjoining room he knew they were the voices of
ghosts. "They were always scrapping with me," he said, "and
going to kill me. They had a knife something like a burglar's, and
were bony."

Richard had seen skeletons in a museum, where he went with
his teacher, and once in a shop window, and again while playing.
He has studied "about the flesh and the inside organs" and it "scares
him a little bit" when he thinks of them. He saw ghosts at home
when alone in the dark. He saw one once in the kitchen. The chief
ghost always seemed to be the same person but " of course they are
not real" he concluded.

There was a peculiar mental conflict here. While realizing the
ghosts were not real, yet his mind constantly dwelt upon them to such
an extent that he felt he could not do his share in the support of the
family. He brooded upon this inability to such a degree that
kind friends wondered if he were not insane. .It was upon this suspicion that the social worker brought him to the Psychological Clinic.
Richard was a delicate-looking undersized boy with a haunted
and wistful expression. He had no marked physical stigmata but
was hollow-chested and round-shouldered. His palate was high and
contracted, his teeth in very bad condition. He had practised masturbation until recently when a boy friend warned him of the evil
effects.

His home surroundings were poor, the family occupying the
unheated third floor of a house, the two boys sleeping in one room,
the parents and two girls of five and ten years of age occupying the
other. The remainder of the house, including the use of the bath,
was sublet.

The mental tests showed him to be of normal mentality with
no tendency to insanity. There was no fixed phobia.
The Courtis Speed Tests in arithmetic showed him to be able
to do about sixth grade work, being especially good in subtraction
but below grade in multiplication and division.

He had a memory span of six digits.

He responded readily in the test of "opposites," and in the recognition of absurdities. He copied designs with the design blocks
and completed the Witmer Cylinders and the Healy Construction
Puzzle B, rapidly.

His response to the Jung Association test was entirely normal.
All his work was done intelligently.

As a result of the psychological examination it was decided to
build him up physically and to provide him with friendly counsel.
Accordingly a medical examination was made and a positive
Wassermann test was obtained. He was given a cathartic and a
tonic and sent to a boy's camp where one of the councilors took an
interest in him. After his return he was put on anti-syphilitic treatment. He has taken his treatment faithfully and has reported to
the dispensary regularly for a year and the results fully justify the
effort expended.

He has lost his haunted expression and his former grouchiness.
He is genial, companionable, and cheerful, a great favorite with all
with whom he comes in contact, young and old like. He sees no
more skeletons, and no longer thinks of them. Soon he will be in
condition to have the necessary dentistry done. For six months
he has been working steadily, earning $6.25 a week, as compared
with a former occasional maximum of $3.00 of a year ago.
