The Locket
============

Film Reviews*

Although unreal and not touching the experience of
anyone in the audience, the film was entertaining to
watch and made a good story. Perhaps because it
was less pretentious than Spellbound (which had a special
preamble on psychiatry and billed a psychiatric adviser),
the improbabilities did not spoil the enjoyment of the
film. Some of the photography was excellent ; scenes
in the artist's attic studio and in the bombed house in
London and the picture of Cassandra which kept
appearing as a kind of motif were most effective. But
the usual sequences of the house-party in the stately
English home of one of the nobility brought down the
level of this part of the picture. Wealth in the cinema
has become monotonous.

With one's present (admittedly low) standards of the
film psychiatrist, one judges Dr Blair as one of the better
characters. Cyril Ray (Sunday Times, June 29th, 1947)
has described the film psychiatrist as " greying at the
temples and speaking with a foreign accent", but
Dr Blair does neither. The theme of the picture is of
an attractive girl who steals jewellery and commits
other crimes and is unaware?or almost unaware?
of it afterwards. Many men love her and the life of each
is wrecked by her actions. Each tries to warn the next
but in vain, and it is a dramatic moment as each sees
the other about to make his mistakes and is unable to do
anything. Cleverly shown, too, is the seed of suspicion
that is sown, not strong enough to cause the lover to
take any action, but present all the time as an unacknowledged worry at the back of his mind. When
it is the psychiatrist who is the husband of this woman,
the artist who is trying to warn him finds himself checked
at every turn by the other's profession. The psychiatrist
can only treat him as a patient and even when the man
in fury cries, " Now you are being professional again
that seems the only relation possible between them.
Still the scene is credible, for the artist was neurotic
and the psychiatrist says with reason that he himself
cannot see with detachment any situation involving
his wife. One might perhaps have expected him to have
been a little more aware of his wife's mental state;
one certainly would have expected the doctors in themental hospital to sum up the situation better. But
once again the lady is believed and the statements of the
psychiatrist, now a patient with a nervous breakdown,
are attributed to his meptal state.

An enjoyable film, but not one to add one jot to the
understanding of the psychiatrist's job or to introduce
him as an ordinary human being. Both in The Locket
and in Spellbound, the psychiatrists only become human
when they fail as psychiatrists.

P.W.
Dishonoured Lady.

This is a very moral story of a lady who has lived a
dissipated life, found it unsatisfactory, attempted to
reform with the help of a psychiatrist and after a serious
setback found happiness at last with the right man.
The story is a feeble one and the characters wooden,
particularly that of the " right man ", and as in a similar
film, The Brennan Girl, the path of goodness seems
unnecessarily hard?all evenings spent alone at home
working, no parties, no entertainments; and her home,
a plain room in a lodging house, is such a contrast to her
former life. Then, one of her lovers had said, " I am a
very rich man and I know all the drawbacks of wealth
and "?in a dangerous voice?" all its pleasures ",
and nothing in the film is lacking to show us that wealth.
A break with the past and its associates was clearly
indicated but it was difficult to see how the lady would
stay such a rigorous course after such luxury.
But though the film as a whole is not very entertaining
and not at all moving, the part of the psychiatrist
* See page 47.

seemed to be better than in many other films, and I
think that perhaps the public might leam something
of psychiatry from the scenes where he gives advice to
the Dishonoured Lady. He had, of course, the consciousness of omniscience that is inseparable from the
film psychiatrist and there are moments when one would
like to see him take a fall, for instance when told, "You
will be surprised to hear that Dr Cousins is in your
consulting room ", he smiles knowingly and replies,
"Not at all". One shares too the exasperation of
the ex-lover who says, " And how does it feel to play
the part of God like this ? " and receives the answer,
" I am used to it ! " But these are minor points. The
psychiatrist is shown as a wise and conscientious man
and some of the advice he gives is surprisingly foreign
to the accepted cinema sequence. When a good man's
love seems to be the solution to the lady's problems,
he is unimpressed and tells her that security must be
found in herself, not in another's love?surely a statement to shake the cinema world.

Although this is an unimportant film I think it possible
that the audience gained some understanding of the ills
of the mind that had driven a woman to lead such an
unsatisfactory life. P.W.
