Mental Hospitals and the Mental Hygiene Movement in the United States I
========================================================================

:Author: Dallas Pratt, M.D.
Staff Psychiatrist, National Mental Health Foundation I
1. The National Committee for Mental Hygiene:

Origins and Achievements
--------------------------
The mental hygiene movement in America was
launched with the founding of the National Committee for Mental Hygiene in the first decade of
the present century. The founder was Clifford
Beers, a man whose knowledge of mental illness and
its attendant problems came entirely out of his own
experience as a patient in mental hospitals. The
National Committee was designed to spearhead the
reform of these institutions. The mixture of
brutality and neglect which passed for " care "
of the mentally ill at that time is unforgettably
delineated in Beers's autobiography: A Mind that
Found Itself. Much was accomplished in the
raising of standards in mental hospitals, and the
National Committee turned gradually away from I
the problems of institutional care, to concentrate
more particularly on preventive psychiatry. Important research projects in schizophrenia and psychosomatic medicine have been sponsored. Even :
more significant has been the impetus which the
Committee has given to the establishment of child
guidance clinics throughout the United States.

Although founded by a layman, the National
Committee's affairs are largely guided by psychia- <
trists, and up to very recently it has attacked the
problem of mental health chiefly through profes- ^
sional channels. For instance, a very competent
survey of the condition of State Hospitals in
1937-9, was made available in print for professional
readers. The findings did not disguise, the fact
that serious deficiencies still existed. However,
funds were apparently not available to the National
Committee to undertake a comprehensive programme of public education and reform, and with
the war the attention of the organization was
absorbed by the needs of the armed forces and of
psychiatric veterans. Two of its major activities
were the promotion of psychiatric rehabilitation,
and the operation of a PsycfiTatrrc~~'Tersonne 1
Placement Service. The latter primarily concerned
itself with the placement of young psychiatrists
returning from the services to civilian practice.
Its finding was that there were twenty times as many
positions open to doctors in State hospitals as there
were applications for them, but that there were
only half as many positions available in psychiatry
outside of the State hospitals as there were
applications.

Another achievement of the National Committee,
again indicative of its concern about mental hospital
conditions, was the major part it played, through
its Medical Director, Dr George Stevenson, in the
formulation and passage of the National Mental
Health Act. This means that Federal Funds will
be made available to the States, their political
subdivisions, and to institutions and organizations,
for broad mental health purposes. It is expected
that the emphasis will be on research and the training. of psychiatric personnel, also to be furthered
by the establishment under the Act of a Psychiatric
Institute in Washington. Beyond the operation
of this Institute, analogous perhaps to the Psychiatric Institute at the Maudsley Hospital, there is no
thought of the Federal Government taking over
any actual institution, so that this Act is in no way
comparable with England's National Health Service
Act. It envisages no comprehensive mental health
service for the community, and although the State
Hospitals in the future will benefit from the increased
supply of trained psychiatric personnel, and from
the preventive aspects of intensified research, no
immediate help is in sight from this source.
2. Trends in the American Psychiatric Association
Turning now to a consideration of the attitude of
the American Psychiatric Association (corresponding to the Royal Medico-Psychological Association)
vis-a-vis the public mental hospitals, it is illuminating
to notice the themes of the annual Presidential
?addresses since its founding in 1844. During its
first seventy-five years of life, the Association was
largely dominated by State Hospital superintendents,
and the addresses reflected the interest in State
Hospital problems. During the past twenty-five
years, the interest and leadership gradually shifted
to extra-muraLpsychiatry, largely under the stimulus
of such men as Adolf Meyer, and of the psychoanalytical group, whose influence has steadily
increased. Up to and through World War II the
problems of the State Hospitals have been very much
neglected, a fact which is noticeable not only from
the tenor of the Presidential addresses, but also
from the papers presented. The emphasis has
shifted to research, child psychiatry, psychosomatic
medicine and the relation of psychiatry to the other
medical specialties, psychotherapy (particularly
psychoanalysis), and war psychiatry. The shock
therapies and psycho-surgery have, of course,
received considerable attention, but by and large
their application to State Hospitals does not appear
to have been so much a matter of common practice
as in England.

3. The New York State Investigation
As an example of what was happening generally
to the State Hospital systems, one may cite New
York. Both in the United States and in England,
this State is generally thought of as being among
'the most advanced in the use of the shock therapies,
yet the Commission appointed by Governor Dewey
to investigate the New York State Hospital system
reported in 1944: " Only twelve out of twenty
hospitals are now regularly using insulin shock
therapy. Only five are using metrazol regularly
and two of the institutions have never used electric
shock therapy. Binghamton, Kings Park, and
Utica have used electric shock only recently. One
institution has never used any form of shock
therapy. . . . Any such chaotic result cannot be
entirely excused on the ground of lack of personnel ". This investigation had been started in 1943
following the outbreak of amoebic dysentery at
one State Hospital; the Superintendent was
retired, and the Commissioner of the Department
of Mental Hygiene resigned. The Commission
found that the Department of Mental Hygiene
was inefficient and had failed to provide for curative
rather than custodial care of patients. A new
Commissioner was appointed. Various administrative changes were 'undertaken, and a large sum of
money was appropriated by the State for new
building.

The deplorable conditions thus revealed in New
York received considerable newspaper publicity,
and in fact the concern aroused by reports in the
Press probably induced the authorities to undertake
the investigation. Two novels dealing with life in
State Hospitals also appeared. The Snake Pit,
by Mary Jane Ward, was a thinly disguised autobiographical account of the authoress's experiences
as a patient. It was later condensed in the Reader's
Digest, became a best seller, and is now being
filmed. Ellen C. Philtine's They Walk in Darkness
was another but less successful attempt to describe
State Hospital life; its authoress was the wife of
a State Hospital psychiatrist. The authoress
followed up her expose by organizing the People's
Committee for Mental Hygiene, a joint lay and
professional organization which has continued to
press for legislative reform of the New York State
Hospitals. While it was obvious that a hospital
system as decrepit as that revealed by the report
of Governor Dewey's Commission could not be
reformed overnight, the People's Committee has
expressed continued dissatisfaction with the progress
made. The Commissioner has made an effort
to open up post-graduate training opportunities
for State Hospital superintendents and physicians,
but over-crowding, inadequate staffing, and lack
of supplies are still unsolved problems.

4. The Contribution of Conscientious Objectors
While the preoccupations of military psychiatry
increasingly absorbed the attention of the professional organizations during the war years, interest
in the plight of the State and Veterans' Mental
Hospitals began to develop from a most unexpected
quarter. It was decided by the government that
conscientious objectors who had been assigned
to work camps under Civilian Public Service would
be permitted to take alternate service as attendants
in mental hospitals and in training schools for mental
defectives. Attendants, both male and female,
outnumber nurses on the staff of an American
State Hospital by seven to one, and perform almost
all the regular ward nursing functions. By the
end of 1943, there were 2,000 pacifists and some of
their wives working in 60 State Hospitals and
Training Schools. These conscientious objectors,
Quakers and members of other churches, were
greatly concerned with the serious deficiencies of
treatment which they found in State Hospital care,
and the poorly paid, untrained, overworked attendant all too frequently resorted to the use of restraints
and physical abuse in order to control the excessive
number of patients. Physicians and superintendents in these institutions, however well-intentioned,
could offer their patients little more than custodial
care. The excellence of a few of these State
Hospitals made the deterioration of the majority
stand out in greater relief. The use of violence
was perhaps the condition above all others which
appalled the conscientious objectors, since the very
basis of their pacifist philosophy was a belief in
non-violent methods. One can comprehend the
mental conflict engendered. The use of mechanical
restraint,* and even surreptitious physical abuse of
patients by attendants, are unfortunately far too
prevalent in American mental hospitals. Nothing
impressed the writer more during a recent tour of
English mental hospitals than the apparent absence
of such methods in those institutions.

(a) The Ohio Reform
The first action taken by conscientious objectors
towards reform in this field occurred in Ohio in
1943. A group of objectors working as attendants
x at Cleveland State Hospital revealed the
deplorable conditions existing in that institution
to Walter Lerch, a reporter on the Cleveland Press,
and to the Rev. Dores Sharpe of the Cleveland
Baptist Association. Mr. Lerch wrote a series of
articles exposing the situation at Cleveland State
Hospital in forthright terms, and Dr Sharpe
followed up this "needling" of the public conscience by organizing concerned groups of citizens
into a popular movement for mental health reform,
after which the Governor instituted an investigation;
the findings largely corroborated the charges
brought. The superintendent of the State Hospital
resigned, and an outstanding psychiatrist, Dr.
Frank F. Tallman, was appointed to the long vacant
post of Commissioner of Mental Hygiene for Ohio.
The Legislature appropriated seventeen million
dollars for the Department of Mental Health.
(b) The Veterans'" Administration Reform
Another significant contribution was made in
October, 1944, when a conscientious objector,
named Robert Hegler, ran away from a Veterans'
Mental Hospital at Lyons, New Jersey, where he
was serving as an attendant, and offered his diary
for publication in the New York Journal American.
Once again, people were shocked by eye-witness
reports of physical abuse of the mentally ill.
Several journalists took up the cudgels against
the Veterans' Administration, attacking not only
the psychiatric hospitals but also the other Veterans'
facilities, and demanding a complete administrative
house-cleaning. A Congressional investigation was
initiated, and many of the allegations made by
Robert Hegler against the Lyons Mental Hospitals
were substantiated. When the clamour for reform
spread from the lay press to such organs as the
Journal of the American Medical Association,
President Truman appointed General Omar Bradley
as Veterans' Administrator. The latter immediately instituted a complete reorganization of
the Administration, and the hospitals have greatly
improved their services. In addition to better
in-patient care, the Administration has made
a determined effort to provide out-patient psychiatric clinics in urban centres, and a programme
of post-graduate psychiatric training is attracting
scores of young psychiatrists. This training is
concentrated in the centre at Winter General
Hospital in Kansas, under the direction of Drs.
Karl and William Menninger. By an ironic
twist of fate, Robert Hegler was rewarded for his
part in starting this chain of events by a two year
prison term, for having taken absence without
leave from his post at the hospital at Lyons.
(c) The National Mental Health Foundation
1944 saw another and perhaps the most significant ,
contribution from the conscientious objector group.
This time the protest against the status quo came
from Pennsylvania, from four men?a writer, two
lawyers and a mining engineer?who were working
as attendants at Philadelphia State Hospital, at
By berry. The Philadelphia Press had been parti- j
cularly alive to the situation, and the Superintendent
of the hospital had frankly stated to reporters that
inadequate appropriations and lack of personnel
made it impossible for him to provide decent care
or treatment. The conscientious objectors referred
to above were particularly struck by the low calibre
type of attendant which the hospital was forced to
employ, owing to their comparatively small com- i
pensation and poor living conditions. They were
moreover given no kind of training before taking
up their duties. Physical abuse and the use of
restraints were widespread. Accordingly, the four
conscientious objectors: Edelstein, Barton, Hetzel
and Steer, started to publish a magazine entitled
The Attendant (since renamed The Psychiatric Aid).
This contained material to aid the attendant, or
the nurse, towards a more humane and therapeutic
approach, presented in a popular fashion. A welldesigned format, illustrations and even a comic
strip (illustrating various cardinal principles of good
mental nursing) were and still are features of this
periodical. The group also brought out a popularly 1/
written Handbook for Psychiatric Aides. 7
This group soon realized that the poorly paid,
poorly trained attendant was only a symptom of
progressive deterioration in many State Hospitals
from long continued legislative neglect and lack of
adequate appropriations. But this in turn reflected
the apathy of the public, which?partly through
a deep-seated fear of mental illness?took no
responsibility to see that these institutions were
properly looked after by their elected representatives.

The nation-wide prevalence of poor conditions was
clearly indicated in the thousands of reports which
the Byberry group collected from conscientious
objector attendants, and from concerned nurses,
social workers and physicians in State Hospitals
and Institutions for Mental Defectives throughout
the country. These reports (by far the most complete such file ever collected) formed the basis
for the programme of public education which was
undertaken as the second step in reform, the
basic need being to arouse the public's sense of
responsibility.

Under the sponsorship of the National Committee
for Mental Hygiene, and with a panel of professional advisors, the group launched the
"National Mental Health Program".^, The
material from the file was such that it was bound
to shock relatives of mental patients, and to alarm
professional persons, particularly superintendents
who might feel that they would be blamed for
conditions of which, in fact, they were more the
victims than the authors. However, the facts
had been concealed from the public too long, and
the resulting public apathy had always nullified any
purely professional efforts towards reform, so that
to bring the material to the attention of the widest
possible audience in the most striking manner
seemed necessary. Accordingly, the file was made
available to Albert Maisel, along with actual
photographs taken on the wards of State Hospitals.
It was stipulated that he should in no case use the
names of actual hospitals or persons, since the philosophy of the programme was to indict the system
as a whole rather than to make scapegoats. Mr.
Maisel wrote the article entitled " Bedlam, 1946
which appeared in Life magazine in the spring of the
year, and was later reprinted as the leading article
in the Reader's Digest. The total circulation of
these two magazines is over thirteen million.
The article, naturally, was written in a far more
sensational way than for a scientific publication.
There were several minor errors, but all the important facts were accurate and have never been
challenged. While some of the worst institutions
were described, the deplorable conditions depicted
are unfortunately less the exception than the rule.
Also, it may be assumed that much which is as
bad if not worse has not been reported.

Life reported one of the largest reader-response
correspondences in its experience, and there is no
doubt that it has made millions of people aware of
the tremendous mental health problem in their
midst. The National Mental Health Program,
by this time a distinct entity no longer under the
sponsorship of the National Committee for Mental
Hygiene, was incorporated in 1946 as the National
Mental Health Foundation. Ex-Supreme Court
Justice Owen Roberts accepted the Chairmanship,
and the Society of Friends, aided by the other
Peace Churches, was largely responsible for the
financial support of the organization during 1946.
Except for one psychiatrist (Dr Earl Bond) on the
Board of Directors, and one (the writer) on the
staff, the organization is entirely lay in its personnel.
This is not only because it was felt that laymen are
best able to prepare educational material for laymen
(under professional guidance), but because the
programme of the Foundation aims to educate the
man in the street in the psychiatric needs of the
community in the hope of joint lay and professional
action. The Foundation seeks to represent the
point of view of the layman (the citizen, the patient,
the patient's relative, the attendant) vis-a-vis those
organizations which speak for the professional
(the psychiatrist, the trained nurse, the social
worker).

The reports on State Hospitals and Training
Schools for Mental Defectives have also been made
available to the public in a popularly written book:
Out of Sight?Out of Mind, and in surveys of
conditions in certain States (Pennsylvania, Iowa
and New Jersey). 200,000 pieces of additional
educational material have been circulated. Two
full-time lawyers and their staff comprise the
Foundation's legal division, which has summarized
the mental health laws of each of the forty-eight
States, and has prepared new mental health legislation for Pennsylvania and Iowa.

As a corrective and constructive follow-up to
the Life article, the Foundation has produced eight
radio plays on mental hygiene?which have been
heard on 200 radio stations in the United States
and Canada?and is now producing thirteen more.
Each of these fifteen-minute dramatizations are
written by a professional writer on the staff of the
Foundation, under the technical supervision of the
staff psychiatrist. They dramatize various kinds
of psychiatric services, or existing abuses with
indications how these may be corrected by popular
action, or misconceptions about mental illness?
worked through in dramatic form to a more constructive point of view. The characters are sympathetically drawn, so that the listeners may identify
themselves with them. The emphasis throughout
is on positive action and constructive attitudes,
with a consistent attempt to decrease the listener's
fear of mental illness and the mental hospital.
Each play is produced in the studios of the National
Broadcasting Company by professional actors,
recorded on discs, and made available to local
non-network radio stations under the sponsorship
of local mental hygiene committees or other
interested organizations.

In each State the Foundation seeks to work not
directly but through the local mental hygiene
organization, providing that organization is widely
representative;' the Foundation can make available
its legal, educational and radio material, and the
services of its speakers and field representatives.
At the same time, it can act as a centre for the
exchange of information between local groups.
A basic principle in a programme of this kind is
actual participation by the citizen in activities
relating to mental health. One of the drawbacks
of the Life article was the gruesome nature of the
photographs which allowed readers to dissociate
themselves from the problem: the patients depicted
did not seem " human " ; the situations described
seemed too xerrible to be "real". Comparisons
were frequently made between the scenes reproduced
and photographs of German concentration camps.
" This can't be happening in America." In the
radio plays described above, the process of identification, the empathy, is far greater?because it is an
emotional rather than a conscious intellectual
identification. Best of all is actual contact between
the citizen and the mental patient, or the citizen
and the psychiatric service. An example of this is
the scheme whereby groups of University students
of psychology, social work or allied subjects, work
during the summer months as attendants in State
Hospitals. There are Institutional Service Units
now in operation in nine States, and the National
Mental Health Foundation has promoted the plan
wherever possible. The writer has tentatively
explored the possibility of such students coming
to work for a period of months, either in groups or
singly, in British Mental Hospitals, and has drawn
the attention of British psychiatrists to the success
of the American venture.

The Foundation often arranges visits to mental
hospitals, usually for specific lay organizations,
or for State legislators, with two leaflets available:
" What to look for in a Mental Hospital ", and
" What to lodk for in a State Training School for
the Feebleminded". While an inquisitorial
approach is not intended, it is expected that the
superintendent and his staff" will be frank with the
sincere citizen about the problems of an institution
which, in a very real sense, is their joint responsibility.

Still another form of " learning by doing " which
the Foundation has promoted is the setting up of
volunteer service units in mental hospitals. These
differ from the Institutional Service Units in that
the volunteers, usually women, do not live in the
hospital, but give certain hours each week to work
in the occupational or recreational therapy departments of State Hospitals. The Foundation has
stimulated the American Red Cross to set up such
so-called " Grey Lady " units in New York, and
recommend them throughout the States. A similar
scheme was started by the Foundation in Pennsylvania, under the American Women's Voluntary
Services. It is essential that such groups meet
three requirements: (1) They must be carefully
selected ; (2) they must be closely disciplined by
the sponsoring organization; and (3) they must
be welcomed and receive basic training in the
proper approach to mental patients by the staff
of the hospital. Some of their activities have been:
musical entertainment stressing patient participation, on the wards; organizing games on the wards
for shut-in patients; library service; taking patients
for walks; shopping service for patients; and
assisting in occupational therapy. These volunteers
not only supply needed services; they invariably
become deeply interested in the problems of the
hospital and promote better public relations between
the hospital and the community.

5. New Activity in the Professional Organizations
The emergence of lay organizations and the
tremendous popular interest in the Press, have
aroused the older professional organizations to new
efforts in the field. The National Committee for
Mental Hygiene has been organizing local mental
health movements on a broad community basis in
the Middle West, particularly in Ohio. Most
significantly, the American Psychiatric Association
has urged superintendents to reveal to the public
the deficiencies of their hospitals?a recognition
that lay support must be secured. It has also
established the Psychiatric Foundation, which
hopes to set up a much needed system of professional inspection and rating of mental hospitals?
possibly analogous to the work done in the United
Kingdom by the Board of Control. Finally,
psychiatrists in the American Psychiatric Association have organized the Group for the Advancement
of Psychiatry (nicknamed " GAP "), which has been
studying ways and means of reform.

6. The Present Phase: Laymen and Professionals
co-operate
One can, perhaps, discern three stages in the
modern American mental hygiene movement.
The first is one of lay protest, exposes in the Press,
and the emergence of new non-professional organizations. The second phase sees new activity in these t
latter organizations, as described above. The
third stage has also been reached, and is marked
by a rapprochement between the professional and
lay organizations, and a replanning of their campaigns for funds, and of their individual objectives
and respective spheres of activity. Agreement on
the over-all mental health- programme for the
nation is desirable, although each organization i
may bring to this its own resources and its own
emphasis. A joint meeting of representatives of
the Menninger Foundation, the Psychiatric Foundation, the National Committee for Mental Hygiene,
and the National Mental Health Foundation has
taken place; and the last two organizations exchange
representatives. The trend is towards co-operation,
or, at the most, federation, but not towards organic
unity. It is felt that each organization will be freer
and better able to make a vigorous and original
contribution if it preserves its own identity.
Tangible results of the movement are to be seen
in some States in the shape of re-organization of
State Departments of Mental Health, formation
of new citizen's mental hygiene committees, additional appropriation by State Legislatures, and the
creation of new psychiatric services. However,
the surface has only been scratched, and the movement is hampered by lack of funds. Intangible
results such as an increased interest and sense of
responsibility of the public are hoped for, and are
of primary importance. It will be of great interest
to compare the developments of the coming years
in the field of mental health in Britain and in the
United States. In Britain the development of the
mental health services is being planned from above,
by the state, closely guided by professional
advisors. In the United States, no nation-wide
planning of this type is possible because of the
Federal form of government. A truly national
mental health programme will be only obtainable
through public education, and this will be uniform
only inasmuch as the organizations concerned can
agree on joint objectives. The actual mental
health services and reforms which finally emerge in
each of the forty-eight States will in turn depend
on the popular response to such education in each
community. The excellence of such reforms will
be proportionate to the sense of self-responsibility
developed in the citizens, and to the communitywide participation therein of all groups, all classes,
and all ages.
