Child Health and Development
=============================

Edited by Professor

iv. w. a. nnis, w.tJ.n,., ivi.u., r.iv.^.r. j. ana
Churchill, Ltd., London. 1947. Pp. 364. 18s.

This work, a symposium by a number of specialists
in child development and related subjects, provides
a long felt want by all concerned with the-study of the
health and growth of the "normal child ".

The Editor is Professor R. W. B. Ellis, who has
recently been appointed to the Chair of Child Life and
Health at Edinburgh. It is noteworthy that the late
Dr R. D. Gillespie had a hand in planning the work.
There is a useful introduction by Professor Ellis
devoted to general considerations. Part I of the book
deals with the child's development in its broadest
aspect. There are chapters dealing with physical
growth and maturation, from conception to puberty.

A most fascinating chapter in this section is Sir Joseph
Bancroft's on the functional development of the foetus.

Of special interest to those concerned with mental
health are the two chapters contributed by Miss Anna
Freud. In the chapter on feeding, Miss Freud emphasizes
the emotional significance of food and feeding to infant
and child; she advocates a far less rigid feeding regime
than is still all too commonly followed by a large proportion of mothers. Feeding is the first and most important
inter-personal relationship of the infant; to be successful,
full co-operation of mother and child is essential. The
author traces the connection of the mother-child relationship to feeding. " For the infant who is breast fed by'
the mother, food and mother are truly identical; the
attitude to both rests on the same firm foundation of
pleasurable experience." The subsequent feeding problems which are sometimes met with, are usually the
expression of the child's unconscious hostile attitude
to the mother. Oral pleasure as a stage in normal
growth is dealt with, as well as the role that biting plays
as an expression of hostility, aggression and
destructiveness.

The chapter on emotional and instinctual development is a psycho-analytic account of these aspects of
psychological growth from birth to adolescent. Miss
Freud's exposition is both lucid and concise; only a
very few psycho-analytic terms are employed and these
are always clearly explained. This part of the book
serves as a most useful introduction to the dynamic
study of human behaviour and will prove most valuable
to both medical students and practitioners. Readers
probably regret the lack of a bibliography.

Professor Penrose contributes an excellent chapter
on intellectual development and the measurement of
intelligence in childhood. The various types of tests
employed for assessing intelligence are considered,
and their merits and limitations discussed. It would
have added to the interest of the section on distribution
of mental capacity in the general population if mention
had been made of Sir Cyril Burt's work on differential
fertility in relation to intelligence.

Part II of the work is devoted to the social aspects
of child health and is in the main historical and expository. Subjects dealt with include chapters on the infant
welfare movement, the school medical and dental
services, nurseries and nursery schools. There is a
useful chapter by Miss Leila Rendel on the care of the
homeless child and another by Miss Eileen Younghusband on Juvenile Courts.

A review of the other part of the book would be out
of place in this journal. Professor Ellis and his collaborators are to be congratulated on producing a work
which is readable, comprehensive and stimulating.
Professor Ellis, in his own approach to the subject,
proves himself to be progressive and constructive with his
vision constantly directed towards a future vast in
promise and opportunity for progress and development.
There are two appendices. The second on Voluntary
Organizations will be found most helpful, though inclusion
of the addresses of the various agencies mentioned
would have added greatly to its value as a source of
reference.

The radiographs throughout are excellent. Two or
three of the photographic reproductions suffer from lack
of clearer definition. The book deserves a more
complete index.
J.J.M.J.
