First Baby
===========

:Author: Dr Winifred de Kok, author of New
J ~ T i ,1   t a J r J
Babies for Old, John Westhouse Ltd. /s. bd.
As the title suggests this is a handbook for mothers
having their first baby. It covers in a practical way
all that a young mother needs to know about caring
for herself and her child from conception and during
the first couple of years. Though the book is
simplicity itself one has the impression of real knowledge
and rare experience and understanding going to its
making.

Dr de Kok is in charge of Infant Welfare in a large
clinic in Sussex and the mother of two children, and
to this practical experience of the anxieties which beset
parents and can themselves be the cause of children's
difficulties, she adds a profound psychological insight and
considerable awareness of modern psychological finding.
In her advice on feeding problems and the conduct of
habit training she keeps the child's natural health as
well as his physical care to the fore. Here is no
moralizing doctor with standards of hygiene and routine
directed to the making of an efficiently functioning
baby, but a woman who realizes how the right kind of
physical care is fundamental to character and emotional
development, and to the prevention of problem
children. Her understanding of parents' anxieties and
the assured way in which she approaches them is really
impressive.

This is an excellent book for any mother and a first
rate construction on how to keep babies healthy and
happy and to prevent them becoming problems.
