The School Psychologist
========================

:Author: F. S. Livie-Noble. Duckworth. 8s. 6d.

The appearance of a book called The School Psychologist is of great interest to everyone engaged in educational or psychological work. There is a growing
appreciation of psychological work in schools on the
part of those to whom a service is available, yet until
now no one has written at length about the psychologist's work.

The book is however, exceedingly disappointing.
There is in it a mixture of elementary text book knowledge and a personal account of Mr. Livie-Noble's own
work, which is by no means typical and which cannot,
and many psychologists will think should not, become
a pattern for the future.

Mr. Livie-Noble himself points out that the work of
Psychologists in Public Schools (his own field) should
not be compared too closely with that of the Psychologist to a Local Education Authority. He envisages
a consultant who is also a Psychotherapist. He would
invest in one person the whole variety of work involved
in educational and vocational guidance as well as requiring him to be a Psychotherapist. He outlines a training
course which unless it is to be superficially covered is
beyond the reach of most-people and yet, at the same time,
is an inadequate preparation for therapeutic work.

The book attempts far too much. It suggests a
somewhat forced gathering together of any information
relevant to psychological disturbance in childhood,
adolescence and after, and includes sections on normal
development of personality. This is, of necessity (in
some 250 pages), all presented without much cohesion
and with little application, but a personal viewpoint
colours the whole. One cannot help feeling that the
book would have been more useful if it had kept within
the scope of its title and contained a clear statement and
discussion of the Psychologist's role in educational
guidance in the widest meaning of that term.
G.R.
