News and Notes
================

National Association for Mental Health Autumn Courses
Refresher Course for Medical Officers

If the demand is sufficient, it is proposed to hold a
Refresher Course for Medical Officers who attended
one of the Association's Courses on Mental Deficiency
(run in conjunction with the University of London)
before the changes brought about by the Education Act,
1944, and other recent legislation.

The Course will include lectures on the practical
application of the sections of the Education Act dealing
with educationally subnormal children, the administration of the Mental Health Services as it affects School
Medical Officers, certain new provisions for mentally
handicapped children, recent developments in child
guidance, the problem of children with double defects,
and the special problems connected with children under
the age of five. It is also hoped to arrange one or two
visits of observation.

The dates selected for the Course are from December
1st to 6th, 1947 and the inclusive cost will be ?4 4s.
For Superintendents and Matrons of Children's Homes
A Course of Lectures and Discussions on problems
relating to the residential care of children deprived of
normal home life is being held at 39 Queen Anne Street
from Monday, November 3rd, to Friday, November 28th.
The Course includes the following subjects: Emotional
Development of Children from Birth to Adolescence;
Physical Care of Children; Organization of a Children's
Community; Play and Recreational Activities; Work
of a Child Guidance Clinic; Juvenile Delinquency;
Intellectual Development of Children; Boarding Out,
After-Care and Employment; Personal Relationships
Inside and Outside the Home.

The lectures are being given by specialists on the
various subjects and Informal Group Discussions are
arranged by the Tutor of the Course, Miss Clare Britton.

For Health Visitors and Nursery Workers
---------------------------------------
A Course of Eight Lectures by Miss Ruth Thomas,
is being given at 39 Queen Anne Street, on Wednesday
evenings.

The Course is exclusively for students who have
attended previous Courses organized by the Association,
and deals with the normal development of the child
from seven to eleven.

. Maurice Craig Memorial
Friends and colleagues of the late Sir Maurice Craig,
C.B.E., M.D., F.R.C.P., will be glad to learn that by
arrangement with the Trustees of the Memorial Fund
established some years ago by an independent Appeal
I Committee, the present, and any future premises
housing the National Association for Mental Health
will be named " Maurice Craig House ", and the funds
collected will be utilized for the promotion of the
? Association's activities.

The original intention of the Appeal Committee was
that the sums received, as the result of their appeal,
should be entrusted to the National Council for Mental
i Hygiene (of which body Sir Maurice Craig was a cofounder with Dr Helen Boyle and was for many years
Chairman) for the furtherance of its work and to help to
found a " Maurice Craig House ". It was felt that
such a centre would greatly assist in co-ordinating the
work of all voluntary bodies in the country dealing
with mental health and the prevention of nervous and
mental disorders, and also provide a meeting and
training centre as well as a headquarters for enquiry
and information.

The work of the Feversham Committee (set up by
the Central Association for Mental Welfare, the Child'
Guidance Council and the National Council for Mental
Hygiene) in regard to its enquiry into the voluntary
mental health services of the country, which began
not long after Sir Maurice Craig's death in 1935, decided
the Appeal Committee to postpone the transfer of the
Fund to the National Council for Mental Hygiene
until the Committee's report and recommendations
were made known. This report was published in July,
1939, and, as is generally known, one of its main
recommendations was that " a new central voluntary
body be set up for England and Wales to co-ordinate
the activities of the voluntary mental health organizations
in the country ". Such a development was clearly
in line with the aspirations of the Appeal Committee,
and as subsequently the Central Association for Mental
Health, the Child Guidance Council and the National
Council for Mental Hygiene proceeded to implement the
recommendation, the Appeal Committee appointed
Trustees to hold the Fund in trust until such time as
the amalgamation of the three bodies concerned took
place. This, as is known, was effected in November,
1946, when the National Association for Mental Health
was formed.

A bronze plaque naming the Association's premises
" Maurice Craig House " is being placed at 39 Queen
Anne Street, W.l. It will, we are sure, give wide
satisfaction that notwithstanding the inevitable delays,
it has now been possible to found a permanent memorial
to a distinguished psychiatrist of international reputation
who was a pioneer in the treatment of nervous and mental
illnesses and contributed valuable knowledge to
their early diagnosis and prevention. He endeared
himself to many by his humane outlook and understanding sympathy and his life was one of consistent
personal service.

The Problem Girl
----------------
This recent report by a Joint Committee of the British
Medical Association and the Magistrates Association*
should be of great interest to all who are attempting
to deal with unstable girls. The recommendations
take into account the basic emotional factors which
must be considered in the constructive treatment of such
cases, and touch also on the preventive and after-care
aspects of the problem.

The girls under consideration are mainly those
between the ages of 13 and 17 who appear before the
court either for stealing or being "-beyond control
or who are in moral danger or in need of care and
protection. It is interesting to learn that although
a very small minority can be said to be mentally defective,
quite a large number come into the low average and dull
group.

In the words of the report " existing methods of handling these girls are often likely to exacerbate rather than
| * Obtainable from B.M.A.. House, Tavistock Square, W.C.I. Price 3d.

improve their tendency to misconduct." Usually " the
girl's misbehaviour is the result of interaction between
temperament and environment, but always at the root
there is some defect of character structure that is the
real cause of her difficulty

The methods of dealing with these girls as recommended in the Report are: (1) a ful'er recognition of the
general nature and causes of their misbehaviour and of
the objects of treatment; (2) more facilities and skilled
staff for investigation and treatment of individual cases;
(3) more clinics and institutions for the purpose of
treatment and control.

The statement that the psychiatric approach is the
only constructive one is undoubtedly true, but it is
hoped that this will be interpreted in the broadest sense
with particular reference to the emotional needs of the
young child, and not merely the provision of psychiatrists
to treat girls who have already become delinquent.

After the Curtis Report
----------------------
Important developments have recently taken place
following on the recommendations made in the Curtis
Report.

Training Courses

A Central Training Council in Child Care has been
appointed by the Home Office to organize Courses and
to select candidates for training in work for deprived
children. Two Courses have been instituted?for
(a) Boarding Out Officers and (b) House Mothers (or
equivalent male staff), for which applications were
invited in August.

The Boarding Out Officers' Courses are being held in
connection with four Universities?London (School
of Economics), Leeds, Liverpool and Cardiff. They
will last twelve months and the practical training will
include residential experience in Children's Homes.
The satisfactory completion of the Course will be
recognized as a qualification for this branch of social
service. Candidates should be between 21 and 40, and
should be graduates of a University, or holders of a
Social Science Health Visitors' or Teachers' certificate,
and should preferably have experience of work with
children or general social work.

The Courses for House Mothers will last 14 months,
of which six months will be devoted mainly to theoretical
work although the whole period will be spent in selected
Children's Homes. The first two months will be regarded
as a test period in which the student's suitability for the
work will be assessed. Candidates should be between
the ages of 18 and 35 (in the case of men, 25 to 35),
of good education and preferably with experience of
work with children. The Courses will be held in
London, Manchester, Birmingham and Cardiff.
For both these Courses grants are available, designed
to cover fees, maintenance, travelling and incidental
expenses.

Children's Committees
---------------------
In a Home Office Circular issued on September 1st,
it is suggested that Local Authorities?in advance of
legislation on the subject?should now proceed to
consider the appointment of Childrens' Committees
to deal with the care of deprived children in all its
branches, consisting of members experienced in the work
of Education, Public Health and Public Assistance
Committees, with specially selected co-opted members,
including representatives of appropriate voluntary
organizations concerned with children's welfare.
Authorities are further urged to appoint a Children's
Officer, who should be a person of high professional
standing, to act as " the pivot of the local authority's
organization " for dealing with deprived children.
Under her there should be a staff of Boarding-Out
Officers to each of whom a group of children would
be allocated.


The speed with which official action has been taken
to implement some of the more urgent recommendations
of the Curtis Report is eminently satisfactory, and we
confidently hope that the mental health aspects
of the problem on which stress was there laid, will
receive due attention in the measures now decided upon.

Concerning Handicapped Children
-------------------------------
We are glad to be able to record that children excluded
from school by reason of mental defect who are not
attending an Occupation Centre are now entitled to
benefit by the " Milk in Schools " scheme which allows
7 pints per week. This concession also applies to other
types of handicapped children unable to attend school.
Particulars may be obtained from Local Food Offices.
In a recent statement it was disclosed that during 1946,
the number ofVhildren reported by Education Authorities to Mental Deficiency Committees under Section 57
of the Education Act as being incapable of receiving
education at school or in need of supervision on leaving
school, was 4,209. The comparable figure in 1945 was
3,276.

The Medical Branch of the Ministry of Education
is in future to be known as the Special Services Branch.
This Branch deals with Special Educational Treatment,
the School Health Service and School Meals. Its
address continues to be 15 Chesham Place, London,
S.W.I.

The recent retirement of Mr. N. D. Bosworth Smith,
for so many years in charge of the Medical Branch,
is an event which cannot be allowed to pass un-noted
by those in the Mental Health field who have been
concerned with the welfare of the Special School child.
To the Central Association for Mental Welfare, he was
a friend whose services and advice could always be
enlisted and his deep human concern for handicapped
children was far removed from the cold official approach
of an impersonal " Civil Servant". It is good to
know that in his retirement these children will still be
his concern, and the fact that he has agreed to represent
the Ministry of Education on the British Association
for the Welfare of Spastics and to serve as a co-opted
member of the Council of the National Association for
Mental Health, is an indication of his continuing
ability to help in promoting efforts on their behalf.
In 1944, the Ministty of Education published the first
List of Boarding Special Schools and Homes for Handicapped Pupils issued since 1939. This showed that
there were three Boarding Schools recognized for
Maladjusted Pupils and seven Boarding Homes. A
recent amendment to the List adds two Schools and
six Homes. The Ministry confidently expects that the
sum total of the Development Plans under preparation
by Education Authorities will be such as to ensure
adequate boarding school provision for all types of
handicapped pupils,* but meanwhile the search for
vacancies must continue and the plight of the greater
number of maladjusted children?of whose needs
Authorities are more acutely aware than at any previous
time?must remain unchanged.

* Vide " Education June 27th, 1947. j
__  ' j
Boarding Home for Young Maladjusted Children
The Home at Pewsey administered by the National
Association for Mental Health since 1942, has recently
been transferred to new premises at The Hill, Pilgrims
Way, Westerham, Kent. The Home has been approved
by the Ministry of Education for 24 maladjusted children
between the ages of 2 and 7, but ordinarily children are
not admitted over the age of 4?.

Candidates from the Home Counties are given preference in order that good contact may be maintained
between the children and their families, and between
the families and the National Association's workers.
For application forms, apply to 39 Queen Anne Street,
W.l.

An Experiment in Portsmouth
---------------------------
The Portsmouth Mental Treatment Committee is
carrying on an interesting experiment in provision for
seriously maladjusted children by reserving for them
a villa in the grounds of the Mental Hospital (St. James's)
with accommodation for 25 patients. At the end of the
year 1946, the Committee's Report states, there were in
this Villa 25 children, of whom two were classified as
psychotics, and the rest as maladjusted. All were
admitted under Section I of the Mental Treatment Act,
but by arrangement with the Chief Education Officer,
eight attended ordinary classes at local schools.
Measured by the happiness of the children, the experiment is considered to be unexpectedly successful, and
it is being extended by the opening of another house,
where in-patient treatment can be provided for 20
additional cases.

The National Association's Holiday Homes
------------------------------------------
The Old Vicarage, Bognor Regis?this year re-opened
by the N.A.M.H. as a Holiday Home for defectives and
mental hospital patients?has been full to capacity
throughout the whole season. A total number of 520
defectives have been received, 334 for a fortnight and
186 for a week, coming in parties of 30 at a time with
their own supervisory staff. The happiness of the
guests who have benefited from the facilities offered
by the Home, leaves no doubt as to the need that exists,
and we are glad to be able to record that in 1948, a
second Home?Bod Donwen, Rhyl, North Wales?
will be freed for holidays.

Authorities wishing to book vacant dates for next
season in either of these Homes, for parties from Mental
Hospitals, Mental Deficiency Institutions or Occupation
Centres, are invited to apply as soon as possible, to the
Hbmes and Hostels Department, National Association
for Mental Health.

Psychotherapy in Prison
------------------------
In recent Reports of the Prisoner Commissioners,*
some interesting information is given as to the arrangements made for psychological treatment of prisoners
during the serving of their sentences.

In February, 1943, the Psychiatric Unit at Wormwood
Scrubbs, closed during the War, was re-opened under
the direction of Dr H. T. P. Young, Dr H. K. Snell and
Dr J. C. Mackworth (part-time). In April, 1944,
Dr Jean Durrant was appointed as psychiatrist at
Holloway Prison.

To Wormwood Scrubbs are transferred prisoners
from other prisons who are considered to be suitable
cases for treatment. Further experience has borne
out the findings of Dr Norwood East and Dr Hubert
published in 1939, as to cases which must be excluded,
viz. : (a) those who are certifiable under the Lunacy or
Mental Deficiency Acts; (b) those with an intelligence
too low to enable them to co-operate (e.g. below
an I.Q. of 85); (c) those suffering from permanent
organic cerebral changes ; (d) chronic psychopaths
or early psychotics ; (e) those showing excessive resentment or undue resignation at their conviction or sentence
(/) those whose attitude suggests ulterior motives in
seeking treatment. In addition to these reasons it has
been found inadvisable to attempt to treat prisoners
serving sentences of less than six months or who are
above 35 years of age.

In 1945, 58 cases were reported for psychiatric investigation of which 5 were considered unsuitable for
treatment. In addition, 13 others were undergoing
treatment begun during the previous year. Of these
66 patients, 7 were still being treated at the time of
reporting, 22 had been discharged as improved or
relieved, and the remaining 37 had been found to be
unsuitable for treatment. A number of cases were
examined by electro-encephalography by arrangement
with Sutton Emergency Hospital and the National
Hospital for Nervous Diseases, and the importance of
this means of investigation has become increasingly
apparent.

At the 1945 Conference of Prison Medical Officers, the
subject of Psychotherapy was given the most prominent
place on the agenda. The result of the discussion
showed the urgent need for a separate establishment
for the study and treatment of psychologically abnormal
prisoners, but unfortunately no hope exists that such
a project can be carried out under present conditions.

New Agricultural Hostels for Defectives
----------------------------------------
In October the National Association opened two
more Agricultural Hostels at the request of the East
Riding (Yorks) Agricultural Executive Committee?
one at Keyingham the other at Patrington, both near
Hull. The Hostels will provide much needed labour
for a wheat growing area, and between them will accommodate 55 men.

Application forms may be obtained from the offices of
the National Association, 39 Queen Anne Street, W.l.

The Cinema and Mental Health
----------------------------
Few would dispute that the cinema is becoming one
of the most important influences in the modern world.
Within the past year or two, it has been noticeable
that stories with a psychological basis have proved to
be among some of the most popular with film-goers.
With this in mind, the National Association for Mental
Health has recently formed a Film Visiting Committee
whose function it is to view and report on films with a
predominantly psychological approach, to consider the
effect of these on children and adults and the mental
health aspects of films for children and adults. It is
felt that a Committee of this kind could give valuable
technical guidance and help in relation to producing, and
also in avoiding inaccurate presentations which would
tend to vulgarize psychology and give the public a
false idea of its possibilities.

Reports of Commissioners of Prisons and Directors of Convict Prisons for the years 1942-4 and for the year
1945. H.M. Stationery Office, 2s. 6d. and 2s.
The work of this Committee is as yet in a very exploratory stage, and its membership is being extended in
order to bring in, as far as possible, all the interests
involved.

On the recommendation of the Committee we are
starting a Film Review column in Mental Health
which we feel will be of interest to our readers and
stimulate discussion. Comments on two recent films
which have now been generally released, have been
provided by one of the members of the Film Visiting
Committee and will be found on page 55 of this issue.

Family Relations Group
----------------------
This Group recently established under the chairmanship of Lord Horder, with Mr. Cyril Bibby, as Hon.
Secretary, is holding a Conference on " Education for
Family Life " to take place at King's College, London,
on January 5th and 6th, 1948. The following subjects
will be dealt with : " The Home Influence " ; " The
Formal Education System " ; " Informal Education "
and " General Community Influences ". Particulars
may be obtained from the offices of the Group, 69
Eccleston Square, London, S.W.I.

As an outcome of the International Congress on the
Family and on Population held in Paris in June, the
decision was made to set up an International Union of
Family Organizations and a provisional committee,
with a Swiss delegate as provisional president, was
appointed. This move, whether or not it is ultimately
successful, marks a world wide interest in problems of
family life and a world wide conviction of the basic
importance of the family in the education of the
individual.

Art in a Mental Hospital
------------------------
During the summer, there was held at St. Albans
(Herts) an Exhibition of Paintings by patients under
treatment at Hill End Mental Hospital, which attracted
a considerable amount of public interest, and won high
praise from Mr. Adrian Hill who is a pioneer in the
introduction of art classes into hospitals and sanatoria.
At the opening of the Exhibition, Dr W. J. T. Kimber,
Medical Superintendent of the Hospital, explained that
the classes had been started in order to provide creative
work which would help the patients towards recovery
by giving them a new insight into the beauty of life
around them, and the experiment had abundantly
justified itself. Astonishing results have been achieved
by patients (most of them only under treatment for a
few months) who had no idea they could paint, and who
will now leave hospital permanently enriched by the
discovery.

It should be noted that the paintings are not looked
upon by the hospital medical staff as providing material
for psychological analysis. The approach is essentially
from the point of view of creative art and care is taken
to ensure that this is realised by the patients concerned.

Adult Education for Mental Hospital Patients
--------------------------------------------
The Mental Hospitals Committee of the London
County Council in conjunction with the British Institute
for Adult Education are appointing an Organizer to
institute for Mental Hospital patients, cultural activities
such as talks and discussion groups, groups for music,
drama and art, and other enterprises designed to help
in intellectual rehabilitation.

This is a development of a tentative experiment at
St. Ebba's Hospital, Epsom, shortly before the war, to
test possibilities, and it is as an experiment that the work
will be re-introduced, being limited, in the first instance,
to the Council's Hospitals at Epsom, Banstead and
Cane Hill.

The Organizer appointed will be directly employed
by the British Institute for Adult Education for the
purpose of the experimental period, while the L.C.C.
will bear the major share of the expense involved.

Convalescent Home for Epileptics
--------------------------------
The National Association's projected Home at Fairwarp, Sussex, will not be available, owing to unavoidable
delays, for the reception of convalescent epileptics, until
the spring of 1948. A Matron has, however, already
been appointed who will take up her duties in January
to make the necessary preparations.

Meanwhile, arrangements are being made to accommodate a few selected cases at The Old Vicarage, Bognor
Regis, during the winter months. Applications can now
be received by the National Association, 39 Queen
Anne Street, W.l.
