The Practice of Mental Nursing.
================================

:Author: May Houlston,
R.G.N., R.M.N., R.F.N. E. and S. Livingstone,
Ltd. 7s. 6d.

st ^Cre *s a really useful book, not only for the first year
udent nurse for whom it is primarily intended, but also
j, a guide to senior nurses whose duty it is to instruct
eir. juniors in routine procedure. Mental hospital
ursing being so much less obvious than the practice
general nursing, one of the initial difficulties in
mqtulrin? t'le art *s to understand that there is a planned
t> hod in operation. This book will prove invaluable
rough that early period of bewilderment and will help
a e,y?Ung nurse to get at the outset an intelligent interest
and Un^erstanding of the work. It is written in an easy
led readable style by an author with first hand knowa 8e of the practical aspect of the subject, and includes
obs ? summary at ^e end of each chapter. The
Va .ervati?n and management of patients, and the
ious special duties of the nurse are very well described,
cor statutory rule on seclusion in England is not quite
stated, but this is not very important to the
JUr??r nurse.

Pur l rner''t book is in the chapters dealing with
atte Practical work, and rather too much has been
o *Pted on psychology and symptomatology where
for SlrnPhfication has caused some inaccuracies. Many,
" TuXarnp'e> will have difficulty in accepting the view that
that tk?n'y difference between a percept and an idea is
0pD .e former has sensory elements " or that " The
nurs?Slte negativism is catalepsy." Nevertheless,
fr0rnes grades will find pleasure and derive benefit
Without^"1? jun'or indent cannot afford to be
J.I.R.
