A Way of Life for the Handicapped Child
========================================

:Author: Eirene Collis. Faber & Faber. 10s. 6d.

Mrs. Collis's book is notable as the first publication
in this country devoted expressly to the problem of
habilitating children suffering from Cerebral Palsy.

Amidst an increasing general interest in problems
concerning the handicapped, the attention which
Cerebral Palsy is beginning to claim is in a great measure
a result of the persistence with which Mrs. Collis has
pursued, the work on which her book is based. In the
past, the paucity of literature and the brevity of references when found has tended to stultify rather than
stimulate interest in this subject. Now, however, that
interest has been aroused, there is a demand for something other than vague statement, and this all too short
volume comes at a good time.

Mrs. Collis has written primarily from the kinesiological point of view, since her speciality is on that
side. Nevertheless, the underlying and express emphasis
is throughout on the necessity for keeping in mind the
ultimate aim of treatment, viz., to enable a child to be as
normally active, both mentally and physically, as
possible. To quote the author:

" Everything that one has learned from life is
useful in training the child with Cerebral Palsy.
The more he is regarded as a whole and trained
with a critical eye for the function of the part, the
more successful will the training be''''

To achieve this aim, it is obvious, as is continually
stressed in this book, that successful therapy depends on
a sound differential diagnosis. Emphasis on the
necessity for carrying out detailed functional and
joint examinations not only after the preliminary classification into one or other of the five main groups has
been made, but also from time to time as treatment
proceeds, underlines a fundamental principle of the
new approach to the Cerebral Palsy problem.

The sixteen chapters touch topics covering a wide
field and include reference to some psychological factors,
the aetiology of the main Cerebral Palsy types, kinesiological and motor re-education methods, appropriate
occupational and speech therapy, and general care.
There is a brief, but useful illustrated chapter on
mechanical aids and equipment; a list of routine
exercises; a short chapter on recording and a tabulation
of procedures in muscle and joint motion examinations.

Despite her enthusiasm, Mrs. Collis does not lose
sight of two important factors that must be borne in
mind. First, that the ultimate success of any training
depends on the mentality of the patient. Provided
this is potentially good, he may be trained in spite of
even a severe degree of physical handicap, while, where
inferior intelligence is coupled with even a comparatively
mild physical handicap, much time can be wasted to
little good purpose. Secondly, even when astonishing
success may ultimately follow treatment given along
the lines of the new approach described, such success
does not come suddenly, but only after patient and
persistent effort, as much on the part of the patient as
of the therapist.

There are parts of the book which will almost certainly
present difficulty to the average reader. Such people
should, however, obtain sufficient help from the explanation of technical terms, given in the glossary which is
appended, to read the book with understanding and
considerable profit. The addition of a bibliography is
a welcome guide to further reading.
M.I.D.
